-parous

word-forming element meaning bearing, producing, from Latin -parus (as in viviparus bringing forth
young alive), from parere to produce, bring forth (see pare).


-path

word-forming element used in modern formations to mean one suffering from (a disease or condition),
from Greek -pathes, from pathos suffering (see pathos). Also one versed in (a certain type of
treatment), in which cases it is a back-formation from -pathy in the related sense.


-pathic

word-forming element from Latin pathicus, from Greek pathikos suffering, remaining passive, from
pathein to suffer (see pathos).


-pathy

word-forming element meaning feeling, suffering, emotion; disorder, disease, from Latin -pathia,
from Greek -patheia act of suffering, feeling (see pathos). Meaning system of treatment of disease
is abstracted from homeopathy (q.v.).


-phage

word-forming element meaning eater, from stem of Greek phagein to eat (see -phagous).


-phagous

word-forming element meaning eating, feeding on, from Latin -phagus, from Greek -phagos eater of,
from phagein to eat, literally to have a share of food, from PIE root *bhag- to share out,
apportion, distribute, also to get a share (cognates: Sanskrit bhajati assigns, allots, apportions,
enjoys, loves, bhagah allotter, distributor, master, lord, bhaksati eats, drinks, enjoys; Persian
bakhshidan to give; Old Church Slavonic bogatu rich).


-phane

word-forming element meaning having the appearance of, from Greek -phanes, from phainein to show,
phainesthai to appear (see phantasm).


-phemia

word-forming element meaning speech, from Greek -phemia, from pheme speech, from stem of phemi I
speak, cognate with Latin fari to speak, fama report, reputation (see fame (n.)).


-phile

also -phil, word-forming element meaning one that loves, likes, or is attracted to, via French
-phile and Medieval Latin -philus in this sense, from Greek -philos, common suffix in personal names
(such as Theophilos), from philos loving, dear, from philein to love, of unknown origin.


-philia

word-forming element meaning friendship, fondness, tendency toward, and in recent use abnormal
attraction to, from Greek philia affection, from philos loving, of uncertain origin. Related:
-philic.


-phobe

word-forming element meaning one who fears or hates, from French -phobe, from Latin -phobus, from
Greek -phobos fearing, from phobos fear, panic, flight, phobein put to flight, frighten (see
phobia).


-phobia

word-forming element meaning excessive or irrational fear of, from Latin -phobia and directly from
Greek -phobia panic fear of, from phobos fear (see phobia). In widespread popular use with native
words from c.1800. Related: -phobic.


-phone

word-forming element meaning voice, sound, also speaker of, from Greek phone voice, sound, from PIE
root *bha- (2) to speak, say, tell (cognates: Latin for, fari to speak, fama talk, report; see fame
(n.)).


-phyte

word-forming element meaning plant, plant characteristic; planting, growth; abnormal growth, from
Greek phyton plant (see phyto-).


-plasia

word-forming element in biology and medicine denoting formation, growth, development, from Modern
Latin -plasia, from Greek plasis molding, formation, from plassein to mold (see plasma).


-plasm

word-forming element meaning a growth, a development; something molded, from Greek -plasma, from
plasma something molded or created (see plasma).


-plast

word-forming element denoting something made, from Greek plastos formed, molded, verbal adjective
from plassein to mold (see plasma). Used to form names of small particles of living matter.


-plasty

word-forming element meaning act or process of forming, also plastic surgery applied to a specific
part, from Greek -plastia, from plastos molded, formed, verbal adjective from plassein to mold (see
plasma).


-plus

word-forming element, Latin -plus -fold, from *-plo-, combining form of PIE *pel- (3) to fold (see
fold (v.)). Cognate with Old English -feald, Greek -paltos, -plos.


-poietic

word-forming element meaning making, producing, from Latinized form of Greek poietikos capable of
making, creative, productive, from poiein to make, create (see poet).


-polis

word-forming element meaning City, from Greek polis city (see polis).


P

a rare letter in the initial position in Germanic, in part because by Grimm's Law PIE p- became
Germanic f-; even with the early Latin borrowings in Old English, -p- takes up a little over 4 pages
in J.R. Clark Hall's Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, compared to 31 pages for B and more than 36 for
F. But it now is the third-most-common initial letter in the English vocabulary, and with C and S
comprises nearly a third of the dictionary, a testimony to the flood of words that have entered the
language since 1066 from Latin, Greek, and French.    To mind one's Ps and Qs (1779), possibly is
from confusion of these letters among children learning to write. Another theory traces it to old-
time tavern-keepers tracking their patrons' bar tabs in pints and quarts. But see also to be P and Q
(1610s), to be excellent, a slang phrase said to derive from prime quality.


p wave (n.)

1908 in geology, the p representing primary (adj.).


p.a. (n.)

abbreviation of public address (system), attested from 1936.


P.C.

abbreviation for personal computer is from 1978; abbreviation for politically correct is by 1990.


P.C.P.

also pcp, 1960s, from animal tranquilizer phencyclidine.


P.D.Q.

also pdq, initialism (acronym) for pretty damn quick, attested from 1875.


p.m.

abbreviation of Latin post meridiem after noon.


p.o.v.

also pov, initialism (acronym) for point of view, by 1973.


P.S.

1610s, abbreviation of Latin post scriptum (see postscript).


pa

1804, colloquial shortening of papa (q.v.).


Pablum

See pabulum.


pabulum (n.)

food for anything, 1670s, from Latin pabulum fodder, food, nourishment, from PIE root *pa- to
protect, feed (see food) + instrumentive suffix *-dhlom.   Pablum (1932), derived from this, is a
trademark (Mead Johnson &amp; Co.) for a soft, bland cereal used as a food for infants and weak and
invalid people, hence figurative use (attested from 1970, first by U.S. Vice President Spiro Agnew)
in reference to mushy political prose.


paca (n.)

Central and South American rodent, 1650s, from Spanish, from Tupi (Brazil) paca.


pace (n.)

late 13c., a step in walking; rate of motion, from Old French pas a step, pace, trace, and directly
from Latin passus, passum a step, pace, stride, noun use of past participle of pandere to stretch
(the leg), spread out, probably from PIE *pat-no-, a nasalized variant of root *pete- to spread
(cognates: Greek petannynai to spread out, petalon a leaf, patane plate, dish; Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old English f&aelig;&eth;m embrace, bosom, fathom, Old Saxon fathmos the
outstretched arms). Also, a measure of five feet [Johnson]. Pace-setter in fashion is from 1895.


pace (prep.)

with the leave of, 1863, from Latin pace, ablative of pax peace, as in pace tua with all deference
to you; from PIE *pak- to fasten (see pax). Used chiefly as a courteous or ironical apology for a
contradiction or difference of opinion [OED].


pace (v.)

1510s, to walk at a steady rate, from pace (n.). Meaning to measure by pacing is from 1570s. That of
to set the pace for (another) is from 1886. Related: Paced; pacing.


pacemaker (n.)

also pace-maker, 1884, originally a rider or boat that sets the pace for others in training. Meaning
the node of the heart which determines the beat rate is from 1910; sense of man-made device for
stimulating and regulating heartbeat is from 1951. From pace (n.) + maker.


pachinko (n.)

1953, from Japanese, pinball machine, also slingshot, handgun, from pachin, of echoic origin, +
diminutive suffix -ko.


pachyderm (n.)

1838, from French pachyderme (c.1600), adopted as a biological term 1797 by French naturalist
Georges L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832),
from Greek pachydermos thick-skinned, from pachys thick, large, massive, from PIE *bhengh- thick,
fat (cognates: Sanskrit bahu- much, numerous Avestan bazah- height, depth, Hittite pankush large,
Old Norse bingr heap, Old High German bungo a bulb, Lithuanian biess thick) + derma skin (see
derma).


pachysandra (n.)

1813, from Modern Latin (1803), from Greek packhys thick (see pachyderm) + aner (genitive andros)
man (see anthropo-), which is used in botany to mean stamen, having stamens.


pacific (adj.)

1540s, tending to make peace, from Middle French pacifique, from Latin pacificus peaceful, peace-
making, from pax (genitive pacis) peace (see peace) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning peaceful, calm is first recorded 1630s. Related: Pacifical (mid-15c.); pacifically.


Pacific Ocean

1660, from Medieval Latin Pacificum, neuter of Latin pacificus (see pacific); so called c.1500 by
Magellan when he sailed into it and found it calmer than the stormy Atlantic.


pacification (n.)

a setting at peace, early 15c., from Middle French pacification act of making peaceful (15c.), from
Latin pacificationem (nominative pacificatio) a peace-making, noun of action from past participle
stem of pacificare to pacify (see pacify).


pacificism (n.)

1904, from pacific + -ism.


pacifier (n.)

one who pacifies or appeases, 1530s, agent noun from pacify. The meaning nipple-shaped device for
babies is first recorded 1904.


pacifism (n.)

1905, from French pacifisme (by 1903, apparently coined by &#201;mile Arnaud), from pacifique (see
pacific).


pacifist (n.)

1903, from French pacifiste (see pacifism). Related: Pacifistic (1902).


pacify (v.)

late 15c., appease, allay the anger of (someone), from Middle French pacifier make peace, from Latin
pacificare to make peace; pacify, from pacificus (see pacific). Of countries or regions, to bring to
a condition of calm, c.1500, from the start with suggestions of submission and terrorization.
Related: Pacified; pacifying.


pack (n.)

bundle, early 13c., probably from a Low German word (compare Middle Dutch pac, pack bundle, Middle
Low German pak, Middle Flemish pac, attested from late 12c.), originally a term of wool traders in
Flanders; or possibly from Old Norse pakki. All are of unknown origin.    Italian pacco is a Dutch
loan word; French pacque probably is from Flemish. Meaning set of persons (usually of a low
character) is c.1300, older than sense of group of hunting animals (early 15c.). Extended to
collective sets of playing cards (1590s), floating ice (1791), cigarettes (1924), and submarines
(1943). Meaning knapsack on a frame is attested from 1916. Pack of lies first attested 1763.


pack (v.)

c.1300, to put together in a pack, from pack (n.), possibly influenced by Anglo-French empaker (late
13c.) and Medieval Latin paccare pack.    Some senses suggesting make secret arrangement are from an
Elizabethan mispronunciation of pact. Sense of to carry or convey in a pack (1805) led to general
sense of to carry in any manner; hence to pack heat carry a gun, underworld slang from 1940s; to be
capable of delivering (a punch, etc.), from 1921. Related: Packed; packing.


pack-horse (n.)

late 15c., from pack (n.) + horse (n.).


pack-rat (n.)

common name for the North American bushytailed woodrat (Neotoma cinerea) 1885, from pack (v.); so
called from the rodents' habit of dragging objects off to their holes. Used figuratively or
allusively from c.1850 of persons who won't discard anything, which means either the rat's name is
older than the record or the human sense is the original one.


package (n.)

1530s, the act of packing, from pack (n.) + -age; or from cognate Dutch pakkage baggage. The main
modern sense of bundle, parcel is first attested 1722. Package deal is from 1952.


package (v.)

1915, from package (n.). Related: Packaged; packaging.


packer (n.)

mid-14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), agent noun from pack (v.).


packet (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle English pak bundle (see pack (n.)) + diminutive suffix -et; perhaps modeled on
Anglo-French pacquet (Middle French pacquet), which ultimately is a diminutive of Middle Dutch pak.
A packet boat (1640s) originally was one that carried mails. Packet-switching attested from 1971.


packsaddle (n.)

also pack-saddle, saddle for supporting packs on the back of a mount, late 14c., pakke sadil; from
pack (n.) + saddle (n.).


pact (n.)

early 15c., from Old French pacte agreement, treaty, compact (14c.), from Latin pactum agreement,
contract, covenant, noun use of neuter past participle of pacisci to covenant, to agree, make a
treaty, from PIE root *pag- fix, join together, unite, make firm (cognates: Sanskrit pasa- cord,
rope, Avestan pas- to fetter, Greek pegnynai to fix, make firm, fast or solid, Latin pangere to fix,
to fasten, Slavonic pa&#382; wooden partition, Old English fegan to join, fon to catch seize).


pad (n.)

1550s, bundle of straw to lie on, possibly from or related to Low German or obsolete Flemish pad
sole of the foot, which is perhaps from PIE *pent- to tread, go (see find (v.)), but see path (n.).
Meaning cushion-like part of an animal foot is from 1790 in English. Generalized sense of something
soft is from c.1700; the sense of a number of sheets fastened together (in writing pad, drawing pad,
etc.) is from 1865.    Sense of takeoff or landing place for a helicopter is from 1960. The word
persisted in underworld slang from early 18c. in the sense sleeping place, and was popularized again
c.1959, originally in beatnik speech (later hippie slang) in its original English sense of place to
sleep temporarily.


pad (v.2)

to stuff, increase the amount of, 1827, from pad (n.); transferred to expense accounts, etc. from
1913. Related: Padded; padding. Notion of a padded cell in an asylum or prison is from 1862 (padded
room).


pad (v.1)

to walk, 1550s, probably from Middle Dutch paden walk along a path, make a path, from pad, pat path.
Originally criminals' slang, perhaps of imitative origin (sound of feet trudging on a dirt road).
Related: Padded; padding.


padding (n.)

material used in stuffing, 1828, verbal noun from pad (v.2).


paddle (n.)

c.1400, padell small spade, from Medieval Latin padela, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Latin
patella small pan, little dish, plate, diminutive of patina (see pan (n.)).    Meaning short oar
with a wide blade is from 1620s. As an instrument used for beating clothes (and slaves, and
schoolboys), it is recorded from 1828, American English. Paddle-ball attested from 1935.


paddle (v.1)

to dabble, wade in water, 1520s, probably cognate with Low German paddeln tramp about, frequentative
of padjen to tramp, to run in short steps, from pad (v.). Related: Paddled; paddling. Meaning to
move in water by means of paddles is a different word (see paddle (v.3)).


paddle (v.2)

to beat with a paddle, spank, 1856, from paddle (n.). Related: Paddled; paddling.


paddle (v.3)

to move in water by means of paddles, 1670s, from paddle (n.). To paddle one's (own) canoe do for
oneself is from 1828.


paddle-wheel (n.)

also paddlewheel, 1805, from paddle (n.) + wheel (n.).


paddock (n.1)

a frog, a toad, c.1300, diminutive of pad toad, from Old Norse padda; common Germanic (Swedish
padda, Danish padde, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch padde frog, toad, also Dutch schildpad tortoise),
of unknown origin and with no certain cognates outside Germanic.


paddock (n.2)

an enclosure, 1620s, alteration of Middle English parrock, from Old English pearroc enclosed space,
fence (see park (n.)). Or possibly from Medieval Latin parricus (8c.), which ultimately is from
Germanic.


paddy (n.1)

rice field, 1620s, rice plant, from Malay padi rice in the straw. Main modern meaning ground where
rice is growing (1948) is a shortening of paddy field.


Paddy (n.2)

Irishman, 1780, slang, from the pet form of the common Irish proper name Patrick (Irish Padraig). It
was in use in black slang by 1946 for any white person. Paddy wagon is 1930, perhaps so called
because many police officers were Irish. Paddywhack (1881) originally meant an Irishman.


padlock (n.)

removable lock, late 15c., from lokke (see lock (n.)), but the first element is of unknown origin.


padlock (v.)

1640s, from padlock (n.). Related: Padlocked; padlocking.


padre (n.)

priest, chaplain, 1580s, from Italian, Spanish, or Portuguese padre, from Latin patrem (nominative
pater) father (see father (n.)). The title of the regular clergy in those languages. Papar was the
name the Norse gave to Irish monks whom they found in Iceland when they arrived.


Padua

Italian city, Italian Padova, from Latin Patavium, probably from Gaulish *padi pine, in reference to
the pine forests thereabouts. Related: Paduan.


paean (n.)

1590s, from Latin paean hymn of deliverance, from Greek paian hymn, chant, hymn to Apollo, from
Paian, a name of the god of healing; originally the physician of the gods (in Homer), later merged
with Apollo; literally one who touches (i.e. one who heals by a touch), from paio to touch, strike.


paederasty (n.)

see pederasty.


paediatric (adj.)

see pediatric.


paediatrician (n.)

see pediatrician; also see pedo-.


paediatrics (n.)

see pediatrics.


paedo-

see pedo-.


paedophile (n.)

see pedophile; also see pedo-.


paedophilia (n.)

see pedophilia; also see pedo-.


paella (n.)

1892, from Catalan paella, from Old French paele cooking or frying pan (Modern French po&ecirc;le),
from Latin patella pan, dish (see pail). So called for the pan in which it is cooked.


paeon (n.)

metrical foot of one long and three short syllables (in any order), c.1600, from Latin paeon, from
Greek paion (see paean). Related: Paeonic.


paesan (n.)

1930s, fellow countryman, native of one's own country, from Italian dialect, from Late Latin
pagensis peasant, rustic (see peasant). Spanish form paisano attested in English (New Mexico) from
1844.


pagan (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin paganus pagan, in classical Latin villager, rustic; civilian, non-
combatant noun use of adjective meaning of the country, of a village, from pagus country people;
province, rural district, originally district limited by markers, thus related to pangere to fix,
fasten, from PIE root *pag- to fix (see pact). As an adjective from early 15c.    Religious sense is
often said to derive from conservative rural adherence to the old gods after the Christianization of
Roman towns and cities; but the word in this sense predates that period in Church history, and it is
more likely derived from the use of paganus in Roman military jargon for civilian, incompetent
soldier, which Christians (Tertullian, c.202; Augustine) picked up with the military imagery of the
early Church (such as milites soldier of Christ, etc.). Applied to modern pantheists and nature-
worshippers from 1908.


paganism (n.)

early 15c., from Church Latin paganismus, from paganus (see pagan).


page (n.1)

sheet of paper, 1580s, from Middle French page, from Old French pagene page, text (12c.), from Latin
pagina page, leaf of paper, strip of papyrus fastened to others, related to pagella small page, from
pangere to fasten, from PIE root *pag- to fix (see pact).    Earlier pagne (12c.), directly from Old
French. Usually said to be from the notion of individual sheets of paper fastened into a book. Ayto
and Watkins offer an alternative theory: vines fastened by stakes and formed into a trellis, which
led to sense of columns of writing on a scroll. When books replaced scrolls, the word continued to
be used. Related: Paginal. Page-turner book that one can't put down is from 1974.


page (n.2)

youth, lad, boy of the lower orders, c.1300, originally also youth preparing to be a knight, from
Old French page a youth, page, servant (13c.), possibly via Italian paggio (Barnhart), from Medieval
Latin pagius servant, perhaps ultimately from Greek paidion boy, lad, diminutive of pais (genitive
paidos) child.    But OED considers this unlikely and points instead to Littr&eacute;'s suggestion
of a source in Latin pagus countryside, in sense of boy from the rural regions (see pagan). Meaning
youth employed as a personal attendant to a person of rank is first recorded mid-15c.; this was
transferred from late 18c. to boys who did personal errands in hotels, clubs, etc., also in U.S.
legislatures.


page (v.1)

to summon or call by name, 1904, from page (n.2), on the notion of to send a page after someone.
Related: Paged; paging.


page (v.2)

to turn pages, 1620s, from page (n.1). Related: Paged; paging.


pageant (n.)

late 14c., play in a cycle of mystery plays, from Medieval Latin pagina, of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Latin pagina page of a book (see page (n.1)) on notion of manuscript of a play.    But
an early sense in Middle English also was stage or scene of a play (late 14c.) and Klein says a
sense of Latin pagina was movable scaffold (probably from the etymological sense of stake). With
excrescent -t as in ancient (adj.). Generalized sense of showy parade, spectacle is first attested
1805, though this notion is found in pageantry (1650s).


pageantry (n.)

splendid display, 1650s; see pageant + -ry.


pager (n.)

device that emits a signal when activated by a telephone call, 1968, agent noun from page (v.1).


paginate (v.)

to mark or number the pages of a publication, 1858 (implied in paginated), back-formation from
pagination. Medieval Latin had paginare, but it had another sense. Related: Paginating.


pagination (n.)

action of marking page numbers, 1841, probably from French pagination (1835), from Latin pagina (see
page (n.1)).


pagoda (n.)

1580s, pagode (modern form from 1630s), from Portuguese pagode (early 16c.), perhaps from a
corruption of Persian butkada, from but idol + kada dwelling. Or perhaps from or influenced by Tamil
pagavadi house belonging to a deity, from Sanskrit bhagavati goddess, fem. of bhagavat blessed,
adorable, from *bhagah good fortune, from PIE root *bhag- to share out, apportion (cognates: Greek
phagein to eat; see -phagous).


Pahlavi (n.)

1773, Iranian language spoken in Persia 3c.-10c., from Persian Pahlavi, from Old Persian Parthava
Parthia (see Parthian).


pahoehoe (n.)

ropy lava, 1859, from Hawaiian.


Paige

fem. proper name, also a family name, variant of page (n.2) young servant.


pail (n.)

mid-14c., of uncertain origin, probably from Old French paele, paelle cooking or frying pan, warming
pan; also a liquid measure, from Latin patella small pan, little dish, platter, diminutive of patina
broad shallow pan, stewpan (see pan (n.)).    Old English had p&aelig;gel wine vessel, but etymology
does not support a connection. This Old English word possibly is from Medieval Latin pagella a
measure, from Latin pagella column, diminutive of pagina (see page (n.1)).


paillard (n.)

variant of palliard.


pain (n.)

late 13c., punishment, especially for a crime; also condition one feels when hurt, opposite of
pleasure, from Old French peine difficulty, woe, suffering, punishment, Hell's torments (11c.), from
Latin poena punishment, penalty, retribution, indemnification (in Late Latin also torment, hardship,
suffering), from Greek poine retribution, penalty, quit-money for spilled blood, from PIE *kwei- to
pay, atone, compensate (see penal). The earliest sense in English survives in phrase on pain of
death.    Phrase to give (someone) a pain be annoying and irritating is from 1908; localized as pain
in the neck (1924) and pain in the ass (1934), though this last might have gone long unrecorded and
be the original sense and the others euphemisms. Pains great care taken (for some purpose) is first
recorded 1520s (in the singular in this sense, it is attested from c.1300). First record of pain-
killer is from 1853.


pain (v.)

c.1300, to exert or strain oneself, strive; endeavor, from Old French pener (v.) to hurt, cause
pain, from peine, and from Middle English peine (n.); see pain (n.). Transitive meaning cause pain;
inflict pain is from late 14c. That of to cause sorrow, grief, or unhappiness also is from late 14c.
Related: Pained; paining.


painful (adj.)

mid-14c., from pain (n.) + -ful. Related: Painfully; painfulness.


painless (adj.)

1560s, from pain (n.) + -less. Related: Painlessly; painlessness.


painstaking

1550s (n.), 1690s (adj.), paynes taking, from plural of pain (n.) + present participle of take (v.).
Related: Painstakingly.


paint (v.)

early 13c., represent in painting or drawing, portray; early 14c., paint the surface of, color,
stain; from Old French peintier to paint, from peint, past participle of peindre to paint, from
Latin pingere to paint, represent in a picture, stain; embroider, tattoo, from PIE root *peig- (1),
also *peik- to cut (cognates: Sanskrit pimsati hews out, cuts, carves, adorns, Old Church Slavonic
pila file, saw, Lithuanian pela file).    Sense evolution between PIE and Latin was, presumably,
from decorate with cut marks to decorate to decorate with color. Compare Sanskrit pingah reddish,
pesalah adorned, decorated, lovely, Old Church Slavonic pegu variegated; Greek poikilos variegated;
Old High German fehjan to adorn; Old Church Slavonic pisati, Lithuanian piesiu to write. Probably
also representing the cutting branch of the family is Old English feol (see file (n.)).    To paint
the town (red) go on a spree first recorded 1884; to paint (someone or something) black represent it
as wicked or evil is from 1590s. Adjective paint-by-numbers simple is attested by 1970; the art-for-
beginners kits themselves date to c.1953.


paint (n.)

late 13c. (in compounds), that with which something is painted, from paint (v.). Of rouge, make-up,
etc., from 1650s. Paint brush attested from 1827.


painted (adj.)

c.1300, depicted in a picture; early 15c., coated with paint, past participle adjective from paint
(v.).


painter (n.1)

artist who paints pictures, early 14c., from Old French peintor, from Latin pictor a painter, from
pingere (see paint (v.)). Sense of workman who colors surfaces with paint is from c.1400. As a
surname, Painter is attested from mid-13c. but it is difficult to say which sense is meant. Related:
Painterly.


painter (n.2)

mid-14c., rope or chain that holds an anchor to a ship's side, from Old French peintor, ultimately
from Latin pendere to weigh (see pendant).


painting (n.)

c.1200, that which is painted, a painting, verbal noun from paint (v.). From mid-15c. as art of
depicting by means of paint.


pair (v.)

to come together with another; be mated or married (intransitive), also  to make a pair by matching
(transitive), c.1600, from pair (n.). These senses now often are distinguished by pair off (c.1803)
for the former and pair up (1908) for the latter. Related: Paired; pairing.


pair (n.)

mid-13c., two of a kind coupled in use, from Old French paire pair, couple, and directly from
Medieval Latin paria equals, neuter plural of Latin par (genitive paris) a pair, counterpart, equal,
noun use of par (adj.) equal, equal-sized, well-matched (see par (n.)). Originally of things. Of
persons from late 14c. Meaning a woman's breasts is attested from 1922. Pair bond (v.) is first
attested 1940, in reference to birds mating.


paisano

see paesan.


paisley (n.)

1834 as a type of clothing or material, from Paisley, town in southwest Scotland, where the cloth
was originally made. As an adjective by 1900. The town name is literally church, from Middle Irish
baslec, itself from Latin basilica (see basilica).


pajama

see pajamas.


pajamas (n.)

1800, pai jamahs loose trousers tied at the waist, worn by Muslims in India and adopted by Europeans
there, especially for nightwear, from Hindi pajama, probably from Persian paejamah, literally leg
clothing, from pae leg (from PIE *ped- foot, see foot (n.)) + jamah clothing. Modern spelling (U.S.)
is from 1845. British spelling tends toward pyjamas.


Paki (n.)

British slang for immigrant from Pakistan, 1964, from first element of Pakistan.


Pakistan

south Asian nation formed 1947 by division of British India, the name apparently proposed 1930s by
Muslim students at Cambridge University, first element said to be an acronym from Punjab,
Afghanistan and Kashmir, three regions envisioned as forming the new state, which also made a play
on Iranian pak pure. For second element, see -stan. Related: Pakistani (1941).


pal (n.)

1788, from Romany (English Gypsy) pal brother, comrade, variant of continental Romany pral, plal,
phral, probably from Sanskrit bhrata brother (see brother (n.)). Extended colloquial form palsy-
walsy attested from 1930.


pal (v.)

1879, from pal (n.). Related: Palled; palling.


palace (n.)

early 13c., official residence of an emperor, king, archbishop, etc., from Old French palais palace,
court, from Medieval Latin palacium a palace (source of Spanish palacio, Italian palazzo), from
Latin palatium the Palatine hill, in plural, a palace, from Mons Palatinus the Palatine Hill, one of
the seven hills of ancient Rome, where Augustus Caesar's house stood (the original palace), later
the site of the splendid residence built by Nero. In English, the general sense of splendid dwelling
place is from late 14c.    The hill name probably is ultimately from palus stake, on the notion of
enclosure. Another guess is that it is from Etruscan and connected with Pales, supposed name of an
Italic goddess of shepherds and cattle.


paladin (n.)

1590s, one of the 12 knights in attendance on Charlemagne, from Middle French paladin a warrior
(16c.), from Italian paladino, from Latin palatinus palace official; noun use of palatinus of the
palace (see palace).    The Old French form of the word was palaisin (which gave Middle English
palasin, c.1400); the Italian form prevailed because, though the matter was French, most of the
poets who wrote the romances were Italians.


palaeo-

see paleo-.


palaestra (n.)

see palestra.


palanquin (n.)

a covered litter, 1580s, from Portuguese palanquim (early 16c.), from Malay and Javanese palangki
litter, sedan, ultimately from Sanskrit palyanka-s couch, bed, litter, from pari around + ancati it
bends, curves, related to anka-s a bend, hook, angle, and meaning, perhaps, that which bends around
the body. Some have noted the curious coincidence of Spanish palanca, from Latin phalanga pole to
carry a burden.


palatable (adj.)

1660s, good-tasting, from palate + -able. Figurative use from 1680s. Related: Palatably;
palatability.


palate (n.)

late 14c., roof of the mouth, from Old French palat and directly from Latin palatum roof of the
mouth, perhaps of Etruscan origin [Klein]. Popularly considered the seat of taste, hence transferred
meaning sense of taste (late 14c.), which also was in classical Latin. Related: Palatal; palatalize.


palatial (adj.)

1754, from French palatial magnificent, from Latin palatium (see palace). Related: Palatially.


palatinate (n.)

1650s, from palatine + -ate (1). In England and Ireland, a county palatine; also used of certain
American colonies (Carolina, Maryland, Maine).


palatine (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French palatin (15c.) and directly from Medieval Latin palatinus of the palace
(of the Caesars), from Latin palatium (see palace). Used in English to indicate quasi-royal
authority. Reference to the Rhineland state is from c.1580.


palaver (n.)

1733 (implied in palavering), talk, conference, discussion, sailors' slang, from Portuguese palavra
word, speech, talk, traders' term for negotiating with the natives in West Africa, metathesis of
Late Latin parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison (see parable). Meaning idle
talk first recorded 1748. The verb is 1733, from the noun. Related: Palavering.


palazzo (n.)

1660s, from Italian palazzo (see palace).


pale (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French paile pale, light-colored (12c., Modern French p&#226;le), from Latin
pallidus pale, pallid, wan, colorless, from pallere be pale, grow pale, from PIE *pel- (2) pale (see
pallor). Pale-face, supposed North American Indian word for European, is attested from 1822.


pale (n.)

early 13c. (c.1200 in Anglo-Latin), stake, pole, stake for vines, from Old French pal and directly
from Latin palus stake, prop, wooden post, related to pangere to fix or fasten (see pact).    From
late 14c. as fence of pointed stakes; figurative sense of limit, boundary, restriction is from
c.1400. Barely surviving in beyond the pale and similar phrases. Meaning the part of Ireland under
English rule is from 1540s, via sense of territory held by power of a nation or people (mid-15c.).


pale (v.)

late 14c., become pale; appear pale (also, in Middle English, to make pale), from Old French paleir
(12c.) or from pale (adj.). Related: Paled; paling.


paleo-

before vowels pale- word-forming element used in scientific combinations (mostly since c.1870)
meaning ancient, early, prehistoric, primitive, from Greek palaio-, comb. form of palaios old,
ancient, from palai long ago, far back, related to palin again, backwards, tele- far off, at a
distance, from PIE root *kwel- (2) far in space and time (see tele-).


Paleocene (adj.)

in reference to the geological epoch preceding the Eocene, 1877, from French pal&eacute;oc&egrave;ne
(Schimpter, 1874), coined from paleo- + Greek kainos new (see recent). It is, thus, the old new age.


paleoclimatology (n.)

also paleo-climatology, 1920, from paleo- + climatology. Related: Paleoclimatologist.


paleolithic (adj.)

of or pertaining to the Earlier Stone Age (opposed to neolithic), 1865, coined by John Lubbock,
later Baron Avebury (1834-1913), from paleo- + Greek lithos stone + -ic.


paleontologist (n.)

1836, from paleontology + -ist.


paleontology (n.)

1833, probably from French pal&eacute;ontologie, from Greek palaios old, ancient (see paleo-) +
ontologie (see ontology). Related: Paleontological.


Paleozoic (adj.)

in reference to the geological era between the Precambrian and the Mesozoic, 1838, coined by Adam
Sedgwick (1785-1873) from paleo- + Greek zoe life.


Palestine

from Latin Palestina (name of a Roman province), from Greek Palaistine (Herodotus), from Hebrew
Pelesheth Philistia, land of the Philistines. Revived as an official political territorial name 1920
with the British mandate.    Under Turkish rule, Palestine was part of three administrative regions:
the Vilayet of Beirut, the Independent Sanjak of Jerusalem, and the Vilayet of Damascus. In 1917 the
country was conquered by British forces who held it under occupation until the mandate was
established April 25, 1920, by the Supreme Council of the Allied Powers at San Remo. During the
occupation Palestine formed Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (South), with headquarters at
Jerusalem.


Palestinian

1875 (adj.), 1905 (n.), from Palestine + -ian. Also in early use with reference to Jews who settled
or advocated settling in that place.


palestra (n.)

early 15c., from Old French palestre (12c.), from Latin palaestra, from Greek palaistra gymnasium,
public place for exercise, originally wrestling school, from palaiein to wrestle (of unknown origin)
+ -tra, suffix denoting place.


palette (n.)

1620s, flat thin tablet used by an artist to lay and mix colors, from French palette, from Old
French palete small shovel, blade (13c.) diminutive of pale shovel, blade, from Latin pala spade,
shoulder blade, probably from PIE *pak-slo-, from root *pag- (see pact). Transferred sense of colors
used by a particular artist is from 1882.


palfrey (n.)

c.1200 (mid-12c. as a surname), saddle horse for ordinary riding (opposed to a war horse), small
horse for ladies, from Old French palefroi (11c.) and directly from Medieval Latin palafredus,
altered by dissimilation from Late Latin paraveredus post horse for outlying districts (6c.),
originally extra horse, from Greek para beside, secondary (see para-) + Latin veredus post horse;
light, fast horse used by couriers, from Gaulish *voredos, from Celtic *wo-red- (cognates: Welsh
gorwydd horse, Old Irish riadaim I ride), from PIE root *reidh- to ride (see ride (v.)). The Latin
word passed to Old High German as pfarifrid, where in modern German it has become the usual word for
horse (Pferd).


Pali

1690s, Middle High Indian dialect used in sacred Buddhist writings (the lingua franca of northern
India from c. 6c. B.C.E.-2c. B.C.E.), from Sanskrit Pali, from pali bhasa language of the canonical
books, from pali line, role, canon + bhasa language.


palimony (n.)

1979, coined from pal (n.) + alimony. Popularized, if not introduced, during lawsuit against U.S.
film star Lee Marvin (1924-1987).


palimpsest (n.)

parchment from which earlier writing has been removed to clear it for new writing, 1660s, from Latin
palimpsestus, from Greek palimpsestos scraped again, from palin again (see palindrome) + verbal
adjective of psen to rub smooth (of uncertain origin).


palindrome (n.)

line that reads the same backward and forward, 1620s, from Greek palindromos a recurrence, literally
a running back, from palin again, back (from PIE *kwle-i-, from root *kwel- (1) move round, with
notion of revolving; see cycle (n.)) + dromos a running (see dromedary). Related: Palindromic.


palinode (n.)

1590s, from Middle French palinod (16c.) or directly from Latin palinodia, from Greek palinoidia
poetic retraction, from palin again, back (see palindrome) + oide song (see ode). Related:
Palinodic.


palisade (n.)

a fence of stakes, c.1600, from Middle French palissade (15c.), from Proven&ccedil;al palissada,
from palissa a stake or paling, from Gallo-Roman *palicea, from Latin palus stake (see pale (n.)).
Military sense is attested from 1690s. The Palisades, along the Hudson River opposite New York City,
so called by 1823.


pall (n.)

Old English p&aelig;ll rich cloth or cloak, purple robe, altar cloth, from Latin pallium cloak,
coverlet, covering, in Tertullian, the garment worn by Christians instead of the Roman toga; related
to pallo robe, cloak, palla long upper garment of Roman women, perhaps from the root of pellis skin.
Notion of cloth spread over a coffin (mid-15c.) led to figurative sense of dark, gloomy mood (1742).


pall (v.)

become tiresome, 1700, from Middle English pallen to become faint, fail in strength (late 14c.),
shortened form of appallen to dismay, fill with horror or disgust (see appall). Related: Palled;
palling.


pall-mall

see mall.


Palladian (adj.)

1731, in the style of Roman architect Andrea Palladio (1518-1580).


palladium (n.1)

safeguard, c.1600, originally (late 14c.) sacred image of Pallas Athene, from Latin palladium, from
Greek Palladion, noun use of neuter of Palladios of Pallas. It stood in the citadel of Troy and the
safety of the city was believed to depend on it.


palladium (n.2)

metallic element, coined 1803 by discoverer William Hyde Wollaston (1766-1828), from Pallas, name of
an asteroid discovered the previous year (by German astronomer Olbers) and named for the goddess
(see Pallas).


Pallas

Greek goddess' name, literally little maiden, related to pallake concubine, and probably somehow
connected to Avestan pairika beautiful women seducing pious men.


pallbearer (n.)

also pall-bearer, 1707, from pall (n.) + agent noun of bear (v.). Originally one who holds the
corners of the pall at a funeral.


pallet (n.1)

mattress, late 14c., from Anglo-French paillete straw, bundle of straw, Old French paillet chaff,
bundle of straw, from paille straw (12c.), from Latin palea chaff, perhaps cognate with Sanskrit
palavah, Old Church Slavonic pleva, Russian peleva, Lithuanian pelus.


pallet (n.2)

flat wooden blade used as a tool by potters, etc., early 15c., from Middle French palette,
diminutive of pale spade, shovel (see palette). Meaning large portable tray used with a forklift for
moving loads is from 1921.


palliard (n.)

late 15c., vagabond or beggar (who sleeps on straw in barns), from Middle French paillard, from Old
French paillart tramp, beggar, vagabond (13c.), from paille straw (see pallet (n.1); also see -ard).


palliate (v.)

alleviate without curing, early 15c., from Medieval Latin palliatus, literally cloaked, from past
participle of Late Latin palliare cover with a cloak, conceal, from Latin pallium cloak (see pall
(n.)). Related: Palliated; palliating; palliation.


palliative (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French palliatif (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin palliativus under
cloak, covert, from Late Latin palliatus (see palliate). As a noun, recorded from 1724.


pallid (adj.)

lacking color, 1580s, from Latin pallidus pale, colorless, from root of pallere be pale (see
pallor).


pallor (n.)

c.1400, from Old French palor paleness, whiteness (12c.) and directly from Latin pallor, from
pallere be pale, turn pale, related to pallus dark-colored, dusky, from PIE root *pel- (2) pale;
gray (cognates: Sanskrit palitah gray, panduh whitish, pale; Greek pelios livid, dark, polios gray;
Old English fealo dull-colored, yellow, brown; Welsh llwyd gray).


palm (n.1)

flat of the hand, c.1300, from Old French palme (Modern French paume), from Latin palma palm of the
hand, also flat end of an oar; palm tree, from PIE *pel- to spread out; flat (cognates: Greek palame
open hand, Old Irish lam, Welsh llaw, Old English folm, Old High German folma hand, Sanskrit panih
hand, hoof). Palm oil is earlier in the punning sense of bribe (1620s) than in the literal sense of
oil from the fruit of the West African palm (1705, from palm (n.2)).


palm (n.2)

tropical tree, Old English palma, Old French palme, both from Latin palma palm tree, originally palm
of the hand; the tree so called from the shape of its leaves, like fingers of a hand (see palm
(n.1)).    The word traveled early to northern Europe, where the tree does not grow, via
Christianity, and took root in the local languages (such as Old Saxon palma, Old High German palma,
Old Norse palmr). Palm Sunday is Old English palm-sunnand&aelig;g.    In ancient times, a leaf or
frond was carried or worn as a symbol of victory or triumph, or on feast days; hence figurative use
of palm for victory, triumph (late 14c.). Palm court large room in a hotel, etc., usually decorated
with potted palms first recorded 1908.


palm (v.)

impose (something) on (someone), 1670s, from palm (n.1). Extended form palm off is from 1822.


palm-tree (n.)

Old English palm-treo; see palm (n.2) + tree (n.).


palmer (n.)

 pilgrim who has returned from the Holy Land, late 12c. (as a surname), from Anglo-French palmer
(Old French palmier), from Medieval Latin palmarius, from Latin palma palm tree (see palm (n.2)). So
called because they wore palm branches in commemoration of the journey.


palmetto (n.)

1580s, from Spanish palmito dwarf fan palm tree, diminutive of palma palm tree, from Latin palma
(see palm (n.2)). The suffix was subsequently Italianized. The Palmetto Flag was an emblem of South
Carolina after secession (1860); the state was called Palmetto State from at least 1837.


palmistry (n.)

divination from the palm of the hand, early 15c., from palme (see palm (n.1)) + obscure second
element, perhaps -estre (as in Middle English webbestre weaver) or -rie (as in Middle English
archerie archery). Palmist (n.) is an 1886 back-formation.


palmy (adj.)

triumphant, c.1600, from palm (n.2) in the triumph sense + -y (2). Literal meaning full of palms
attested from 1660s.


palomino (n.)

1914, from American Spanish palomino cream-colored horse, from Spanish, literally young dove,
perhaps from Italian palombino dove-colored, from Latin palumbinus of wood pigeons, from palumba
wood pigeon (see fallow (adj.)). The horse so called because of its dove-like coloring, light brown
or cream with a pale mane and tail.


palooka (n.)

mediocre prizefighter, 1926, of unknown origin, credited to U.S. sportswriter and Variety staffer
Jack Conway (d.1928). Non-boxing sense of average person is from Joe Palooka, hero of Ham Fisher's
comic strip.


palp (n.)

feeler, 1842, from French palpe, from Latin palpus feeler, related to palpare to touch, feel (see
feel (v.)).


palpable (adj.)

late 14c., that can be touched, from Late Latin palpabilis that may be touched or felt, from Latin
palpare touch gently, stroke (see feel (v.)). Figurative sense of easily perceived, evident also is
from late 14c. Related: Palpably.


palpate (v.)

examine by touch, c.1850, a back-formation from palpation, or else from Latin palpatus, past
participle of palpare to touch (see feel (v.)). Related: Palpated; palpating.


palpation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French palpation, from Latin palpationem (nominative palpatio) stroking,
flattering, flattery, noun of action from past participle stem of palpare to touch (see feel (v.)).
Used in English in literal sense.


palpitant (adj.)

1837, from French palpitant (early 16c.), from Latin palpitantem, present participle of palpitare to
move frequently and swiftly, tremble, throb, frequentative of palpare to touch (see feel (v.)).


palpitate (v.)

1620s, from Latin palpitatus, past participle of palpitare to throb, flutter (see palpitation).
Related: Palpitated; palpitating.


palpitation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French palpitation, from Latin palpitationem (nominative palpitatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of palpitare to throb, to flutter, to tremble, to quiver,
frequentative of palpare touch gently, stroke; wheedle, coax (see feel (v.)).


palsgrave (n.)

1540s, a count palatine, from Middle Dutch palsgrave, from pals palace (from Latin palatium, see
palace) + grave (Dutch graaf) count (see margrave). Similar formation in Middle High German
pfalzgrave, German Pfalzgraf.


palsied (adj.)

1540s, from palsy.


palsy (n.)

disease causing paralysis, c.1300, palesie, from Anglo-French parlesie, Old French paralisie, from
Vulgar Latin *paralysia, from Latin paralysis (see paralysis).


palter (v.)

1530s, speak indistinctly, of unknown origin. It has the form of a frequentative, but no verb palt
is known. Connection with paltry is uncertain. Hence play fast and loose (c.1600). Related:
Paltered; paltering; palterer.


paltry (adj.)

1560s, probably an adjectival use of noun paltry worthless thing (1550s), associated with dialectal
palt, pelt trash, cognate with Middle Low German and East Frisian palte rag, Middle Dutch palt
broken or torn fragment. Similar formation in Low German paltrig rubbishy, East Frisian palterig
ragged, torn.


pampas (n.)

large plains of South America, 1704, from Spanish pampas, plural of pampa, from Quechua (Peru) pampa
a plain.


pamper (v.)

late 14c., to cram with food, probably from Middle Dutch (compare West Flemish pamperen cram with
food, overindulge; dialectal German pampen to cram), probably from frequentative of root of pap
(n.1). Meaning to overindulge first attested 1520s. Related: Pampered; pampering.


pampered (adj.)

1520s, over-fed, past participle adjective from pamper. Meaning spoiled by luxury is from 1690s.


pamphlet (n.)

small, unbound treatise, late 14c., from Anglo-Latin panfletus, popular short form of Pamphilus, seu
de Amore (Pamphilus, or about Love), a short 12c. Latin love poem popular and widely copied in
Middle Ages; the name from Greek pamphilos loved by all, from pan- all + philos loving, dear see
-phile). Meaning brief work dealing with questions of current interest is late 16c.


pamphleteer (n.)

1640s, from pamphlet + -eer. As a verb from 1690s.


Pamphylia

ancient region in modern Turkey, from Greek, literally place of all races, from pan all (see pan-) +
phylon race (see phylo-).


Pamplona

city in Spain, Roman Pompeiopolis, named for Pompey, Roman emperor who founded it 68 B.C.E.


pan (n.)

Old English panne, earlier ponne (Mercian) pan, from Proto-Germanic *panna pan (cognates: Old Norse
panna, Old Frisian panne, Middle Dutch panne, Dutch pan, Old Low German panna, Old High German
phanna, German pfanne), probably an early borrowing (4c. or 5c.) from Vulgar Latin *patna, from
Latin patina shallow pan, dish, stewpan, from Greek patane plate, dish, from PIE *pet-ano-, from
root *pete- to spread (see pace (n.)). Irish panna probably is from English, and Lithuanian pana is
from German.    Used of pan-shaped parts of mechanical apparatus from c.1590; hence flash in the
pan, a figurative use from early firearms, where a pan held the priming (and the gunpowder might
flash, but no shot ensue).  To go out of the (frying) pan into the fire is first found in Spenser
(1596).


pan (v.2)

follow with a camera, 1913 shortening of panoramic in panoramic camera (1878). Meaning to swing from
one object to another in a scene is from 1931. Related: Panned; panning.


Pan

Arcadian shepherd god with upper body of a man and horns and lower part like a goat, late 14c., a
god of the woods and fields, from Latin, from Greek Pan. Klein says perhaps cognate with Sanskrit
pusan, a Vedic god, guardian and multiplier of cattle and other human possessions, literally
nourisher. Similarity to pan all (see pan-) led to his being regarded as a personification of
nature. Pan-pipe, upon which he supposedly played, is attested from 1820.


pan (v.1)

to wash gravel or sand in a pan in search of gold, 1839, from pan (n.); thus to pan out turn out,
succeed (1868) is a figurative use of this (literal sense from 1849). The meaning criticize severely
is from 1911, probably from the notion in contemporary slang expressions such as on the pan under
reprimand or criticism (1923). Related: Panned; panning.


pan-

word-forming element meaning all, every, whole, all-inclusive, from Greek pan-, combining form of
pas (neuter pan, masculine and neuter genitive pantos) all, from PIE *pant- all (with derivatives
found only in Greek and Tocharian).    Commonly used as a prefix in Greek, in modern times often
with nationality names, the first example of which seems to have been Panslavism (1846). Also
panislamic (1881), pan-American (1889), pan-German (1892), pan-African (1900), pan-European (1901),
pan-Arabism (1930).


pan-Africanism

1955, from pan-African (1900), from pan- + African.


panacea (n.)

universal remedy, 1540s, from Latin panacea, a herb (variously identified) that would heal all
illnesses, from Greek panakeia cure-all, from panakes all-healing, from pan- all (see pan-) + akos
cure, from iasthai to heal (see -iatric). Earlier in English as panace (1510s).


panache (n.)

1550s, a tuft or plume of feathers, from Middle French pennache tuft of feathers, from Italian
pennaccio, from Late Latin pinnaculum small wing, gable, peak (see pinnacle). Figurative sense of
display, swagger first recorded 1898 (in translation of Cyrano de Bergerac), from French.


Panama

probably from an unknown Guarani word, traditionally said to mean place of many fish. Originally the
name of the settlement founded 1519 (destroyed 1671 but subsequently rebuilt). Panama hat, made from
the leaves of the screw pine, attested from 1833, a misnomer, because it originally was made in
Ecuador, but perhaps so called in American English because it was distributed north from Panama
City. Panama red as a variety of Central American marijuana is attested from 1967.


panatela (n.)

also panetela, panetella, type of thin cigar, 1901, from Spanish panatela, literally sponge-cake (in
American Spanish, a long, thin biscuit), a diminutive, formed from Latin panis bread (see food).


Panavision (n.)

1955, proprietary name of a type of wide-screen lens, word formed from elements of panorama +
vision.


pancake (n.)

early 15c. (late 13c. as a surname), from pan (n.) + cake (n.); as symbol of flatness c.1600.


pancake (v.)

to squeeze flat, 1879, from pancake (n.). Later, of aircraft, to fall flat (1911), with figurative
extension. Related: Pancaked; pancaking.


panchen

Tibetian Buddhist title of respect, 1763, abbreviation of pandi-tachen-po, literally great learned
one.


pancreas (n.)

1570s, from Latinized form of Greek pankreas sweetbread (pancreas as food), pancreas, literally
entirely flesh, from pan- all (see pan-) + kreas flesh (see raw), probably on notion of homogeneous
substance of the organ.


pancreatitis (n.)

1842, medical Latin, from comb. form of pancreas + -itis.


panda (n.)

1835, from French, apparently from the Nepalese name of a raccoon-like mammal (lesser panda) found
there. First reference to the Giant Panda is from 1901; since its discovery in 1869 by French
missionary Armand David (1826-1900) it had been known as parti-colored bear, but the name was
changed after the zoological relationship to the red panda was established.


pandemic (adj.)

1660s, from Late Latin pandemus, from Greek pandemos pertaining to all people; public, common, from
pan- all (see pan-) + demos people (see demotic). Modeled on epidemic. The noun is first recorded
1853, from the adjective.


pandemonium (n.)

1667, Pand&aelig;monium, in Paradise Lost the name of the palace built in the middle of Hell, the
high capital of Satan and all his peers, coined by John Milton (1608-1674) from Greek pan- all (see
pan-) + Late Latin daemonium evil spirit, from Greek daimonion inferior divine power, from daimon
lesser god (see demon).    Transferred sense place of uproar is from 1779; that of wild, lawless
confusion is from 1865. Related: Pandemoniac; pandemoniacal; pandemonian; pandemonic.


pander (n.)

arranger of sexual liaisons, one who supplies another with the means of gratifying lust, 1520s,
procurer, pimp, from Middle English Pandare (late 14c.), used by Chaucer (Troylus and Cryseyde), who
borrowed it from Boccaccio (who had it in Italian form Pandaro in Filostrato) as name of the prince
(Greek Pandaros), who procured the love of Cressida (his niece in Chaucer, his cousin in Boccaccio)
for Troilus. The story and the name are medieval inventions. Spelling influenced by agent suffix
-er.


pander (v.)

to indulge (another), to minister to base passions, c.1600, from pander (n.). Related: Pandered;
pandering.


pandiculation (n.)

1610s, noun of action from Latin pandiculat-, past participle stem of pandiculari to stretch
oneself, from pandere to stretch (see pace (n.)).


Pandora

1570s, in Greek mythology, the first mortal woman, made by Hephaestus and given as a bride to
Epimetheus, from Greek pandora all-gifted (or perhaps giver of all), from pan all (see pan-) + doron
gift, from PIE root *do- to give (see date (n.1)).   Pandora's box (1570s) refers to her gift from
Zeus, which was foolishly opened by Epimetheus, upon which all the contents escaped. They were said
to be the host of human ills (escaping to afflict mankind), or, in a later version, all the
blessings of the god (escaping to be lost), except Hope, which alone remained.


pane (n.)

mid-13c., garment, part of a garment, later side of a building, section of a wall, from Old French
pan section, piece, panel (11c.), from Latin pannum (nominative pannus) piece of cloth, garment,
possibly from PIE root *pan- fabric (cognates: Gothic fana piece of cloth, Greek penos web, Old
English fanna flag). Sense of window glass first attested mid-15c.


panegyric (n.)

eulogy, laudation, c.1600, from French pan&eacute;gyrique (1510s), from Latin panegyricus public
eulogy, originally an adjective, for a public festival, from Greek panegyrikos (logos) (a speech)
given in a public assembly, from panegyris public assembly (especially in honor of a god), from pan-
all (see pan-) + agyris place of assembly, Aeolic form of agora (see agora).


panel (n.)

early 14c., from Old French panel piece of cloth, piece, saddle cushion (Modern French panneau),
from Vulgar Latin *pannellus, diminutive of Latin pannus piece of cloth (see pane). Anglo-French
legalese sense of piece of parchment (cloth) listing jurors led by late 14c. to meaning jury.
General sense of persons called on to advise, judge, discuss, etc. is from 1570s. Sense of distinct
part of surface of a wall, door, etc. is first recorded c.1600.


panel (v.)

mid-15c., to empanel, from panel (n.). From 1630s as to furnish (a room) with panels. Related:
Paneled; paneling; panelling.


panelist (n.)

1950, American English, from panel (n.) + -ist. Originally in quiz shows.


panelling (n.)

also paneling, 1800, verbal noun from panel (v.).


panem et circenses

Latin, literally bread and circuses, supposedly coined by Juvenal and describing the cynical formula
of the Roman emperors for keeping the masses content with ample food and entertainment.   Duas
tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses [Juvenal, Sat. x.80].


panfish (n.)

1833, American English, from pan (n.1) + fish (n.).


pang (n.)

1520s, sudden physical pain, of unknown origin, perhaps related to prong (prongys of deth is
recorded from mid-15c.). Reference to mental or emotional pain is from 1560s. Related: Pangs.


Pangaea

supercontinent of the late Paleozoic era, 1924, from Greek pan- all (see pan-) + gaia earth (see
gaia). First attested in German, 1920, in Alfred Wegener's Die Entstehung der Kontinente und Ozeane
(not found in 1914 first edition, according to OED).


Panglossian (adj.)

optimistic (usually ironic or disparaging), 1831, from French Panglosse, name of the philosopher and
tutor in Voltaire's Candide (1758), from pan- (see pan-) + Greek glossa, literally tongue (see gloss
(n.2)).


pangolin (n.)

1774, scaly toothless mammal of Java, from Malay peng-goling roller, from its habit of curling into
a ball; from peng- (denominative prefix) + goling to roll. Later extended to related species in Asia
and Africa.


panhandle (n.)

something resembling the handle of a pan, 1851, from pan (n.) + handle (n.). Especially in reference
to geography, originally American English, from 1856, in reference to Virginia (now West Virginia;
Florida, Texas, Idaho, Oklahoma, and Alaska also have them). Meaning an act of begging is attested
from 1849, perhaps from notion of arm stuck out like a panhandle, or of one who handles a (beggar's)
pan.


panhandle (v.)

to beg, 1888, from panhandle (n.) in the begging sense. Related: Panhandled; panhandling.


panhandler (n.)

one who begs, 1893, from panhandle (n.) in begging sense. Related: Panhandled; panhandler;
panhandling.


Panhellenic (adj.)

also Related: pan-Hellenic, 1847, pertaining to or involving all the Greeks, from Greek Panhellenes
all the Hellenes; see pan- + Hellenic. Related: Panhellenism.


panic (v.)

1827, to afflict with panic, from panic (n.). Intransitive sense of to lose one's head, get into a
panic is from 1902. Related: Panicked; panicking.


panic (n.1)

mass terror, 1708, from earlier adjective (c.1600, modifying fear, terror, etc.), from French
panique (15c.), from Greek panikon, literally pertaining to Pan, the god of woods and fields, who
was the source of mysterious sounds that caused contagious, groundless fear in herds and crowds, or
in people in lonely spots.    In the sense of panic, fright the Greek word is short for panikon
deima panic fright, from neuter of Panikos of Pan. Meaning widespread apprehension about financial
matters is first recorded 1757. Panic button in figurative sense is first recorded 1955, the literal
sense apparently is from parachuting. Panic attack attested by 1970.


panic (n.2)

type of grass, early 15c., from Old French panic Italian millet, from Latin panicum panic grass,
kind of millet, from panus ear of millet, a swelling (compare panocha).


panicky (adj.)

1869, from panic (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Panickiness.


panjandrum (n.)

mock name for a pompous personage, 1755, invented by Samuel Foote (1720-1777) in a long passage full
of nonsense written to test the memory of actor Charles Macklin (1697-1797), who said he could
repeat anything after hearing it once.


panne (n.)

1794, from French panne soft material, plush (15c.), earlier penne (13c.), of unknown origin;
perhaps from Latin penna feather (see pen (n.1)).


pannel

see panel.


pannier (n.)

late 13c., large basket for provisions, from Old French panier basket, from Latin panarium bread
basket, from panis bread (see food).


pannikin (n.)

small metal cup, 1823, described as a Suffolk dialect word, from pan (n.) + diminutive suffix -kin.


Pannonia

ancient name of the region roughly corresponding to modern Hungary.


panocha (n.)

also panoche, 1847, from American Spanish panocha brown sugar, perhaps ultimately from Latin
panucula tuft, diminutive of panus tuft, swelling; ear of millet (see panic (n.2)).


panoply (n.)

1570s, from Greek panoplia complete suit of armor, from pan- all (see pan-) + hopla (plural), arms
of a hoplites (heavily armed soldier); see hoplite. Originally in English figurative, of spiritual
armor, etc. (a reference to Eph. vi); non-armorial sense of any splendid array first recorded 1829.


panoptic (adj.)

1826, from Greek panoptos fully visible, seen by all, from panopes all-seeing, from pan all (see
pan-) + optos (see optic). Related: Panoptical.


panopticon (n.)

1768, a type of optical instrument or telescope, from Greek pan all (see pan-) + optikon, neuter of
optikos of or for sight (see optic). Later the name of a type of prison designed by Bentham (1791)
in which wardens had a constant view of all inmates, and a showroom (1850).


panorama (n.)

1796, a painting on a revolving cylindrical surface, coined c.1789 by inventor, Irish artist Robert
Barker, literally a complete view, from pan- all + Greek horama sight, spectacle, that which is
seen, from horan to look, see, possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)). Meaning
comprehensive survey is 1801.


panoramic (adj.)

1813; see panorama + -ic. Panoramic camera is attested from 1878.


pansexual (adj.)

1926 (pansexualism is from 1917), from pan- + sexual. Originally in reference to the view that the
sex instinct plays the primary part in all human activity, mental and physical; this was held by his
critics to be the view of Freud, therefore a term of reproach leveled at early psychology.


Panslavism (n.)

1846, from German Pansclavismus, coined as a linguistic term by Herkel in 1826.


pansy (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French pens&eacute;e a pansy, literally thought, remembrance, from fem. past
participle of penser to think, from Latin pensare consider, frequentative of pendere to weigh (see
pendant). So called because it was regarded as a symbol of thought or remembrance. Meaning
effeminate homosexual man is first recorded 1929.


pant (v.)

mid-15c., perhaps a shortening of Old French pantaisier gasp, puff, pant, be out of breath, be in
distress (12c.), probably from Vulgar Latin *pantasiare be oppressed with a nightmare, struggle for
breathing during a nightmare, literally to have visions, from Greek phantasioun have or form images,
subject to hallucinations, from phantasia appearance, image, fantasy (see phantasm). Related:
Panted; panting.


pant (n.)

a gasping breath, c.1500, from pant (v.).


Pantaloon (n.)

skinny, foolish old man in Italian comedy, 1580s; see pantaloons. As a kind of leggings, 1660s.


pantaloons (n.)

1660s, kind of tights (originally a French fashion and execrated as such by late 17c. English
writers), associated with Pantaloun (1580s), silly old man character in Italian comedy who wore
tight trousers over his skinny legs, from Italian Pantalone, originally San Pantaleone, Christian
martyr, a popular saint in Venice (Pantaleone in the comedies represents the Venetian). The name is
of Greek origin and means all-compassionate (or, according to Klein, entirely lion). Applied to
tight long trousers (replacing knee-breeches) by 1798; pants is a shortened form first recorded
1840.


Panthalassa (n.)

universal sea, such as that which surrounded Pangaea, 1893 (Suess), from pan- all (see pan-) + Greek
thalassa sea (see thalasso-).


pantheism (n.)

belief that God and the universe are identical, from pantheist (n.), which was coined (1705) by
Irish deist John Toland (1670-1722), from Greek pan- all (see pan-) + theos god (see theo-).
Toland's word was borrowed into French, which from it formed panth&eacute;isme (1712) which returned
to English as pantheism the doctrine that all is god in 1732 (no evidence that Toland used
pantheism).    Greek pantheios meant common to all gods (see pantheon). Other words used at various
times for similar notions include panentheism, philosophy founded on the notion that all things are
in God (1874), from German (1828), coined by Karl Christian Friedrich Krause (1781-1832).


pantheist (n.)

1705, see pantheism + -ist.


pantheistic (adj.)

1732, from pantheist + -ic.


pantheon (n.)

c.1300, from Pantheon, name of a temple for all the gods built in Rome c.25 B.C.E. by Agrippa (since
609 C.E. made into the Christian church of Santa Maria Rotonda), from Greek Pantheion (hieron)
(shrine) of all the gods, from pantheion, neuter of pantheios, from pan- all (see pan-) + theios of
or for the gods, from theos god (see theo-). Sense of any group of exalted persons is first found
1590s.


panther (n.)

early 13c., from Old French pantere panther (12c.), from Latin panthera, from Greek panther panther,
leopard, probably of Oriental origin. Folk etymology derivation from Greek pan- all + ther beast led
to many curious fables.


panties (n.)

1845, drawers for men (derogatory), diminutive of pants; meaning underpants for women or children
first recorded 1908. Panty raid first attested 1952.


pantisocracy (n.)

ideal Utopian community in which all have equal rights, 1794, literally equal rule of all, from
Greek pant-, comb. form of pantos, genitive of pan all (see pan-) + isocratia equality of power (see
isocracy).


pantomime (n.)

1610s, mime actor, from Latin pantomimus mime, dancer, from Greek pantomimos actor, literally
imitator of all, from panto- (genitive of pan) all (see pan-) + mimos imitator (see mime (n.)).
Meaning drama or play without words first recorded 1735. The English dramatic performances so
called, usually at Christmas and with words and songs and stock characters, are attested by this
name from 1739; said to have originated c.1717. Related: Pantomimic; pantomimical.


pantomime (v.)

1768, from pantomime (n.). Related: Pantomimed; pantomiming.


pantothenic (adj.)

denoting a B-complex vitamin acid, 1933, from Greek pantothen from all quarters, on every side, from
panto-, comb. form of pantos, genitive of pan all (see pan-) + -ic. So called because it was found
in so many sources.


pantry (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French panetrie (Old French paneterie) bread room, from Medieval Latin
panataria office or room of a servant who has charge of food (literally bread), from Latin panis
bread (see food). Sense in English has evolved so far that its roots in bread are no longer felt.


pants (n.)

trousers, 1840, see pantaloons. Colloquial singular pant is attested from 1893. To wear the pants be
the dominant member of a household is first attested 1931. To do something by the seat of (one's)
pants by human instinct is from 1942, originally of pilots, perhaps with some notion of being able
to sense the condition and situation of the plane by engine vibrations, etc. To be caught with
(one's) pants down discovered in an embarrassing condition is from 1932.


pantsuit (n.)

1966, contraction of pants suit (1964), from pants + suit (n.).


pantyhose (n.)

1963; see panties + hose (n.).


pantywaist (n.)

weak or effeminate male, 1936, from a type of child's garment with short pants that buttoned to the
waist of a shirt; see panties + waist.


panzer (adj.)

1940, from of German Panzerdivision armored unit, from Panzer tank, literally armor, from Middle
High German panzier, from Old French panciere armor for the belly, from pance belly, stomach, from
Latin pantex (genitive panticis) belly (see paunch).


pap (n.1)

soft food for infants, late 14c., from Old French pape watered gruel, from Latin pappa, a widespread
word in children's language for food (Middle High German and Dutch pap, German Pappe, Spanish,
Portuguese papa, Italian pappa), imitative of an infant's noise when hungry; possibly associated
with pap (n.2). Meaning over-simplified idea first recorded 1540s.


pap (n.2)

nipple of a woman's breast, c.1200, first attested in Northern and Midlands writing, probably from a
Scandinavian source (not recorded in Old Norse, but compare dialectal Swedish pappe), from PIE
imitative root *pap- to swell (cognates: Latin papilla nipple, papula a swelling, pimple; Lithuanian
papas nipple).


pap (n.3)

older man, 1844, shortening of papa.


Pap test (n.)

1963, short for Papanicolaou (1947) in reference to George Nicholas Papanicolaou (1883-1962), Greek-
born U.S. anatomist who developed the technique of examining secreted cells to test for cancer.


papa (n.)

father, 1680s, from French papa, from Latin papa, originally a child's word, similar to Greek pappa
(vocative) o father, pappas father, pappos grandfather. The native word is daddy; first use of papa
was in courtly speech, as a continental affectation, not used by common folk until late 18c.


papacy (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin papatia papal office, from Late Latin papa pope (see pope). Old
English had papdom in this sense.


papal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French papal (late 14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin papalis pertaining to
the pope, from papa (see pope).


paparazzi (n.)

1961, from Italian Paparazzo (plural paparazzi) surname of the freelance photographer in Federico
Fellini's 1959 film La Dolce Vita. The surname itself is of no special significance; it is said to
be a common one in Calabria, and Fellini is said to have borrowed it from a travel book, By the
Ionian Sea, in which occurs the name of hotel owner Coriolano Paparazzo.


paparazzo (n.)

see paparazzi.


papaw (n.)

1620s, variant of papaya (q.v.), used from 1760 to designate the papaw tree.


papaya (n.)

1590s for fruit, 1610s for tree, from Spanish, probably from Arawakan (West Indies) papaya.


paper (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French paper, Old French papier paper, document, from Latin papyrus paper,
paper made of papyrus stalks (see papyrus).    Meaning paper money attested from 1722. As shortened
form of newspaper, first attested 1640s. In plural, collection of papers to establish one's
identity, credentials, etc., it is attested from 1680s. Paper chase is British slang from 1932.


paper (v.)

1590s, to write down on paper, from paper (n.). Meaning to decorate a room with paper hangings is
from 1774. Related: Papered; papering. Verbal phrase paper over in the figurative sense is from
1955, from the notion of hiding plaster cracks with wallaper.


paper (adj.)

1590s, from paper (n.). Figurative of something flimsy or unsubstantial from 1716. Paper tiger
(1952) translates Chinese tsuh lao fu, popularized by Mao Zedong. Paper doll attested from 1849;
paper plate from 1723.


paper-weight (n.)

heavy object used to hold down papers, 1858, from paper (n.) + weight (n.).


paperback (n.)

1899, from paper (n.) + back (n.). Adjective paper-backed attested from 1888.


paperless (adj.)

1938 of cigarettes; 1967 of banks; 1971 of offices, from paper (n.) + -less.


paperwork (n.)

1580s, things made of paper, from paper (n.) + work (n.). Meaning work done on paper is from 1889.


papier-mache (n.)

also papier mache, 1753, from French papier-m&acirc;ch&eacute;, literally chewed paper, from Old
French papier paper (see paper (n.)) + m&acirc;ch&eacute; compressed, mashed, from past participle
of m&acirc;cher, literally to chew, from Late Latin masticare masticate (see mastication).


papilla (n.)

plural papillae, 1690s, nipple, from Latin papilla nipple, diminutive of papula swelling (see pap
(n.2)). Meaning nipple-like protuberance attested from 1713.


papillary (adj.)

1660s, from Latin papilla (see papilla) + -ary.


papilledema (n.)

also papilloedema, 1908, from papilla + edema.


papilloma (n.)

1866, a modern Latin hybrid from papilla + -oma.


papillon (n.)

1907, as a breed of dog, from French papillon, literally butterfly, from Latin papilionem
(nominative papilio) butterfly, perhaps from a reduplicated form of PIE root *pal- to touch, feel,
shake.    The Latin word is cognate with Old English fifealde butterfly, Old Saxon fifoldara, Old
Norse fifrildi, Old High German vivaltra, German Falter. The dog so called for the shape of the
ears.


papish (adj.)

1540s; see papal + -ish.


papist (n.)

1530s, adherent of the pope, from Middle French papiste, from papa pope, from Church Latin papa (see
pope).


papoose (n.)

1630s, from Narragansett papoos child, or a similar New England Algonquian word; said to mean
literally very young.


paprika (n.)

1896, from German Paprika, from Hungarian paprika, a diminutive from Serbo-Croatian papar pepper,
from Latin piper or Modern Greek piperi (see pepper (n.)). A condiment made from a New World plant,
grown by the Turks at Buda from 1529.


Papua

race that inhabits New Guinea, 1610s, from Malay papuah frizzled. Related: Papuan.


papule (n.)

1864, from Latin papula pustule, pimple, swelling (see pap (n.2)). Related: Papular.


papyrus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin papyrus the paper plant, paper made from it, from Greek papyros any plant of
the paper plant genus, said to be of Egyptian origin. Proper plural is papyri.


par (n.)

1620s, equality, also value of one currency in terms of another, from Latin par equal, equal-sized,
well-matched, also as a noun, that which is equal, equality, of unknown origin. Watkins suggests
perhaps from PIE root *pere- (2) to grant, allot, with suggestion of reciprocality (see part (n.)).
Another guess connects it with PIE root *per-  to traffic in, sell (on notion of give equal value
for); see pornography. Meaning average or usual amount is first attested 1767. Golf usage is first
attested 1898. Figurative use of par for the course is from 1928.


par (prep.)

by, for, mid-13c., from Old French par, per, from Latin per (see per).


par excellence

French, from Latin per excellentiam by the way of excellence. From French par by way of, by means
of, from Latin per (see per). For second element see excellence.


para- (1)

before vowels, par-, word-forming element meaning alongside, beyond; altered; contrary; irregular,
abnormal, from Greek para- from para (prep.) beside, near, issuing from, against, contrary to, from
PIE *prea, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per). Cognate with Old English for- off, away.


para- (2)

word-forming element meaning defense, protection against; that which protects from, from Italian
para, imperative of parare to ward off, from Latin parare make ready (see pare).


Parabellum (n.)

proprietary name for a type of automatic firearm, 1904 (Mauser &amp; Deutsche Waffen und
Munitionsfabriken), from Latin phrase si vis pacem, para bellum, from para, imperative of parare to
prepare (see para- (2)) + bellum war (see bellicose).


parable (n.)

mid-13c., parabol, modern form from early 14c., saying or story in which something is expressed in
terms of something else, from Old French parable parable, parabolic style in writing (13c.), from
Latin parabola comparison, from Greek parabole a comparison, parable, literally a throwing beside,
hence a juxtaposition, from para- alongside (see para- (1)) + bole a throwing, casting, beam, ray,
related to ballein to throw (see ballistics).    Replaced Old English bispell. In Vulgar Latin,
parabola took on the meaning word, hence Italian parlare, French parler to speak (see parley (n.)).


parabola (n.)

1570s, from Modern Latin parabola, from Greek parabole parabola, comparison, analogy; application
(see parable), so called by Apollonius of Perga c.210 B.C.E. because it is produced by application
of a given area to a given straight line. It had a different sense in Pythagorean geometry. Related:
Parabolic.


parabole (n.)

comparison, metaphor, 1580s, from Greek parabole comparison (see parable).


parabolic (adj.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin parabolicus, from late Greek parabolikos figurative, from parabole (see
parable). Related: Parabolical.


paracentesis (n.)

1590s, from medical Latin form of Greek parakentesis perforation, from parakentein to pierce at the
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + kentein to prick, stab (see center (n.)).


parachute (n.)

1784 (the year the use of one first was attempted, in Paris), from French parachute, literally that
which protects against a fall, hybrid coined by French aeronaut Fran&ccedil;ois Blanchard
(1753-1809) from para- defense against (see para- (2)) + chute a fall (see chute).    PARACHUTE, a
kind of large and strong umbrella, contrived to break a person's fall from an airballoon, should any
accident happen to the balloon at a high elevation. [Supplement to the Encyclopaedia or Dictionary
of Arts and Sciences, Philadelphia, 1803]


parachute (v.)

1807, from parachute (n.). Related: Parachuted; parachuting.


paraclete (n.)

mid-15c., Paraclit, a title of the Holy Spirit, from Old French paraclet (13c.), from Medieval Latin
paracletus, from Greek parakletos advocate, intercessor, legal assistant, noun use of adjective
meaning called to one's aid, from parakalein to call to one's aid, in later use to comfort, to
console, from para (see para- (1)) + kalein to call (see claim (v.)).


parade (n.)

1650s, a show of bravado, also an assembly of troops for inspections, from French parade display,
show, military parade, from Middle French parade (15c.), or from Italian parate a warding or
defending, a garish setting forth, or Spanish parada a staying or stopping, all from Vulgar Latin
*parata, from Latin parere arrange, prepare, adorn (see pare), which developed widespread senses in
Romanic derivatives. Non-military sense of march, procession is first recorded 1670s.


parade (v.)

1680s (transitive), from parade (n.). Intransitive sense from 1748. Related: Paraded; parading.


paradigm (n.)

late 15c., from Late Latin paradigma pattern, example, especially in grammar, from Greek paradeigma
pattern, model; precedent, example, from paradeiknynai exhibit, represent, literally show side by
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + deiknynai to show (cognate with Latin dicere to show; see
diction). Related: Paradigmatic; paradigmatical.


paradise (n.)

late 12c., Garden of Eden, from Old French paradis paradise, Garden of Eden (11c.), from Late Latin
paradisus, from Greek paradeisos park, paradise, Garden of Eden, from an Iranian source similar to
Avestan pairidaeza enclosure, park (Modern Persian and Arabic firdaus garden, paradise), compound of
pairi- around + diz to make, form (a wall).    The first element is cognate with Greek peri- around,
about (see per), the second is from PIE root *dheigh- to form, build (see dough).    The Greek word,
originally used for an orchard or hunting park in Persia, was used in Septuagint to mean Garden of
Eden, and in New Testament translations of Luke xxiii:43 to mean heaven (a sense attested in English
from c.1200). Meaning place like or compared to Paradise is from c.1300.


paradisiacal (adj.)

1630s, from Latin paradisiacus (from Greek paradeisiakos, from paradeisos; see paradise) + -al (1).
Other adjective forms include paradisaic, paradisaical, paradisal, paradisean, paradisiac,
paradisial, paradisian, paradisic, paradisical.


parados (n.)

rear wall of a trench, 1917, earlier elevation behind a fortified place (1853), literally defense
from the back, from French parados, from para- defense (see para- (2)) + dos back (see dossier).


paradox (n.)

1530s, statement contrary to common belief or expectation, from Middle French paradoxe (14c.) and
directly from Latin paradoxum paradox, statement seemingly absurd yet really true, from Greek
paradoxon, noun use of neuter of adjective paradoxos contrary to expectation, incredible, from para-
contrary to (see para- (1)) + doxa opinion, from dokein to appear, seem, think (see decent). Meaning
statement that is seemingly self-contradictory yet not illogical or obviously untrue is from 1560s.


paradoxical (adj.)

1580s, from paradox + -ical. Competing forms were paradoxal (1560s), paradoxial (1620s), but they
survive in niches, if at all. Related: Paradoxically.


paraesthesia (n.)

also paresthesia, 1835, from para- (here disordered) + Greek aisthesis perception (see anaesthesia).


paraffin (n.)

1838, from German Paraffin, coined c.1830 by German chemist Karl von Reichenbach (1788-1869), who
first obtained it as a waxy substance from wood tar, irregularly from Latin parum not very, too
little, probably related to parvus little, small (see parvi-) + affinis associated with (see
affinity).    So called because paraffin is chemically not closely related to other substances. The
liquid form (originally parafin oil) Reichenbach called eupion, but this was the standard meaning of
paraffin in English by 1860.


paragon (n.)

1540s, from Middle French paragon a model, pattern of excellence (15c., Modern French parangon),
from Italian paragone, originally touchstone to test gold (early 14c.), from paragonare to test on a
touchstone, compare, from Greek parakonan to sharpen, whet, from para- on the side (see para- (1)) +
akone whetstone, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid).


paragraph (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French paragraphe division of text (13c., Old French paragrafe), from
Medieval Latin paragraphus sign for start of a new section of discourse (the sign looked something
like a stylized letter -P-), from Greek paragraphos short stroke in the margin marking a break in
sense, also a passage so marked, literally anything written beside, from paragraphein write by the
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + graphein to write (see -graphy).


Paraguay

country is named for the river, which is said to be from Guarani para water + guay born. Said to
have been the name of a local chieftain who treated with the first Spanish explorers.


parakeet (n.)

1620s, from Spanish perquito; earlier English form parroket (1580s) is from Middle French paroquet,
from Old French paroquet (14c.), which is said by etymologists of French to be from Italian
parrocchetto, literally little priest, from parroco parish priest, from Church Latin parochus (see
parish), or parrucchetto, diminutive of parrucca peruke, periwig, in reference to the head plumage.
The Spanish form, meanwhile, is sometimes said to be a diminutive of Perico, familiar form of Pedro
Peter, and the Old French word is likewise perhaps from or influenced by a diminutive of Pierre
Peter. The relations of the Spanish and Italian forms, and the influence of folk etymology on either
or both, are uncertain.


paralanguage (n.)

1958, from para- (1) + language.


paralegal (n.)

1972, from para- (1) + legal assistant.


paralipsis (n.)

1580s, from Greek paraleipsis passing by omission, from paraleipein to leave on one side, pass over,
leave untold, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + leipein to leave (see relinquish).


parallax (n.)

1570s, from Middle French parallaxe (mid-16c.), from Greek parallaxis change, alteration,
inclination of two lines meeting at an angle, from parallassein to alter, make things alternate,
from para- (see para- (1)) + allassein to change, from allos other (see alias (adv.)). Related:
Parallactic.


parallel (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French parall&egrave;le (16c.) and directly from Latin parallelus, from Greek
parallelos parallel, from para allelois beside one another, from para- beside (see para- (1)) +
allelois each other, from allos other (see alias (adv.)). As a noun from 1550s. Parallel bars as
gymnastics apparatus are recorded from 1868.


parallel (v.)

1590s, from parallel (n.).


parallelism (n.)

c.1600, from Greek parallelismos, from parallelizein (see parallel).


parallelogram (n.)

1560s, from Middle French parall&eacute;logramme (1550s) and directly from Late Latin
parallelogrammum, from Greek parallelogrammon noun use of neuter adjective meaning bounded by
parallel lines, from parallelos (see parallel) + stem of graphein to write (see -graphy).


paralyse (v.)

alternative (chiefly British) spelling of paralyze. For ending, see -ize. Related: Paralysed;
paralysing.


paralysis (n.)

1520s, from Latin paralysis, from Greek paralysis paralysis, palsy, literally loosening, from
paralyein disable, enfeeble, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + lyein loosen, untie (see lose).
Figurative use from 1813. Earlier form was paralysie (late 14c., see palsy). Old English equivalent
was lyft adl (see left (adj.)) or crypelnes crippleness.


paralytic

c.1300 (adj.), late 14c. (n.), from Old French paralitique paralyzed, unmoving, from Latin
paralyticus, from Greek paralytikos, from paralysis (see paralysis).


paralyze (v.)

1804, from French paralyser (16c.), from Old French paralisie paralysis, from Latin paralysis (see
paralysis). Figurative use from 1805. Related: Paralyzed; paralyzing.


paramagnetic (adj.)

1850, from para- (1) + magnetic.


paramecium (n.)

1752, Modern Latin Paramecium, the genus name, coined from Greek paramekes oblong, oval, from para-
on one side (see para- (1)) + mekos length, related to makros long (see macro-).


paramedic (n.)

medical technician, 1970, back-formation from paramedical. The meaning medical corpsman who
parachutes is 1951 from para(chute) + medic.


paramedical (adj.)

related to medicine in an auxiliary capacity, 1908, from para- (1) + medical.


parameter (n.)

1650s in geometry, from Modern Latin parameter (1630s), from Greek para- beside, subsidiary (see
para- (1)) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)).    A geometry term until 1920s when it yielded sense
of measurable factor which helps to define a particular system (1927). Common modern meaning
(influenced by perimeter) of boundary, limit, characteristic factor is from 1950s. Related:
Parametric.


paramilitary (adj.)

1935, from para- (1) + military.


paramount (adj.)

1530s, from Anglo-French paramont, Old French paramont above (in place, order, degree), mid-14c.,
from Old French par by, from Latin per through, for, by (see per (prep.)) + amont up, from a mont
upward (see amount (v.)). The whole from Latin per ad montem, literally to the hill.


paramour (n.)

c.1300, noun use of adverbial phrase par amour (c.1300) passionately, with strong love or desire,
from Anglo-French and Old French par amour, from accusative of amor love, from amare to love (see
Amy). Originally a term for Christ (by women) or the Virgin Mary (by men), it came to mean darling,
sweetheart (mid-14c.) and mistress, concubine, clandestine lover (late 14c.).


paranoia (n.)

mental disorder characterized by systematized delusions, 1848 (earlier paranoea 1811), from Greek
paranoia mental derangement, madness, from paranoos mentally ill, insane, from para- beside, beyond
(see para- (1)) + noos mind.    FOR several years frequent descriptions have been given in the
foreign journals, especially German and Italian, of the forms of insanity designated by the names
Paranoia, Verr&#252;cktkeit, and Wahnsinn. [Paranoia -- Systematized Delusions and Mental
Degenerations, J. S&#233;glas (transl. William Noyes), 1888]


paranoiac

1892 (n. and adj.), from paranoia on model of maniac, etc.


paranoid (adj.)

1901, irregularly formed from paranoia + -oid. As a noun, a paranoid person, attested from 1922.


paranormal (adj.)

1905, from para- (1) + normal. Related: Paranormally.


parapet (n.)

1580s, from Middle French parapet breastwork (16c.), or directly from Italian parapetto, from para-
defense (see para- (2)) + petto breast, from Latin pectus (see pectoral (adj.)).


paraphernalia (n.)

1650s, a woman's property besides her dowry, from Medieval Latin paraphernalia (short for
paraphernalia bona paraphernal goods), neuter plural of paraphernalis (adj.), from Late Latin
parapherna a woman's property besides her dowry, from Greek parapherna, neuter plural, from para-
beside (see para- (1)) + pherne dowry, related to pherein to carry (see infer). Meaning equipment,
apparatus is first attested 1791, from notion of odds and ends.


paraphilia (n.)

1913, from German paraphilie (by 1903), apparently coined by Austrian ethnologist Friedrich Salomo
Krauss (1859-1938) as literally inverted erotic instinct, from Greek para- beside, aside (see para-
(1)) + philos loving (see -phile).    The neurotic whose accompanying fancies always lead into
forbidden ground (and this is what constitutes the guilt feeling of pollutions) fights against
masturbation [pollutions] because it is connected with incest fancies, criminal desires,
perversions, or as F.S. Krauss calls them, paraphilias. [Wm. J. Robinson, M.D., Masturbation --
Injurious or Harmless, American Journal of Urology, May 1913]   <hr />  Krauss bereichert uns um das
neue Wort Paraphilie anstelle der Psychopathie, ein fortschrittlich-oppositionelles Wort zwar, aber
auch nur ein Wort und als Aufkl&#228;rung etwa so bedeutsam wie Seitenspr&#252;nge. [Rezensionen
&#252;ber die Anthropophyteia Jahrb&#252;cher, Leipzig, 1907]    Popularized in psychology circles
in English from c.1918 in translation of work by Viennese-born psychotherapist Wilhelm Stekel
(1868-1940); not in widespread use until 1950s. first used in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders in 1980, as a morally neutral and more dignified label than perversion, to which it
is nonetheless etymologically similar. Related: Paraphiliac; paraphilic.


paraphrase (n.)

1540s, from Middle French paraphrase (1520s), from Latin paraphrasis a paraphrase, from Greek
paraphrasis a free rendering, from paraphrazein to tell in other words, from para- beside (see para-
(1)) + phrazein to tell (see phrase (n.)).


paraphrase (v.)

c.1600, from paraphrase (n.) or from French paraphraser. Related: Paraphrased; paraphrasing.


paraphrastic (adj.)

from Medieval Latin paraphrasticus, from Greek paraphrastikos, from paraphrastes one who
paraphrases, from paraphrazein (see paraphrase (n.)). Related: Paraphrastical (1540s).


paraplegia (n.)

paralysis of the lower half of the body, 1650s, Latinized form of (Ionic) Greek paraplegie paralysis
of one side of the body, from paraplessein strike at the side, paraplessesthai be stricken on one
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + plessein to strike (see plague (n.)).


paraplegic (adj.)

c.1822; see paraplegia + -ic. The noun meaning paraplegic person is first recorded 1890. An earlier
adjectival form was paraplectic (1660s).


parapraxis (n.)

faulty action, blunder, 1904, from Modern Latin, from para- contrary (see para- (1)) + Greek praxis
a doing, transaction, business (see praxis). In psychology, a minor error held to reveal a
subconscious motive.


paraprofessional (adj.)

1962, from para- (1) + professional (adj.). As a noun from 1968.


parapsychology (n.)

1924, from para- (1) beside + psychology.


paraquat (n.)

quick-acting herbicide, 1961, from para- (1) + first element in quaternary. So called in reference
to its chemical configuration.


parasail (n.)

1963, from first element of parachute + sail. As a verb from 1970. Related: Parasailing.


parasite (n.)

1530s, a hanger-on, a toady, person who lives on others, from Middle French parasite (16c.) or
directly from Latin parasitus toady, sponger, and directly from Greek parasitos one who lives at
another's expense, person who eats at the table of another, from noun use of an adjective meaning
feeding beside, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + sitos food, of unknown origin. Scientific
meaning animal or plant that lives on others is first recorded 1640s (implied in parasitical).


parasitic (adj.)

1620s, from Latin parasiticus, from Greek parasitikos of or pertaining to a parasite; the trade of a
parasite, from parasitos (see parasite). Biological sense is from 1731. Related: Parasitical, 1570s
in reference to toadies; from 1640s in the biological sense.


parasitism (n.)

1610s, from parasite + -ism. Biological sense is from 1853.


parasol (n.)

1610s, from Middle French parasol (1570s), from Italian parasole, literally protection from the sun,
from para- defense against (see para- (2)) + sole sun, from Latin solem (nominative sol; see sol).


parastate (n.)

also para-state, 1959, from para- (1) beside + state (n.). Related: Parastatal.


parasympathetic (adj.)

1905, from para- (1) beside + sympathetic.


parataxis (n.)

1838, from Greek parataxis a placing side by side, a placing in line of battle, from stem of
paratassein to place side by side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + tassein to arrange (see
tactics). Related: Paratactic.


paratransit (n.)

also para-transit, 1973, from para- (1) + transit.


paratrooper (n.)

1941, from parachute + trooper. The collective noun paratroops is first recorded 1940. Earliest
reference is to the German invaders who were expected to drop on England.


paratroops (n.)

1940, from parachute + plural of troop (n.).


parboil (v.)

late 14c., to boil partially; mid-15c., to boil thoroughly, from Old French parboillir to boil
thoroughly, from Medieval Latin perbullire to boil thoroughly, from Latin per through, thoroughly +
bullire to boil (see boil (v.)). Main modern meaning boil partially is by mistaken association of
the prefix with part. Related: Parboiled; parboiling.


parcel (n.)

late 14c., a portion of something, a part (sense preserved in phrase parcel of land, c.1400), from
Old French parcele small piece, particle, parcel, from Vulgar Latin *particella, diminutive of Latin
particula small part, little bit, itself a diminutive of pars (genitive partis) part (see part
(n.)).    Meaning package is first recorded 1640s, earlier a quantity of goods in a package (mid-
15c.), from late 14c. sense of an amount or quantity of anything. The expression part and parcel
(early 15c.) also preserves the older sense; both words mean the same, the multiplicity is for
emphasis.


parcel (v.)

to divide into small portions, early 15c. (with out), from parcel (n.). Related: Parceled;
parcelled; parceling; parcelling.


parch (v.)

late 14c., to roast or dry (peas, beans, corn, etc.), of uncertain origin. Klein and OED reject
derivations from Old North French perchier (Old French percer) to pierce and Latin persiccare to dry
thoroughly. Barnhart suggests possibly from Middle English perchen, variant of perishen to perish
(see perish). Klein tentatively suggests a back-formation from parchment. Surname Parchecorn is
attested from mid-14c. Meaning to dry with excessive heat is mid-15c. Related: Parched; parching.


parcheesi (n.)

1800, from Hindi pachisi, from pachis twenty-five (highest throw of the dice), from Sanskrit panca
five (see five) + vinsati-s twenty. Modern spelling outside India, with intrusive -r-, was enshrined
1892 by trademark name.


parchment (n.)

c.1300, parchemin (c.1200 as a surname), from Old French parchemin (11c., Old North French
parcamin), from Late Latin pergamena parchment, noun use of adjective (as in pergamena charta,
Pliny), from Late Greek pergamenon of Pergamon, from Pergamon Pergamum (modern Bergama), city in
Mysia in Asia Minor where parchment supposedly first was adopted as a substitute for papyrus, 2c.
B.C.E. Possibly influenced in Vulgar Latin by Latin parthica (pellis) Parthian (leather). Altered in
Middle English by confusion with nouns in -ment and by influence of Medieval Latin collateral form
pergamentum.


pard (n.1)

archaic form of leopard, c.1300, from Latin pardus a male panther, from Greek pardos male panther,
from the same source (probably Iranian) as Sanskrit prdaku-s leopard, tiger, snake, and Persian
palang panther.


pard (n.2)

1850, dialectal shortening of pardener (1795), representing a common pronunciation of partner (n.).


pardon (n.)

late 13c., papal indulgence, from Old French pardon, from pardoner to grant; forgive (11c., Modern
French pardonner), to grant, forgive, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare to give wholeheartedly, to remit,
from Latin per- through, thoroughly (see per) + donare give, present (see donation).    Meaning
passing over an offense without punishment is from c.1300, also in the strictly ecclesiastical
sense; sense of pardon for a civil or criminal offense; release from penalty or obligation is from
late 14c. earlier in Anglo-French. Weaker sense of excuse for a minor fault is attested from 1540s.


pardon (v.)

mid-15c., to forgive for offense or sin, from Old French pardoner (see pardon (n.)).  'I grant you
pardon,' said Louis XV to Charolais, who, to divert himself, had just killed a man; 'but I also
pardon whoever will kill you.' [Marquis de Sade, Philosophy in the Bedroom]Related: Pardoned;
pardoning. Pardon my French as exclamation of apology for obscene language is from 1895.


pardonable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French pardonable (12c.), from pardoner (see pardon (v.)). Related: Pardonably.


pardoner (n.)

man licensed to sell papal pardons or indulgences, mid-14c., agent noun from pardon (v.).


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


paregoric (n.)

medicine that soothes pain, 1704, from adjective (1680s) soothing, from Late Latin paregoricus, from
Greek paregorikos soothing, encouraging, consoling, from paregorein speak soothingly to, from
paregoros consoling, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + root of agoreuein speak in public, from
agora public assembly, from PIE root *ger- to gather (see gregarious).


parenchyma (n.)

1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek parenkhyma something poured in beside, from para- beside (see para-
(1)) + enkhyma infusion, from en- in + khein to pour (see found (v.2)). In ancient physiology, the
stuff that was supposed to make up the liver, lungs, etc., which was believed to be formed from
blood strained through the capillaries and congealed.


parent (n.)

early 15c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French parent father, parent, relative, kin (11c.),
from Latin parentem (nominative parens) father or mother, ancestor, noun use of present participle
of parere bring forth, give birth to, produce, from PIE root *pere- (1) to bring forth (see pare).
Began to replace native elder after c.1500.


parent (v.)

1660s, from parent (n.). Related: Parented; parenting.


parentage (n.)

late 15c., parental conduct, from Middle French parentage (12c.), from parent (see parent). Meaning
lineage is from 1560s; figurative use from 1580s.


parental (adj.)

1620s, from Latin parentalis of parents, from parens (see parent (n.)). Related: Parentally.


parenteral (adj.)

1905, from para- (1) + Greek enteron intestine (see enteric).


parenthesis (n.)

1540s, words, clauses, etc. inserted into a sentence, from Middle French parenth&egrave;se (15c.),
from Late Latin parenthesis addition of a letter to a syllable in a word, from Greek parenthesis,
literally a putting in beside, from parentithenai put in beside, from para- beside (see para- (1)) +
en- in + tithenai put, place (see theme). Sense extension by 1715 from the inserted words to the
curved brackets that indicate the words inserted.    A wooden parenthesis; the pillory. An iron
parenthesis; a prison. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


parenthesize (v.)

1825, from parenthesis + -ize. Related: Parenthesized; parenthesizing.


parenthetical (adj.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin parentheticus from Greek parenthetos put in beside, verbal adjective from
parentithenai; see parenthesis) + -al (1). Related: Parenthetically.


parenthood (n.)

1856, from parent (n.) + -hood.


parenting (n.)

1959, verbal noun from parent (v.). An earlier term was parentcraft (1930); also see parentage.


parer (n.)

1570s, agent noun from pare (v.).


paresis (n.)

partial paralysis, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek paresis letting go, slackening of strength,
paralysis, from stem of parienai to let go, from para- (see para- (1)) + hienai to send, throw (see
jet (v.)).


Pareto

1920, in reference to the work of Italian economist Vilfredo Federico Pareto (1848-1923). Related:
Paretan.


parfait (n.)

kind of frozen dessert, 1894, French, literally perfect (see perfect (adj.)).


parhelion (n.)

1640s, from Greek parelion a mock sun, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + helios sun (see sol).


pari passu

Latin, literally with equal step, from ablative of par equal (see par) + passus pace (see pace
(n.)).


pari-mutuel

1881, from French pari-mutuel mutual wager, from pari wager (from parier to bet, from Latin pariare
to settle a debt, literally to make equal, from par, genitive paris, equal; see par) + mutuel
mutual, from Latin mutuus (see mutual).


pariah (n.)

1610s, from Portuguese paria or directly from Tamil paraiyar, plural of paraiyan drummer (at
festivals, the hereditary duty of members of the largest of the lower castes of southern India),
from parai large festival drum. Especially numerous at Madras, where its members supplied most of
the domestics in European service [OED]. Applied by Hindus and Europeans to any members of low Hindu
castes and even to outcastes. Extended meaning social outcast is first attested 1819.


parietal (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the walls of a cavity in the body, from Late Latin parietalis of walls,
from Latin paries (genitive parietis) wall (of a building), of unknown origin. In U.S. also
pertaining to the residents and rules of a college or university (1837).


Paris

capital of France, from Gallo-Latin Lutetia Parisorum (in Late Latin also Parisii), name of a
fortified town of the Gaulish tribe of the Parisii, who had a capital there; literally Parisian
swamps (compare Old Irish loth dirt, Welsh lludedic muddy, slimy).    The tribal name is of unknown
origin, but traditionally derived from a Celtic par boat (perhaps related to Greek baris; see barge
(n.)), hence the ship on the city's coat of arms.


parish (n.)

c.1300, district with its own church; members of such a church, from Anglo-French paroche, parosse
(late 11c.), Old French paroisse, from Late Latin parochia a diocese, alteration of Late Greek
paroikia a diocese or parish, from paroikos a sojourner (in Christian writers), in classical Greek,
neighbor, from para- near (see para- (1)) + oikos house (see villa).    Sense development unclear,
perhaps from sojourner as epithet of early Christians as spiritual sojourners in the material world.
In early Church writing the word was used in a more general sense than Greek diokesis, though by
13c. they were synonymous. Replaced Old English preostscyr, literally priest-shire.


parishioner (n.)

mid-15c., with -er (1), from earlier parishen parishioner (c.1200), from Old French paroissien,
parochien, from paroisse (see parish). Doublet form parochian was obsolete by 1700.


Parisian

1520s (n.), 1610s (adj.), from French parisien, from Medieval Latin parisianus (see Paris). Fem.
form Parisienne (n.) is attested from 1886.


parity (n.)

1570s, equality of rank or status, from Middle French parit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Late
Latin paritas equality, from Latin adjective par (genitive paris) equal (see pair (n.)). Meaning
condition in which adversaries have equal resources is from 1955, originally in reference to the
U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.


park (n.)

mid-13c., enclosed preserve for beasts of the chase, from Old French parc enclosed wood or heath
land used as a game preserve (12c.), probably ultimately from West Germanic *parruk enclosed tract
of land (cognates: Old English pearruc, root of paddock (n.2), Old High German pfarrih fencing
about, enclosure, German pferch fold for sheep, Dutch park).    Internal evidence suggests the West
Germanic word is pre-4c. and originally meant the fencing, not the place enclosed. Found also in
Medieval Latin as parricus enclosure, park (8c.), which likely is the direct source of the Old
French word, as well as Italian parco, Spanish parque, etc. Some claim the Medieval Latin word as
the source of the West Germanic, but the reverse seems more likely. Some later senses in English
represent later borrowings from French. OED discounts notion of a Celtic origin. Welsh parc, Gaelic
pairc are from English.    Meaning enclosed lot in or near a town, for public recreation is first
attested 1660s, originally in reference to London; the sense evolution is via royal parks in the
original, hunting sense being overrun by the growth of London and being opened to the public.
Applied to sporting fields in American English from 1867.    New York's Park Avenue as an adjective
meaning luxurious and fashionable (1956) was preceded in the same sense by London's Park Lane
(1880). As a surname, Parker keeper of a park is attested in English from mid-12c. As a vehicle
transmission gear, park (n.) is attested from 1949.


park (v.)

1812, to arrange military vehicles in a park, from park (n.) in a limited sense of enclosure for
military vehicles (attested from 1680s). General non-military meaning to put (a vehicle) in a
certain place is first recorded 1844. Related: Parked; parking. Park-and-ride is from 1966.


parka (n.)

1780, from Aleut parka, from Russian parka a pelt or jacket made from pelt, from Samoyed.


parking (n.)

act of putting (a vehicle) in a certain place, 1915, verbal noun from park (v.). Parking lot is from
1920; parking ticket attested by 1925. Parking brake recorded from 1929.


Parkinson&#039;s disease

1877, from French maladie de Parkinson (1876), named for English physician James Parkinson
(1755-1824), who described it (1817) under the names shaking palsy and paralysis agitans.


Parkinson&#039;s Law

1955 (in the Economist of Nov. 19), named for its deviser, British historian and journalist Cyril
Northcote Parkinson (1909-1993): work expands to fill the time available for its completion.


parlance (n.)

1570s, speaking, speech, especially in debate; 1787 as way of speaking, from Anglo-French (c.1300)
and Old French parlance, from Old French parlaunce, from parler to speak (see parley).


parlay (n.)

1701, parloi, term in the card game faro, from French paroli, from Italian parole (Neapolitan
paroli) words, promises, plural of parolo (see parole). Meaning exploit to advantage is from 1942.


parley (n.)

conference, speech, especially with an enemy, mid-15c., from Middle French parl&eacute;e, from fem.
past participle of Old French parler to speak (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *paraulare, from Late Latin
parabolare to speak (in parables), from parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison
(see parable).


parley (v.)

late 14c., to speak, talk, confer, probably a separate borrowing of Old French parler to speak (see
parley (n.)). Related: Parleyed; parleying. Meaning to discuss terms is 1560s, from the noun.


parleyvoo

colloquial for the French language, 1754, from French parlez-vous (fran&ccedil;ais?) do you speak
(French?) For parlez, see parley (n.).


parliament (n.)

c.1300, consultation; formal conference, assembly, from Old French parlement (11c.), originally a
speaking, talk, from parler to speak (see parley (n.)); spelling altered c.1400 to conform with
Medieval Latin parliamentum.    Anglo-Latin parliamentum is attested from early 13c. Specific sense
representative assembly of England or Ireland emerged by mid-14c. from general meaning a conference
of the secular and/or ecclesiastical aristocracy summoned by a monarch.


parliamentarian (n.)

1640s as a designation of one of the sides in the English Civil War; meaning one versed in
parliamentary procedure dates from 1834. See parliamentary + -ian.


parliamentary (adj.)

1610s, from parliament + -ary.


parlor (n.)

c.1200, parlur, window through which confessions were made, also apartment in a monastery for
conversations with outside persons; from Old French parleor courtroom, judgment hall, auditorium
(12c., Modern French parloir), from parler to speak (see parley (n.)).    Sense of sitting room for
private conversation is late 14c.; that of show room for a business (as in ice cream parlor) first
recorded 1884. As an adjective, advocating radical views from a position of comfort, 1910.


parlour

chiefly British English spelling of parlor (q.v.).


parlous (adj.)

late 14c., late Middle English contraction of perilous.


parmaceutics (n.)

1660s, from pharmaceutic (see pharmaceutical); also see -ics.


parmaco-

word-forming element meaning drug, medicine, also poison, from Latinized form of Greek pharmako-,
comb. form of pharmakon drug, poison (see pharmacy).


Parmesan (n.)

type of dry, hard cheese, 1550s, from Italian Parmegiano of Parma, from Parma, city in northern
Italy, one of the places where the cheese is made. Full form parmeson chese is recorded from 1510s.
The place name ultimately is Etruscan.


Parnassus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Parnassos, mountain in central Greece, sacred to Apollo and the
Muses, thus symbolic of poetry. Room writes that the name is from Hittite parna abode. Related:
Parnassian.    Various kinds of literary fame seem destined to various measures of duration. Some
spread into exuberance with a very speedy growth, but soon wither and decay; some rise more slowly,
but last long. Parnassus has its flowers of transient fragrance, as well as its oaks of towering
height, and its laurels of eternal verdure. [Samuel Johnson, The Rambler, March 23, 1751]


Parnellite (n.)

in Irish history, 1881, adherent of the Irish Home Rule policy of Charles Stewart Parnell
(1846-1891) + -ite (1).


parochial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a parish, from Anglo-French parochiel (late 13c.), from Old French
parochial, from Late Latin parochialis of a parish (c.600), from parochia (see parish).
Figurative sense, limited, narrow, as if confined to a small region, is from 1856 (also see
parochialism). Parochial school is attested from 1755.


parochialism (n.)

limited and narrow character or tendency, 1847, from parochial + -ism.


parodist (n.)

1742, from French parodiste (18c.), from parodie (see parody (n.)).


parody (n.)

1590s (first recorded use in English is in Ben Jonson), from or in imitation of Latin parodia
parody, from Greek paroidia burlesque song or poem, from para- beside, parallel to (see para- (1),
in this case, mock-) + oide song, ode (see ode). The meaning poor or feeble imitation is from 1830.
Related: Parodic; parodical.


parody (v.)

c.1745, from parody (n.). Related: Parodied; parodying.


parol (n.)

oral statement, late 15c., from Anglo-French (14c.), from Old French parole word, speech, argument
(see parole (n.)).


parole (n.)

1610s, word of honor, especially promise by a prisoner of war not to escape, from French parole
word, speech (in parole d'honneur word of honor) from Vulgar Latin *paraula speech, discourse, from
Latin parabola (see parable). Sense of conditional release of a prisoner before full term is first
attested 1908 in criminal slang.


parole (v.)

1716, from parole (n.). Originally it was what the prisoner did (pledge); its transitive meaning put
on parole is first attested 1782. Related: Paroled; paroling.


parolee (n.)

1916, from parole (v.) + -ee.


paronomasia (n.)

pun, 1570s, from Latin, from Greek paronomasia play upon words which sound similarly, from
paronomazein to alter slightly, to call with slight change of name, literally to name beside, from
par- (see para- (1)) + onomasia naming, from onoma name (see name (n.)).


paronychia (n.)

inflammation beside a fingernail, 1590s, from Latin, from Greek paronykhia whitlow, from para-
beside (see para- (1)) + onyx nail (see nail (n.)).


paronym (n.)

cognate word, 1846, from Greek paronymos, formed by a slight change, from para- (see para- (1)) +
onyma (see name (n.)). Related: Paronymous (1660s).


parotid (adj.)

situated near the ear, 1680s, from French parotide (1540s), or directly from Latin parotid-, stem of
parotis, from Greek parotis tumor near the ear, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + ot-, stem of ous
ear (see ear (n.1)). As a noun, the parotid gland.


Parousia (n.)

Second Coming, a reference to Matt. xxiv:27, 1875, from Greek parousia, literally presence, from
para- (see para- (1)) + ousia essence, from on, genitive ontos, present participle of einai to be
(see ion).


paroxysm (n.)

sudden attack, convulsion, early 15c., from Middle French paroxysme (16c.), earlier paroxime (13c.),
from Medieval Latin paroxysmus irritation, fit of a disease, from Greek paroxysmos irritation,
exasperation, from paroxynein to irritate, goad, provoke, from para- beyond (see para- (1)) +
oxynein sharpen, goad, from oxys sharp, pointed (see acrid). Non-medical sense first attested
c.1600. Related: Paroxysmal.


parquet (n.)

1816, patterned wooden flooring, from French parquet wooden flooring; enclosed portion of a park,
from Old French parchet (14c.) small compartment, part of a park or theater, diminutive of parc (see
park (n.)).    Meaning part of a theater auditorium at the front of the ground floor is first
recorded 1848. The noun use in English has been influenced by the verb (attested from 1640s, from
French parqueter. Related: Parquetry


parr (n.)

young salmon, c.1720, Scottish, of unknown origin.


parrel (n.)

late 15c., binding that fixes a yard to a mast, from parel equipment (c.1400), earlier apparel
(early 14c.), a shortening of apparel (n.).


parricide (n.)

1. person who kills a parent or near relative (1550s), also 2. act of killing parent or near
relative (1560s), both from Middle French parricide (13c. in sense 1, 16c. in sense 2), from 1.
Latin parricida, 2. Latin parricidium, probably from parus relative (of uncertain origin, but
compare Greek paos, peos relation, Sanskrit purushah man) + 1. cida killer, 2. cidium killing, both
from caedere (see -cide).


parrot (n.)

1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal Middle French perrot, from a variant of Pierre
Peter; or perhaps a dialectal form of perroquet (see parakeet). Replaced earlier popinjay. The
German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt in South America in 1800 encountered a very old parrot that
was the sole speaker of a dead Indian language, the original tribe having gone extinct.


parrot (v.)

repeat without understanding, 1590s, from parrot (n.). Related: Parroted; parroting.


parrot-fish (n.)

1712, from parrot (n.) + fish (n.).


parry (v.)

1630s, from French parez! (which commonly would have been heard in fencing lessons), imperative of
parer ward off, from Italian parare to ward or defend a blow (see para- (2)). Related: Parried;
parrying. Non-fencing use is from 1718. The noun is 1705, from the verb.


parse (v.)

1550s, to state the parts of speech in a sentence, verb use of Middle English pars (n.) part of
speech (c.1300), from Old French pars, plural of part part, from Latin pars (see part (n.)) in
school question, Quae pars orationis? What part of speech? Transferred (non-grammatical) use is from
1788. Pars was a common plural of part (n.) in early Middle English. Related: Parsed; parsing.


parsec (n.)

interstellar distance measure, 1913, from first elements of parallax second. It is the distance at
which an object has parallax (viewed from Earth) of one second of arc, or about 3.26 light-years.


Parsee (n.)

1610s, descendant of Zoroastrians who fled to India 7c.-8c. after Muslim conquest of Persia, from
Old Persian parsi Persian (see Persian). In Middle English, Parsees meant Persians.


parsimonious (adj.)

1590s, from Latin parsimonia frugality, thrift (see parsimony) + -ous. Not originally with the
suggestion of stinginess. Related: Parsimoniously; parsimoniousness.


parsimony (n.)

early 15c., from Latin parsimonia sparingness, frugality, thrift, from pars-, past participle stem
of parsi, perfect tense of parcere to spare, save, refrain from, use moderately (which is said to be
unrelated to Latin parvus small, parum too little) + -monia, suffix signifying action, state, or
condition.


parsley (n.)

14c. merger of Old English petersilie and Old French peresil (13c., Modern French persil), both from
Medieval Latin petrosilium, from Latin petroselinum, from Greek petroselinon rock-parsley, from
petros rock, stone + selinon celery (see celery).


parsnip (n.)

16c., parsnepe, corruption (by influence of Middle English nepe turnip; see neep) of Middle English
passenep (late 14c.), from Old French pasnaise parsnip, also male member (Modern French panais),
from Latin pastinaca parsnip, carrot, from pastinum two-pronged fork (related to pastinare to dig up
the ground); so called from the shape of the root. The parsnip was considered a kind of turnip.


parson (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French and Old French persone curate, parson, holder of Church office (12c.),
from Medieval Latin persona parson (see person). Ecclesiastical use is obscure; it might refer to
the person legally holding church property, or it may be an abbreviation of persona ecclesiae person
of the church.


parsonage (n.)

house for a parson, late 15c., from parson + -age. Earlier it meant benefice of a parson (late
14c.).


part (n.)

mid-13c., division, portion of a whole, from Old French part share, portion; character; power,
dominion; side, way, path, from Latin partem (nominative pars) a part, piece, a share, a division; a
party or faction; a part of the body; a fraction; a function, office, related to portio share,
portion, from PIE root *pere- (2) to assign, grant, allot (reciprocally, to get in return; cognates:
Greek peprotai it has been granted, Sanskrit purtam reward, Hittite parshiya- fraction, part).    It
has replaced native deal (n.) in most senses. Theatrical sense (late 15c.) is from an actor's share
in a performance (The Latin plural partis was used in the same sense). Meaning the parting of the
hair is 1890, American English.    As an adjective from 1590s. Late Old English part part of speech
did not survive and the modern word is considered a separate borrowing. Phrase for the most part is
from late 14c. To take part participate is from late 14c.


part (v.)

c.1200, to divide into parts; separate oneself, from Old French partir to divide, separate (10c.),
from Latin partire, partere to share, part, distribute, divide, from pars (see part (n.)).    Sense
of to separate (someone from someone else) is from early 14c.; that of to take leave is from early
15c. Meaning to separate the hair is attested from 1610s. Related: Parted; parting. To part with
surrender is from c.1300.


part of speech (n.)

c.1500, translating Latin pars orationis (see parse). Noun, adjective, pronoun, verb, adverb,
preposition, conjunction, and interjection. Sometimes article and participle are counted among them.


part-time (adj.)

also parttime, 1891, from part (n.) + time (n.). Related: Part-timer.


partake (v.)

1560s, back-formation from Middle English part-taking (late 14c.), or part-taker (c.1400), both
translations of Latin particeps participant (n.), also sharing, partaking (see participation).
Related: Partook; partaking.


partaker (n.)

c.1400, from part (n.) + agent noun from take (v.); see partake.


parterre (n.)

1630s, from French parterre (1540s), from adverbial phrase par terre over the ground; see par +
terrain


parthenic (adj.)

of or of the nature of a virgin, 1866, from Greek parthenikos, from parthenos virgin (see
Parthenon).


parthenogenesis (n.)

reproduction without fertilization, 1849, from Greek parthenos virgin, of unknown origin, + genesis
(see genesis). Related: Parthenogenetic.


Parthenon (n.)

name of the temple of Athena on the Acropolis in Athens, Greek, literally temple of the virgin
goddess (Athene), from parthenos virgin, maiden, girl, of unknown origin.


Parthian (n.)

1520s, native or inhabitant of Parthia (ancient kingdom northeast of Persia in western Asia), from
Old Persian Parthava- Parthian, dialectal variant of the stem Parsa-, source of Persia.    As an
adjective, 1580s. Phrase Parthian shot is in reference to their horsemen, who were expert at racing
forward, turning, and shooting arrows backward at the moment of retreat. The exact phrase is
attested by 1832; the image itself was in use long before (for example Parthian fight, 1630s).
Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight [Cymbeline, Act I, Scene VII]


parti-

in two ways, word-forming element extracted late 16c. from parti-colored.


parti-colored (adj.)

1530s, from party divided, from French parti, past participle of partir to divide (see part (v.)).
The noun parti itself occurs in the sense parti-colored from late 14c.


partial (adj.)

early 15c., one-sided, biased, from Old French parcial (14c., Modern French partial), from Medieval
Latin partialis divisible, solitary, partial, from Latin pars (genitive partis) part (see part
(n.)). Sense of not whole, incomplete is attested from late 14c. Related: Partially (mid-15c. as
incompletely).


partiality (n.)

one-sidedness, early 15c., from Middle French parcialit&eacute;, from Medieval Latin partialitatem
(nominative partialitas), from partialis (see partial).


partialness (n.)

incompleteness, 1701, from partial + -ness.


participant (adj.)

1540s, from Latin participantem (nominative participans), present participle of participare to share
in, partake of, from particeps sharing, partaking (see participation).


participant (n.)

1560s, from Middle French participant, from Latin participantem (nominative participans), present
participle of participare to share in, partake of from particeps sharing, partaking (see
participation).


participate (v.)

1530s, back-formation from participation, or else from Latin participatus, past participle of
participare to share, share in, participate in; to impart, from particeps partaking, sharing, from
parti, past participle of partir to divide (see part (n.)) + -cip-, weak form of stem of capere to
take (see capable). Related: Participated; participating.


participation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French participacion (13c.) and directly from Late Latin participationem
(nominative participatio) partaking, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin participare
participate in, share in, partake of; to make partaker, to share, impart, from particeps (genitive
participis) partaker, comrade, fellow soldier, also, as an adjective, sharing, partaking, from pars
(genitive partis) part (see part (n.)) + -cip-, weak form of stem of capere to take (see capable).


participative (adj.)

1650s, from participate + -ive.


participatory (adj.)

1833, from participate + -ory. Participatory democracy attested from 1965, a term from student
protests.


participial (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French participial and directly from Latin participialis, from participium (see
participle). As a noun from 1560s.


participle (n.)

late 14c., a noun-adjective, from Old French participle (13c.), variant of participe, from Latin
participium, literally a sharing, partaking, from particeps sharing, partaking (see participation).
In grammatical sense, the Latin translates Greek metokhe sharer, partaker, and the notion is of a
word partaking of the nature of both a noun and an adjective.


particle (n.)

late 14c., small part or division of a whole, minute portion of matter, from Latin particula little
bit or part, grain, jot, diminutive of pars (genitive partis) part; see part (n.). Particle physics
attested from 1969. In construction, particle board (1957) is so called because it is made from
chips and shavings of wood.


particular (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a single thing or person, from Old French particuler (14c., Modern French
particulier) and directly from Late Latin particularis of a part, concerning a small part, from
Latin particula particle (see particle). Sense of precise, exacting first recorded 1814.


particular (n.)

a part or section of a whole, late 14c., from particular (adj.). Particulars small details of
statement is from c.1600.


particularity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French particularit&#233;, from Late Latin particularitatem (nominative
particularitas), from Latin particularis (see particular).


particularize (v.)

1580s, from particular + -ize. Related: Particularized; particularizing.


particularly (adv.)

in a special degree, more than others, 1670s, from particular (adj.) + -ly (2).


particulate (adj.)

1871, from Modern Latin particulatus, from particula (see particle). As a noun from 1960. Related:
Particulates.


parting (n.)

action of going away, c.1300, verbal noun from part (v.). As separation of persons, early 14c.


partisan (n.)

also partizan, 1550s, one who takes part with another, zealous supporter, from Middle French
partisan (15c.), from dialectal upper Italian partezan (Tuscan partigiano) member of a faction,
partner, from parte part, party, from Latin partem (nominative pars), see part (n.). Sense of
guerilla fighter is first recorded 1690s.


partisan (adj.)

1708 for warfare, 1842 for politics, from partisan (n.).


partisanship (n.)

1831, from partisan + -ship.


partition (n.)

early 15c., division into shares, distinction, from Old French particion (12c.), from Latin
partitionem (nominative partitio) a sharing, division, partition, distribution; method of dividing,
from past participle stem of partire to part (see part (v.)). Sense of that which separates first
recorded late 15c.


partition (v.)

1741, from partition (n.). Related: Partitioned; partitioning.


partitive (adj.)

late 14c., having the quality of dividing into parts, from Late Latin partitivus, from Latin
partitus, past participle of partire to divide (see part (v.)).


partly (adv.)

1520s, from part (n.) + -ly (2).


partner (n.)

c.1300, altered from parcener (late 13c.), from Old French par&ccedil;onier partner, associate;
joint owner, joint heir, from par&ccedil;on partition, division. portion, share, lot, from Latin
partitionem (nominative partitio) a sharing, partition, division, distribution (see partition (n.)).
Form in English influenced by part (n.). The word also may represent Old French part tenour part
holder.


partner (v.)

1610s, transitive, to make a partner, from partner (n.). Intransitive sense from 1961. Related:
Partnered; partnering.


partnership (n.)

1570s, from partner (n.) + -ship. In the commercial sense from c.1700.


partridge (n.)

late 12c., from Old French pertis, alteration of perdis (perhaps influenced by fem. suffix -tris),
from Latin perdicem (nominative perdix) plover, lapwing, from Greek perdix, the Greek partridge,
probably related to perdesthai to break wind, in reference to the whirring noise of the bird's
wings, from PIE imitative base *perd- to break wind (cognates: Sanskrit pardate breaks wind,
Lithuanian perdzu, Russian perdet, Old High German ferzan, Old Norse freta, Middle English farten).


parts (n.)

personal qualities, gifts of ability, 1560s, from part (n.).


parturient (adj.)

about to give birth, 1590s, from Latin parturientem (nominative parturiens), present participle of
parturire be in labor, literally desire to bring forth, desiderative of parere to bear (see pare).
Related: Parturiency.


parturition (n.)

1640s, from Latin parturitionem (nominative parturitio), noun of action from past participle stem of
parturire (see parturient).


party (n.)

late 13c., part, portion, side, from Old French partie side, part; portion, share; separation,
division (12c.), literally that which is divided, noun use of fem. past participle of partir to
divide (see part (v.)). Political sense of side in a contest or dispute evolved by 1300; meaning a
person is from mid-15c. Sense of gathering for social pleasure is first found 1716, from general
sense of persons gathered together (originally for some specific purpose, such as dinner party,
hunting party). Phrase the party is over is from 1937; party line is first recorded 1834 in the
sense of policy adopted by a political party, 1893 in the sense of telephone line shared by two or
more subscribers. Party pooper is from 1951, American English.


party (v.)

have a good time, 1922, from party (n.). Earlier as to take the side of (1630s). Related: Partied;
partying.


parvenu (n.)

upstart, 1802, from French parvenu, said of an obscure person who has made a great fortune
(Littr&eacute;);  noun use of past participle of parvenir to arrive (12c.), from Latin pervenire to
come up, arrive, attain, from per- through (see per (prep.)) + venire to come (see venue). As an
adjective from 1828.


parvi-

word-forming element used in science and meaning small, little, from comb. form of Latin parvus
small, from metathesized form of PIE *pau-ro-, from base *pau- few, little (see few).


parvovirus (n.)

1965, from parvi- + connecting element -o- + virus.


Parzival

also Parsifal, hero of medieval legends, from Old French Perceval, literally he who breaks through
the valley, from percer to pierce, break through (see pierce) + val valley (see vale).


pas (n.)

a step in dancing, 1775, from French pas; see pass (n.). Used in forming names for types of dances,
such as pas de deux (1762).


pas devant les enfants

French: Not in front of the children.


PASCAL

high-level computer programming language, 1971, named for French scholar Blaise Pascal (1623-1662),
who invented a calculating machine c.1642.


Pasch

Easter, early 12c.; see paschal.


paschal (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to Easter, from Old French paschal (12c.) and directly from Late Latin
paschalis, from pascha Passover, Easter, from Greek pascha Passover, from Aramaic pasha pass over,
corresponding to Hebrew pesah, from pasah he passed over. (see Passover). Pasche was an early Middle
English term for Easter (see Easter).


pash (n.)

head, 1610s, now obsolete or dialectal, of uncertain origin. In 20c. the word was used as an
colloquial shortening of passion.


pasha

Turkish honorary title formerly given to officers of high rank, 1640s, from Turkish pasha, earlier
basha, from bash head, chief (no clear distinction between -b- and -p- in Turkish), from Old Persian
pati- master, from PIE *poti- (see potent) + root of shah. Earlier in English as bashaw (1530s).


pashmina (adj.)

from Persian pashmin woolen, from pashm wool, down, from PIE *pek- to pluck out (see fight (v.)).


Pashto (n.)

1784, from Persian pashto (Afghan pakhto). Related: Pashtun.


Pasiphae

wife of Minos, mother of Phaedra and Ariadne, from Latin, from Greek Pasiphae, from pasiphaes
shining for all, from pasi for all, dative plural of pas, pan all (see pan-) + phaos light (see
fantasy).


pasquinade (n.)

a lampoon, 1650s, from Middle French, from Italian pasquinata (c.1500), from Pasquino, name given to
a mutilated ancient statue (now known to represent Menelaus dragging the dead Patroclus) set up by
Cardinal Caraffa in his palace in Rome in 1501; the locals named it after a schoolmaster (or tailor,
or barber) named Pasquino who lived nearby. A custom developed of posting satirical verses and
lampoons on the statue.


pass (v.)

late 13c. (transitive) to go by (something), also to cross over, from Old French passer (11c.), from
Vulgar Latin *passare to step, walk, pass (source also of Spanish pasar, Italian passare), from
Latin passus step, pace (see pace (n.)). Intransitive sense of to go on, to move forward, make one's
way is attested from c.1300. Figurative sense of to experience, undergo (as in pass the time) is
first recorded late 14c. Sense of to go through an examination successfully is from early 15c.
Meaning decline to do something is attested from 1869, originally in cards (euchre). In football,
hockey, soccer, etc., the meaning to transfer the ball or puck to another player is from c.1865.
Related: Passed; passing.    The meaning to be thought to be something one is not (especially in
racial sense) is from 1935, from pass oneself off (as), first found 1809. The general verb sense of
to be accepted as equivalent is from 1590s. Pass up decline, refuse is attested from 1896. Pass the
buck is from 1865, said to be poker slang reference to the buck horn-handled knife that was passed
around to signify whose turn it was to deal. Pass the hat seek contributions is from 1762. Pass-fail
as a grading method is attested from 1955, American English.


pass (n.1)

mountain defile, c.1300, from Old French pas step, track, passage, from Latin passus step, pace (see
pace (n.)).


pass (n.2)

written permission to pass into, or through, a place, 1590s, from pass (v.). Sense of ticket for a
free ride or admission is first found 1838. Colloquial make a pass offer an amorous advance first
recorded 1928, perhaps from a sporting sense. Phrase come to pass (late 15c.) uses the word with a
sense of completion, accomplishment.


pass out (v.)

lose consciousness, 1915, from pass (v.) + out. Probably from weakened sense of earlier meaning to
die (1899). Meaning to distribute is attested from 1926. Related: Passed out.


passable (adj.)

early 15c., that may be crossed, from pass (v.) + -able, or from Old French passable fordable,
affording passage (14c.). Sense of tolerable is first attested late 15c. Related: Passably.


passacaglia (n.)

dance tune of Spanish origin, 1650s, from Italian, from Spanish pasacalle, from pasar to pass (see
pass (v.)) + calle street. So called because they often were played in the streets.


passage (n.)

early 13c., a road, passage; late 13c., action of passing, from Old French passage mountain pass,
passage (11c.), from passer to go by (see pass (v.)). Meaning corridor in a building first recorded
1610s. Meaning a portion of writing is from 1610s, of music, from 1670s.


passageway (n.)

1640s, American English, from passage + way (n.).


Passamaquoddy

Indian tribe of southeast Maine, from Micmac, literally place where pollack are plentiful, or else,
if it originally is a tribal name, those of the place of many pollack.


passant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French passant, present participle of passer (see pass (v.)).


passbook (n.)

also pass-book, 1828, from pass (v.) + book (n.); apparently the notion is of the document passing
between bank and customer.


passe (adj.)

1775, from French pass&eacute; (fem. pass&eacute;e) past, faded, past participle of passer to pass
(see pass (v.)). Originally of a woman past the period of greatest beauty.


passe-partout (n.)

master-key, 1670s, French, literally pass everywhere, from passer to pass (see pass (v.)) + partout
everywhere, from par through (see per) + tout all.


passel (n.)

1835, dialectal variant of parcel (n.).


passenger (n.)

early 14c., passager passer-by, from Old French passagier traveler, passer-by (Modern French
passager), noun use of passagier (adj.) passing, fleeting, traveling, from passage (see passage).
And in this I resemble the Lappwing, who fearing hir young ones to be destroyed by passengers,
flyeth with a false cry farre from their nestes, making those that looke for them seeke where they
are not .... [John Lyly, Euphues and His England, 1580]    The -n- was added early 15c. (compare
messenger, harbinger, scavenger, porringer). Meaning one traveling in a vehicle or vessel first
attested 1510s. Passenger-pigeon of North America so called from 1802; extinct since 1914.


passer-by (n.)

also passerby, 1560s, from agent noun of pass (v.) + by; earlier, this sense was in passager (see
passenger).


passerine (adj.)

1776, from Latin passerinus of a sparrow, from passer sparrow, possibly of imitative origin. The
noun is 1842, from the adjective.


passim (adv.)

occurring in various places, Latin, literally scatteredly, in every direction, adverb from passus,
past participle of pandere to stretch (see pace (n.)).


passing (adv.)

in a (sur)passing degree, surpassingly, late 14c., from pass (v.).


passing (n.)

death, 1869, verbal noun from pass (v.).


passion (n.)

late 12c., sufferings of Christ on the Cross, from Old French passion Christ's passion, physical
suffering (10c.), from Late Latin passionem (nominative passio) suffering, enduring, from past
participle stem of Latin pati to suffer, endure, possibly from PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (cognates:
Sanskrit pijati reviles, scorns, Greek pema suffering, misery, woe, Old English feond enemy, devil,
Gothic faian to blame).    Sense extended to sufferings of martyrs, and suffering generally, by
early 13c.; meaning strong emotion, desire is attested from late 14c., from Late Latin use of passio
to render Greek pathos. Replaced Old English &thorn;olung (used in glosses to render Latin passio),
literally suffering, from &thorn;olian (v.) to endure.    Sense of sexual love first attested 1580s;
that of strong liking, enthusiasm, predilection is from 1630s. The passion-flower so called from
1630s.The name passionflower -- flos passionis -- arose from the supposed resemblance of the corona
to the crown of thorns, and of the other parts of the flower to the nails, or wounds, while the five
sepals and five petals were taken to symbolize the ten apostles -- Peter ... and Judas ... being
left out of the reckoning. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1885]


passionate (adj.)

early 15c., angry; emotional, from Medieval Latin passionatus affected with passion, from Latin
passio (genitive passionis) passion (see passion). Specific sense of amorous is attested from 1580s.
Related: Passionately.


passive (adj.)

late 14c., in grammatical sense (opposed to active), Old French passif suffering, undergoing
hardship (14c.) and directly from Latin passivus capable of feeling or suffering, from pass-, past
participle stem of pati to suffer (see passion). Meaning not active is first recorded late 15c.;
sense of enduring suffering without resistance is from 1620s. Related: Passively. Passive resistance
first attested 1819 in Scott's Ivanhoe, used throughout 19c.; re-coined by Gandhi c.1906 in South
Africa. Passive-aggressive with reference to behavior is attested by 1971.


passiveness (n.)

1650s, from passive + -ness.


passivist (n.)

1895, originally in reference to sex roles, from passive + -ist.


passivity (n.)

1650s, from passive + -ity.


Passover

1530, coined by Tyndale from verbal phrase pass over, to translate Hebrew ha-pesah Passover, from
pesah (see paschal), in reference to the Lord passing over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt
when he killed the first-born of the Egyptians (Ex. xii).


passport (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French passeport authorization to pass through a port to enter or leave a
country (15c.), from passe, imperative of Old French passer to pass (see pass (v.)) + port port (see
port (n.1)).


password (n.)

word appointed as a sign to distinguish friend from foe, 1798, from pass (v.) + word (n.).


past (adj.)

c.1300, done with, over, from past participle of passen go by (see pass (v.)). Past participle is
recorded from 1798; past tense from 1813.


past (n.)

times gone by, 1580s, from past (adj.).


pasta (n.)

1874, from Italian pasta, from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste, from Greek pasta barley
porridge, probably originally a salted mess of food, from neuter plural of pastos (adj.) sprinkled,
salted, from passein to sprinkle, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (see quash).


paste (n.)

c.1300 (mid-12c. as a surname), dough, from Old French paste dough, pastry (13c., Modern French
p&#226;te), from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste (see pasta). Meaning glue mixture is
first attested mid-15c.


paste (v.2)

hit hard, 1846, probably an alteration of baste beat (see lambaste). Related: Pasted; pasting.


paste (v.1)

to stick with paste, 1560s; see paste (n.). Related: Pasted; pasting.


paste-up (n.)

1930, from paste (v.) + up (adv.).


pasteboard (n.)

1540s, from paste (n.) + board (n.1). So called because it is made of sheets of paper pasted
together.


pastel (n.)

1660s, crayons, chalk-like pigment used in crayons, from French pastel crayon, from Italian pastello
a pastel, literally material reduced to a paste, from Late Latin pastellus dye from the leaves of
the woad plant, diminutive of pasta (see pasta). Meaning pale or light color (like that of pastels)
first recorded 1899. As an adjective from 1884.


pastern (n.)

late 13c., shackle fixed on the foot of a horse or other beast, from Old French pasturon (Modern
French paturon), diminutive of pasture shackle for a horse in pasture, from Vulgar Latin *pastoria,
noun use of fem. of Latin pastorius of herdsmen, from pastor shepherd (see pastor). Metathesis of
-r- and following vowel occurred 1500s. Sense extended (1520s) to part of the leg to which the
tether was attached.


pasteurization (n.)

1885, from pasteurize + -ation.


pasteurize (v.)

1881, with -ize, after Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), French chemist and bacteriologist, who invented
the process of heating food, milk, wine, etc., to kill most of the micro-organisms in it;
distinguished from sterilization, which involves killing all of them. The surname is literally
Pastor. Related: Pasteurized; pasteurizing.


pastiche (n.)

a medley made up of fragments from different works, 1878, from French pastiche (18c.), from Italian
pasticcio medley, pastry cake, from Vulgar Latin *pasticium composed of paste, from Late Latin pasta
paste, pastry cake (see pasta). Borrowed earlier (1752) in the Italian form.


pasties (n.)

adhesive patches worn over the nipples by exotic dancers, 1957, plural diminutive from paste (v.).


pastime (n.)

late 15c., passe tyme recreation, diversion, amusement, sport, from pass (v.) + time (n.). Formed on
model of Middle French passe-temps (15c.), from passe, imperative of passer to pass + temps time.


pastor (n.)

late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), shepherd, also spiritual guide, shepherd of souls, from Old
French pastor, pastur herdsman, shepherd (12c.), from Latin pastorem (nominative pastor) shepherd,
from pastus, past participle of pascere to lead to pasture, set to grazing, cause to eat, from PIE
root *pa- to tend, keep, pasture, feed, guard, protect (see food). The spiritual sense was in Church
Latin (e.g. Gregory's Cura Pastoralis). The verb in the Christian sense is from 1872.


pastoral (adj.)

of or pertaining to shepherds, early 15c., from Old French pastoral (13c.), from Latin pastoralis of
herdsmen, of shepherds, from pastor (see pastor (n.)). The noun sense of poem dealing with country
life generally, usually dealing with it in an idealized form and emphasizing the purity and
happiness of it, is from 1580s.


pastorale (n.)

musical composition from rustic tunes or representing pastoral scenes, 1724, from Italian pastorale,
noun use of adjective, from Latin pastoralis (see pastoral).


pastoralism (n.)

1854, from pastoral + -ism.


pastoralist (n.)

1793, from pastoral + -ist.


pastrami (n.)

1940, from Yiddish pastrame, from Rumanian pastrama, probably from Turkish pastrima, variant of
basdirma dried meat, from root *bas- to press. Another possible origin of the Rumanian word
[Barnhart] is Modern Greek pastono I salt, from classical Greek pastos sprinkled with salt, salted.
Spelling in English with -mi probably from influence of salami.


pastry (n.)

mid-15c., food made with paste, not originally limited to sweets, from Middle English paste (see
paste (n.)) + -ry. Probably influenced by Old French pastaierie pastry (Modern French
p&#226;tisserie), from pastoier pastry cook, from paste (see paste (n.)); also borrowed from
Medieval Latin pasteria pastry, from Latin pasta. Specific sense of small confection made of pastry
is from 1906. Pastry-cook attested from 1712.


pasturage (n.)

1530s, from Old French pasturage (13c, Modern French p&#226;turage), from pasturer to pasture (see
pasture (v.)).


pasture (n.)

c.1300, grass eaten by cattle, from Old French pasture fodder, grass eaten by cattle (12c., Modern
French p&#226;ture), from Late Latin pastura a feeding, grazing, from Latin pastus, past participle
of pascere to feed, graze (see pastor). Meaning land covered with vegetation suitable for grazing is
from early 14c. To be out to pasture retired is from 1945, from what was done (ideally) to horses
after the active working life.


pasture (v.)

late 14c., of animals, to graze; early 15c., of humans, to lead to pasture, to feed by putting in a
pasture, from Old French pasturer (12c., Modern French p&#226;turer, from pasture (see pasture
(n.)). Related: Pastured; pasturing.


pasty (n)

c.1300, a type of pastry pie, from Old French paste dough, pastry, from Vulgar Latin *pastata meat
wrapped in pastry from Latin pasta (see pasta).


pasty (adj.)

resembling paste, 1650s, from paste (n.) + -y (2). Related: Pastiness.


pat (n.)

c.1400, a blow, stroke, perhaps originally imitative of the sound of patting. Meaning light tap with
hand is from c.1804. Sense of that which is formed by patting (as in pat of butter) is 1754,
probably from the verb. Pat on the back in the figurative sense attested by 1804.


pat (adv.)

aptly, suitably, at the right time, 1570s, perhaps from pat (adj.) in sense of that which hits the
mark, a special use from pat (n.) in sense of a hitting of the mark. The modern adjective is 1630s,
from the adverb.


pat (v.)

1560s, to hit, throw; meaning to tap or strike lightly is from 1714; from pat (n.). Related: Patted;
patting. The nursery rhyme phrase pat-a-cake is known from 1823. Alternative patty-cake (usually
American English) is attested from 1794 (in Mother Goose's Melody, or Sonnets for the Cradle,
Worcester, Mass.).


Pat

as a fem. proper name, short for Patricia. As a masc. proper name, short for  Patrick; hence a
nickname for any Irishman.


Patagonia

South American region, with -ia + Patagon, name given by Europeans to the Tehuelche people who
inhabited the coasts of the region, sometimes said to mean literally large-foot, from Spanish and
Portuguese pata paw, animal foot (see patten) in reference to the people's llama-skin shoes. But
elsewhere said to be from Patagon, name of a dog-headed monster in the prose romance Amad&iacute;s
de Gaula (1508) by Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo (which also might have yielded
California).


patch (v.)

mid-15c., from patch (n.1). Electronics sense of to connect temporarily is attested from 1923.
Related: Patched; patching.


patch (n.1)

piece of cloth used to mend another material, late 14c., of obscure origin, perhaps a variant of
pece, pieche, from Old North French pieche (see piece (n.)), or from an unrecorded Old English word
(but Old English had cla&eth;flyhte a patch). Phrase not a patch on nowhere near as good as is from
1860.


patch (n.2)

fool, clown, 1540s, perhaps from Italian pazzo fool, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old High
German barzjan to rave [Klein].  But Buck says pazzo is originally euphemistic, and from Latin
patiens suffering, in medical use, the patient. Form perhaps influenced by folk etymology derivation
from patch (n.1), on notion of a fool's patched garb.


patchouli (n.)

perfume made from an Indian plant of the mint family, 1845, from the native name for the plant in
Madras, said to be from Tamil pachchai green + ilai leaf. The form of the word appears French, but
this has not been explained and the record of it in English predates that in French.


patchwork (n.)

work composed of patches, 1690s, from patch (n.1) + work (n.). As an adjective from 1713.


patchy (adj.)

1798, from patch (n.1) + -y (2).


pate (n.1)

top of the head, early 14c. (late 12c. in surnames), of unknown origin; perhaps a shortened form of
Old French patene or Medieval Latin patena, both from Latin patina pan, dish (see pan (n.)).


pate (n.2)

paste, 1706, from French p&acirc;t&eacute;, from Old French paste, earlier past&eacute;e, from paste
(see paste (n.)).


patella (n.)

knee cap, 1690s, from Latin patella pan, kneecap, diminutive of patina pan (see pan (n.)). So called
from its shape. Related: Patellar; patelliform.


paten (n.)

plate for bread at Eucharist, c.1300, from Old French patene and directly, from Medieval Latin
patena, from Latin patina pan, dish (see pan (n.)).


patency (n.)

1650s, from patent + -cy.


patent (n.)

late 14c., open letter or document from some authority, shortened form of Anglo-French lettre patent
(also in Medieval Latin (litter&aelig;) patentes), literally open letter (late 13c.), from Old
French patente (see patent (adj.).  The Letters Patent were ... written upon open sheets of
parchment, with the Great Seal pendent at the bottom ... [while] the 'Litter&aelig; Claus&aelig;,'
or Letters Close, ... being of a more private nature, and addressed to one or two individuals only,
were closed or folded up and sealed on the outside. [S.R. Scargill-Bird, A Guide to the Principal
Classes of Documents at the Public Record Office, 1891]  Meaning a license covering an invention is
from 1580s.


patent (v.)

to obtain right to land, 1670s, from patent (n.). The meaning copyright an invention is first
recorded 1822, from earlier meaning obtain exclusive right or monopoly (1789), a privilege granted
by the Crown via letters patent. Related: Patented; patenting.


patent (adj.)

late 14c., in letters patent, literally open letter, from Old French patente, from Latin patentum
(nominative patens) open, lying open, present participle of patere lie open, be open, from PIE
*pete- to spread (see pace (n.)). Sense of open to view, plain, clear is first recorded c.1500.
Related: Patently.


paterfamilias (n.)

early 15c., from Latin pater familias master of a house, head of a family, from pater father (see
father (n.)) + familias, old genitive of familia family (see family).


paternal (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French paternal of a father (12c.), from Medieval Latin paternalis, from Latin
paternus of a father, fatherly, from pater (see father (n.)).


paternalism (n.)

feeling of a father for his children, 1851; government as by a father over his children, 1866, from
paternal + -ism. Related: Paternalistic (1890).


paternity (n.)

mid-15c., condition of being a father, from Old French paternit&eacute; (12c.), from Late Latin
paternitatem (nominative paternitas) fatherly care, fatherhood, from Latin paternus of a father,
from pater (see father (n.)). Originally in the ecclesiastical sense; literal sense first recorded
1580s. Meaning paternal origin is from 1868.


paternoster (n.)

the Lord's Prayer, Old English Pater Noster, from Latin pater noster our father, first words of the
Lord's Prayer in Latin. Meaning set of rosary beads first recorded mid-13c. Paternoster Row, near
St. Paul's in London (similarly named streets are found in other cathedral cities), reflects the
once-important industry of rosary bead-making.


path (n.)

Old English pa&thorn;, p&aelig;&thorn; path, track, from West Germanic *patha- (cognates: Old
Frisian path, Middle Dutch pat, Dutch pad, Old High German pfad, German Pfad path), of uncertain
origin. The original initial -p- in a Germanic word is an etymological puzzle. Don Ringe (From
Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic, Oxford 2006) describes it as An obvious loan from Iranian
..., clearly borrowed after Grimmâ&euro;&trade;s Law had run its course. Watkins says the word is
probably borrowed (? via Scythian) from Iranian *path-, from PIE root *pent- to tread, go, pass
(source of Avestan patha way; see find (v.)), but this is too much of a stretch for OED and others.
In Scotland and Northern England, commonly a steep ascent of a hill or in a road.


Pathet Lao

communist guerrilla movement and political party in Laos, 1954, from Laotian Thai, literally Land of
the Lao.


pathetic (adj.)

1590s, affecting the emotions, exciting the passions, from Middle French path&eacute;tique moving,
stirring, affecting (16c.), from Late Latin patheticus, from Greek pathetikos subject to feeling,
sensitive, capable of emotion, from pathetos liable to suffer, verbal adjective of pathein to suffer
(see pathos). Meaning arousing pity, pitiful is first recorded 1737. Colloquial sense of so
miserable as to be ridiculous is attested from 1937.  Related: Pathetical (1570s); pathetically.
Pathetic fallacy (1856, first used by Ruskin) is the attribution of human qualities to inanimate
objects.


pathfinder (n.)

1839 (Cooper), from path + finder.


pathless (adj.)

1590s, from path + -less.


patho-

before vowels path-, word-forming element meaning Suffering, disease, from Greek patho-, comb. form
of pathos suffering, disease (see pathos).


pathogen (n.)

1880, a back-formation from pathogenic.


pathogenesis (n.)

1876, from patho- + genesis.


pathogenic (adj.)

producing disease, 1836, from French pathog&eacute;nique, from Greek pathos disease (see pathos) +
French -g&eacute;nique producing (see -gen). Related: Pathogenetic (1838); pathogenicity.


pathognomonic (adj.)

1640s (implied in pathognomonical), from  patho- disease, suffering + Greek gnomonikos able to
judge, from gnomon one who knows (see gnomon).


pathologic (adj.)

pertaining to pathology, 1650s, from Greek pathologikos (see pathology).


pathological (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to disease, formed in English from pathologic + -al (1). Sense of worthy to be a
subject of pathology, morbid, excessive (as in pathological liar) is attested from 1845. Related:
Pathologically.


pathologist (n.)

1640s, from pathology + -ist.


pathology (n.)

science of diseases, 1610s, from French pathologie (16c.), from medical Latin pathologia study of
disease, from Greek pathos suffering (see pathos) + -logia study (see -logy). In reference to the
study of abnormal mental conditions from 1842. Ancient Greek pathologia was study of the passions;
the Greek word for science of diseases was pathologike (pathologics).


pathophysiology (adj.)

1952, from patho- + physiology.


pathos (n.)

quality that arouses pity or sorrow, 1660s, from Greek pathos suffering, feeling, emotion, calamity,
literally what befalls one, related to paskhein to suffer, and penthos grief, sorrow; from PIE root
*kwent(h)- to suffer, endure (cognates: Old Irish cessaim I suffer, Lithuanian ken&#269;iu to
suffer, pakanta patience).


pathway (n.)

1530s, from path + way (n.). An etymological tautology.


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


patient (adj.)

mid-14c., enduring without complaint, from Old French pacient and directly from Latin patientem
bearing, supporting, suffering, enduring, permitting (see patience). Meaning pertaining to a medical
patient is late 14c., from the noun. Related: Patiently.


patient (n.)

suffering or sick person under medical treatment, late 14c., from Old French pacient (n.), from the
adjective, from Latin patientem (see patience).


patina (n.)

greenish film on old bronze, 1748, from French patine (18c.), from Italian patina, perhaps from
Latin patina dish, pan (see pan (n.)), on the notion of encrustation on ancient bronze dishes. Sense
of refinement, cultural sophistication first recorded 1933.


patio (n.)

1818, inner court open to the sky, from Spanish patio probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al patu, pati
untilled land, communal pasture, from Latin pactum agreement (see pact). Another theory traces the
Spanish word to Latin patere to lie open. Meaning paved and enclosed terrace beside a building first
recorded 1941. Patio furniture is attested from 1969.


patisserie (n.)

1784, from French p&acirc;tisserie pastry shop, from p&acirc;tisser pastry-seller, pastry-cook, from
Old French pasticier (14c.), from Medieval Latin pasticium pasty, composed of paste, from Late Latin
pasta paste, pastry cake (see pasta).


patois (n.)

a provincial dialect, 1640s, from French patois native or local speech (13c.), of uncertain origin,
probably from Old French patoier handle clumsily, to paw, from pate a paw, from Vulgar Latin *patta
(see patten), from notion of clumsy manner of speaking. Compare French pataud properly, a young dog
with big paws, then an awkwardly built fellow [Brachet]. Especially in reference to Jamaican English
from 1934.


patootie (n.)

sweetheart, pretty girl, colloquial American English, 1921, perhaps a corruption of potato (c.f.
sweet potato). Sweet patootie is recorded from 1919 as a generic exclamation.


patri-

word-forming element used to make terms describing kinship of the father or the paternal line, from
Latin patri-, comb. form of pater (see father (n.)).


patriarch (n.)

late 12c., from Old French patriarche one of the Old Testament fathers (11c.) and directly from Late
Latin patriarcha (Tertullian), from Greek patriarkhes chief or head of a family, from patria family,
clan, from pater father (see father (n.)) + arkhein to rule (see archon). Also used as an honorific
title of certain bishops in the early Church, notably those of Antioch, Alexandria, and Rome.


patriarchal (adj.)

mid-15c., pertaining to a (Church) patriarch, from patriarch + -al, or else from Late Latin
patriarchalis, from patriarcha.


patriarchy (n.)

1560s, in ecclesiastical sense, from Greek patriarkhia, from patriarkhes (see patriarch). Meaning
system of society or government by fathers or elder males of the community first recorded 1630s.


patriate (v.)

1966, in Canadian English (perhaps coined by Lester B. Pearson) in reference to constitutional laws,
probably a back-formation from repatriate. Related: Patriated; patriation.


Patricia

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of patricius patrician, noble (see Patrick).


patrician (n.)

early 15c., member of the ancient Roman noble order, from Middle French patricien, from Latin
patricius of the rank of the nobles, of the senators; of fatherly dignity, from patres conscripti
Roman senators, literally fathers, plural of pater father (see father (n.)). Contrasted, in ancient
Rome, with plebeius. Applied to noble citizens and higher orders of free folk in medieval Italian
and German cities (sense attested in English from 1610s); hence nobleman, aristocrat in a modern
sense (1630s). As an adjective, attested from 1610s, from the noun.


patricide (n.)

1. person who kills his father (1590s), 2. act of killing one's father (1620s), from Middle French
patricide in both senses, from 1. Latin patricida murderer of a father, 2. Latin patricidium, from
pater father + 1. cida killer, 2. cidium killing (see -cide).


Patrick

masc. proper name, from Old Irish Patraicc (Irish Padraig), from Latin Patricius, literally a
patrician (see patrician). As a given name, chiefly in northern England and Scotland, in Ireland
only a popular name after 1600, due probably to the Scots settlers in Ulster. [Reaney]


patrilineal (adj.)

1904, from patri- + lineal.


patrilocal (adj.)

1906,  from patri- + local (adj.).


patrimonial (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French patrimonial- and directly from Late Latin patrimonialis, from Latin
patrimonium (see patrimony).


patrimony (n.)

mid-14c., property of the Church, also spiritual legacy of Christ, from Old French patremoine
heritage, patrimony (12c.) and directly from Latin patrimonium a paternal estate, inheritance from a
father, also figurative, from pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)) + -monium, suffix
signifying action, state, condition. Meaning property inherited from a father or ancestors is
attested from late 14c. Figurative sense of immaterial things handed down from the past is from
1580s. A curious sense contrast to matrimony.


patriot (n.)

1590s, compatriot, from Middle French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota fellow-
countryman (6c.), from Greek patriotes fellow countryman, from patrios of one's fathers, patris
fatherland, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)); with -otes, suffix expressing
state or condition. Liddell &amp; Scott write that patriotes was applied to barbarians who had only
a common [patris], [politai] being used of Greeks who had a common [polis] (or free-state).
Meaning loyal and disinterested supporter of one's country is attested from c.1600, but became an
ironic term of ridicule or abuse from mid-18c. in England, so that Johnson, who at first defined it
as one whose ruling passion is the love of his country, in his fourth edition added, It is sometimes
used for a factious disturber of the government.The name of patriot had become [c.1744] a by-word of
derision. Horace Walpole scarcely exaggerated when he said that ... the most popular declaration
which a candidate could make on the hustings was that he had never been and never would be a
patriot. [Macaulay, Horace Walpole, 1833]Somewhat revived in reference to resistance movements in
overrun countries in World War II, it has usually had a positive sense in American English, where
the phony and rascally variety has been consigned to the word patrioteer (1928). Oriana Fallaci [The
Rage and the Pride, 2002] marvels that Americans, so fond of patriotic, patriot, and patriotism,
lack the root noun and are content to express the idea of patria by cumbersome compounds such as
homeland. (Joyce, Shaw, and H.G. Wells all used patria as an English word early 20c., but it failed
to stick.) Patriots' Day (April 19, anniversary of the 1775 skirmishes at Lexington and Concord
Bridge) was observed as a legal holiday in Maine and Massachusetts from 1894.


Patriot Act

signed into law Oct. 26, 2001; a contrived acronym for Uniting and Strengthening America by
Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001.


patriotic (adj.)

1650s, of one's own country, from French patriotique or directly from Late Latin patrioticus, from
Greek patriotikos, from patriotes (see patriot). Meaning loyal, supporting one's own country is from
1757. Related: Patriotical.


patriotism (n.)

1726, from patriot + -ism.


patristic (adj.)

1773, from patri- + -istic. Related: patristical (1819).


patroclinous (adj.)

resembling the father rather than the mother, 1913, from patri- + Greek klinein to lean (see lean
(v.)).


patrol (n.)

1660s, action of going the rounds (of a military camp, etc.), from French patrouille a night watch
(1530s), from patrouiller go the rounds to watch or guard, originally tramp through the mud,
probably soldiers' slang, from Old French patouiller paddle in water, probably from pate paw, foot
(see patten). Compare paddlefoot, World War II U.S. Army slang for infantry soldier. Meaning those
who go on a patrol is from 1660s. Sense of detachment of soldiers sent out to scout the countryside,
the enemy, etc. is attested from 1702.


patrol (v.)

1690s, from patrol (n.) and in part from French patrouiller. Related: Patrolled; patrolling.


patrolman (n.)

police constable on a particular beat, 1841, from patrol (n.) + man (n.).


patron (n.)

a lord-master, a protector, c.1300, from Old French patron patron, protector, patron saint (12c.)
and directly from Medieval Latin patronus patron saint, bestower of a benefice, lord, master, model,
pattern, from Latin patronus defender, protector, former master (of a freed slave); advocate, from
pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)). Meaning one who advances the cause (of an artist,
institution, etc.), usually by the person's wealth and power, is attested from late 14c.; commonly a
wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery [Johnson]. Commercial sense of regular
customer first recorded c.1600. Patron saint (1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).


patronage (n.)

late 14c., right of presenting a qualified person to a church benefice, from Old French patronage
(14c.) from patron (see patron). Secular sense of action of giving influential support is from
1550s. General sense of power to give jobs or favors is from 1769; meaning regular business of
customers is 1804.


patroness (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin patronissa, fem. of patronus protector, defender (see patron).


patronise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of patronize (q.v.); for suffix, see  -ize.


patronize (v.)

1580s, to act as a patron towards, from patron + -ize, or from Old French patroniser. Meaning treat
in a condescending way is first attested 1797; sense of give regular business to is from 1801.
Related: Patronized; patronizing.


patronizing (adj.)

1727, past participle adjective from patronize. Related: Patronizingly.


patronym (n.)

1834, from Greek patronymos, from patr-, comb. form of pater father (see father (n.)) + -onym name
(see name (n.)).


patronymic (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin patronymicum, from neuter of patronymicus derived from a father's name, from
patronymos named from the father, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)) + onyma
name, Aeolic dialectal variant of onoma name (see name (n.)). As an adjective from 1660s.


patroon (n.)

1660s, variant of patron used in foreign contexts, from Dutch patroon (a French loan-word) or French
patron master, patron, from Old French (see patron; also see -oon); used from 1758 in parts of New
York and New Jersey colonies for landholder, especially one with certain manorial privileges
(abolished c.1850) under the old Dutch governments by the charter of 1629.


patsy (n.)

fall guy, victim of a deception, 1903, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Italian pazzo
madman (see patch (n.2)), or south Italian dialectal paccio fool. Another theory traces it to Patsy
Bolivar, character created by Billy B. Van in an 1890s vaudeville skit who was blamed whenever
anything went wrong.    Poor Rogers, Vincent said, still smiling, he is always the 'Patsy Bolivar'
of the school.    Yes, Frank answered, if there are any mistakes to be made or trouble to fall into,
Rogers seems to be always the victim. [Anthony Yorke, A College Boy, 1899]


patten (n.)

late 14c., from Old French patin clog, type of shoe (13c.), probably from pate paw, foot, from
Gallo-Roman *pauta, ultimately perhaps imitative of the sound made by a paw. The immediate source
has been sought in Celtic [Barnhart] and Germanic [OED], but evidence is wanting. Likely cognates
include Proven&ccedil;al pauta, Catalan pote, Middle Dutch and Dutch poot, German Pfote paw.


patter (v.1)

make quick taps, 1610s, frequentative of pat (v.). Related: Pattered; pattering. As a noun in this
sense from 1844.


patter (v.2)

talk rapidly, c.1400, from pater mumble prayers rapidly (c.1300), shortened form of paternoster.
Perhaps influenced by patter (v.1). The related noun is first recorded 1758, originally cant
language of thieves and beggars. Compare Devil's paternoster (1520s) a grumbling and mumbling to
oneself.    PATTERING. The maundering or pert replies of servants; also talk or palaver in order to
amuse one intended to be cheated. [Grose, Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 2nd edition.
1788]


pattern (n.)

early 14c., outline, plan, model, pattern; early 15c. as model of behavior, exemplar, from Old
French patron and directly from Medieval Latin patronus (see patron).    Extended sense of
decorative design first recorded 1580s, from earlier sense of a patron as a model to be imitated.
The difference in form and sense between patron and pattern wasn't firm till 1700s. Meaning model or
design in dressmaking (especially one of paper) is first recorded 1792, in Jane Austen.


pattern (v.)

1580s, to make a pattern for, design, plan, from pattern (n.). Meaning to make something after a
pattern is c.1600. Phrase pattern after take as a model is from 1878.


patty (n.)

small pie, 1710, from patti-pan (1690s) something baked in a small pan, from French
p&acirc;t&eacute;, from Old French paste (see paste (n.)).


paucity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French paucit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin paucitatem (nominative
paucitas) fewness, scarcity, a small number, from paucus few, little, from PIE *pau-ko-, from root
*pau- (1) few, little (cognates: Latin paullus little; Old English feawe few; see few (adj.)).


Paul

masc. proper name, Biblical name of the apostle to the Gentiles, from Latin Paulum (nominative
Paulus),  Roman surname of the Aemilian gens, literally small, from PIE *pau-ro-lo-, from base *pau-
(1) few, little (see few). Other forms include Old French Pol, Italian Paolo, Spanish Pablo, Russian
Pavel.


pauldron (n.)

armor for the shoulder, mid-15c., from Old French espauleron, from espaule (French &#233;paule)
shoulder (see epaulet)


Pauline

fem. proper name, fem. of Paul.


Pauline (adj.)

pertaining to the apostle Paul, 1817, from Latin Paulinus, from Paulus (see Paul).


paunch (n.)

late 14c. (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French pance (Old North French panche) belly, stomach,
from Latin panticem (nominative pantex) belly, bowels (source also of Spanish panza, Italian
pancia); possibly related to panus swelling (see panic (n.2)).


paunchy (adj.)

1590s, from paunch + -y (2). Related: Paunchiness.


pauper (n.)

1510s, person destitute of property or means of livelihood, from Latin pauper poor, not wealthy, of
small means (see poor (adj.)). Originally in English a legal word, from Latin phrase in forma
pauperis (late 15c.) in the character of a poor person, thus allowed to sue in court without legal
fees.


pause (n.)

early 15c., from Old French pausee a pause, interruption (14c.) and directly from Latin pausa a
halt, stop, cessation, from Greek pausis stopping, ceasing, from pauein to stop, to cause to cease,
from PIE root *paus- to leave, desert, cease, stop.


pause (v.)

mid-15c., from pause (n.) and from Middle French pauser, from Late Latin pausare to halt, cease,
pause. Related: Paused; pausing.


pavan (n.)

slow, stately dance, 1530s, from French pavane (1520s), probably from Spanish pavana, from pavo
peacock (from Latin pavo), in reference to the bird's courting movements. But some see an Italian
origin and trace the name to Padovana Paduan. Possibly there was a merger of two distinct dance
words.


pave (v.)

early 14c., to cover (a street) with stones or other material, from Old French paver to pave (12c.),
perhaps a back-formation from Old French pavement or else from Vulgar Latin *pavare, from Latin
pavire to beat, ram, tread down, from PIE *pau- to cut, strike, stamp (cognates: Latin putare to
prune; Greek paiein to strike; Lithuanian piauju to cut, piuklas saw). Related: Paved; paving. The
figurative sense of make smooth (as in pave the way) is attested from 1580s.


pavement (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French pavement roadway, pathway; paving stone (12c.) and directly from Latin
pavimentum hard floor, level surface beaten firm, from pavire (see pave).


paver (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from pave (v.).


pavilion (n.)

c.1200, large, stately tent, from Old French paveillon large tent; butterfly (12c.), from Latin
papilionem (nominative papilio) butterfly, moth, in Medieval Latin tent (see papillon); the type of
tent so called on resemblance to wings. Meaning open building in a park, etc., used for shelter or
entertainment is attested from 1680s.


Pavlovian (adj.)

1931, from the theories, experiments, and methods of Russian physiologist Ivan Petrovich Pavlov
(1849-1936), especially in connection with the salivary reflexes of dogs in response to mental
stimulus of the sound of a bell (attested from 1911, in Pavloff [sic] method).


paw (n.)

c.1300, from Old French powe, poe paw, fist, of uncertain origin. Evidence points to a Gallo-Roman
root form *pauta which probably is related to the source of patten.


paw (v.)

use the hands roughly, c.1600, from paw (n.). Related: Pawed; pawing. Middle English had pawen to
touch or strike with the paw (c.1400).


pawl (n.)

bar preventing a capstan from recoiling (nautical) 1620s, of unknown origin; perhaps from French pal
stake [OED] or &eacute;paule shoulder [Klein].


pawn (n.1)

something left as security, late 15c. (mid-12c. as Anglo-Latin pandum), from Old French pan, pant
pledge, security, also booty, plunder, perhaps from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare
Old High German pfant, German Pfand, Middle Dutch pant, Old Frisian pand pledge), from West Germanic
*panda, of unknown origin.    The Old French word is identical to pan cloth, piece of cloth, from
Latin pannum (nominative pannus) cloth, piece of cloth, garment and Klein's sources feel this is the
source of both the Old French and West Germanic words (perhaps on the notion of cloth used as a
medium of exchange).


pawn (n.2)

lowly chess piece, late 14c., from Anglo-French poun, Old French peon, earlier pehon, from Medieval
Latin pedonem foot soldier, from Late Latin pedonem (nominative pedo) one going on foot, from Latin
pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). The chess sense was in Old French by 13c. Figurative use,
of persons, is from 1580s.


pawn (v.)

to give (something) as security in exchange for, 1560s, from pawn (n.1). Related: Pawned; pawning.


pawnbroker (n.)

1680s, from pawn (n.1) + broker (n.).


Pawnee

Indian tribes of the Caddoan family, formerly inhabiting the plains of Nebraska, 1778, from Canadian
French pani, from a Siouan language, such as Oto panyi.


pawnshop (n.)

also pawn-shop, by 1763, from pawn (n.1) + shop (n.).


pawpaw (n.)

see papaw.


pax (n.)

mid-15c., kiss of peace, from Latin pax (genitive pacis) peace, in Ecclesiastical Latin, kiss of
peace (see peace). Capitalized, Pax was the name of the Roman goddess of peace. Used by 1933 with
adjectives from national names, on model of Pax Romana (such as Pax Britannica, 1872; Pax Americana,
1886, with reference to Latin America).


pay (v.)

c.1200, to appease, pacify, satisfy, from Old French paier to pay, pay up (12c., Modern French
payer), from Latin pacare to please, pacify, satisfy (in Medieval Latin especially satisfy a
creditor), literally make peaceful, from pax (genitive pacis) peace (see peace). Meaning to give
what is due for goods or services arose in Medieval Latin and was attested in English by early 13c.;
sense of please, pacify died out in English by 1500. Sense of suffer, endure (a punishment, etc.) is
first recorded late 14c. Related: Paid; paying.


pay (n.)

c.1300, satisfaction, liking, reward, from pay (v.), or else from Old French paie payment,
recompense, from paier. Meaning money given for labor or services, wages is from late 14c.


payable (adj.)

late 14c., to be paid, from pay (v.) + -able or from Old French paiable.


payback (n.)

also pay-back, 1946, net return on profits from an investment, from pay (v.) + back (adj.). Meaning
revenge is attested from 1957.


paycheck (n.)

also pay-check, 1894, from pay (n.) + check (n.).


payday (n.)

also pay-day, 1520s, from pay (n.) + day.


paydirt (n.)

also pay dirt, profit, success, 1873, from pay (n.) + dirt (n.); a word from mining, where it was
used in a literal sense from 1856.


payee (n.)

1758, from pay (v.) + -ee.


payer (n.)

person who pays (originally wages, late 14c., later taxes, early 15c.), from Old French paiere
(13c.), agent noun from paier (see pay (v.)).


payload (n.)

also pay-load, 1917, from pay + load (n.). Originally the part of a truck's (later an aircraft's)
load from which revenue is derived (passengers, cargo, mail); figurative sense of bombs, etc.
carried by a plane or missile is from 1936.


payment (n.)

late 14c., from Old French paiement (13c.), from paiier (see pay (v.)).


paynim (n.)

mid-13c., heathen lands, from Old French paienime, paienisme heathen, pagan; Saracen lands or
culture or faith, from Late Latin paganismus heathendom (Augustine), from paganus heathen (see
pagan); mistaken meaning a heathen person (late 14c., also in Old French) is via phrases such as
paynim lands.


payoff (n.)

also pay-off, 1905, winnings from gambling, from pay (v.) + off. Meaning graft, bribes first
attested 1930. Phrase to pay off be profitable is first recorded 1937.


payola (n.)

graft (especially to disc jockeys from record companies to play their music), 1938 (in a Variety
headline), from pay off bribery (underworld slang from 1930) + ending from Victrola, etc. (see
pianola). Compare also plugola (1959), from plug (n.) in the advertising sense.


payor (n.)

1817, agent noun in Latin form from pay (v.). Chiefly legalese.


payout (n.)

1904, from pay (v.) + out. Originally in reference to oil wells that produced enough to justify the
expense of drilling them.


Paypal (n.)

e-commerce money transfer business, formed 2000 by merger of earlier firms.


payphone (n.)

also pay-phone, 1906, from pay (v.) + phone (n.).


payroll (n.)

1740, from pay (v.) + roll (n.); total amount paid to employees over a period, hence, via records-
keeping, list of employees receiving pay.


PBS

abbreviation of Public Broadcasting Service, 1970, America English. It succeeded National
Educational Television (NET).


pcb

1966, from polychlorinated biphenyl.


pcp

1977, from phenocyclidine.


pda

by 1992, initialism (acronym) for personal digital assistant.


pdf

by 1992, initialism (acronym) for portable document format, a generic term.


PE

1956 as an abbreviation of physical education (see physical).


pea (n.)

early or mid-17c., false singular from Middle English pease (plural pesen), which was both single
and collective (as with wheat, corn) but the s sound was mistaken for the plural inflection. From
Old English pise (West Saxon), piose (Mercian) pea, from Late Latin pisa, variant of Latin pisum
pea, from Greek pison the pea, perhaps of Thracian or Phrygian origin [Klein].    In Southern U.S.
and the Caribbean, used of other legumes as well. Pea soup is first recorded 1711 (pease-soup);
applied to London fogs since at least 1849. Pea-shooter attested from 1803.


pea jacket (n.)

1721, loan-translation of North Frisian pijekkat, from Dutch pijjekker, from pij coarse woolen cloth
+ jekker jacket. Middle English had pee coat of coarse, thick wool (late 15c.). Related: Pea-coat.


peace (n.)

mid-12c., freedom from civil disorder, from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais peace, reconciliation,
silence, permission (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) compact,
agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of war (source of Proven&ccedil;al patz, Spanish
paz, Italian pace), from PIE *pag-/*pak- fasten, related to pacisci to covenant or agree (see pact).
Replaced Old English fri&eth;, also sibb, which also meant happiness. Modern spelling is 1500s,
reflecting vowel shift. Sense in peace of mind is from c.1200. Used in various greetings from
c.1300, from Biblical Latin pax, Greek eirene, which were used by translators to render Hebrew
shalom, properly safety, welfare, prosperity.    Sense of quiet is attested by 1300; meaning absence
or cessation of war or hostility is attested from c.1300. As a type of hybrid tea rose (developed
1939 in France by Francois Meilland), so called from 1944. Native American peace pipe is first
recorded 1760. Peace-officer attested from 1714. Peace offering is from 1530s. Phrase peace with
honor first recorded 1607 (in Coriolanus). The U.S. Peace Corps was set up March 1, 1962. Peace
sign, both the hand gesture and the graphic, attested from 1968.


peace-keeping (n.)

also peacekeeping, 1961 in the international sense, from peace + keeping, verbal noun from keep
(v.). Earlier preservation of law and order (mid-15c.). Related: Peace-keeper (1570s).


peaceable (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French paisible peaceful (12c.), from pais (see peace). Related: Peacably.


peaceful (adj.)

early 14c., inclined to peace, friendly, pacific, from peace + -ful. Meaning tranquil, calm, full of
peace is from mid-14c. In reference to nonviolent methods of effecting social change, it is attested
from 1876. Related: Peacefully; peacefulness. Peaceful coexistence (1920) originally was in regard
to Soviet policy toward the capitalist West.


peacemaker (n.)

early 15c., from peace + maker.


peacenik (n.)

1962, from peace + -nik. An earlier equivalent was peacemonger (1808).


peacetime (n.)

also peace-time, 1550s, from peace + time (n.).


peach (n.)

c.1400 (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French pesche peach, peach tree (Old North French peske,
Modern French p&ecirc;che), and directly from Medieval Latin pesca, from Late Latin pessica, variant
of persica peach, peach tree, from Latin malum Persicum, literally Persian apple, translating Greek
Persikon malon, from Persis Persia (see Persian).    In ancient Greek Persikos could mean Persian or
the peach. The tree is native to China, but reached Europe via Persia. By 1663 William Penn observed
peaches in cultivation on American plantations. Meaning attractive woman is attested from 1754; that
of good person is from 1904. Peaches and cream in reference to a type of complexion is from 1901.
Peach blossom as a color is from 1702. Georgia has been the Peach State since 1939.


peach (v.)

to inform against, 1560s (earlier to accuse, indict, bring to trial, mid-15c.), a shortening of
appeach, an obsolete variant of impeach. Related: Peached; peaching.


peachy (adj.)

1590s, resembling a peach in some way, from peach (n.) + -y (2). Slang sense of attractive attested
by 1900. Extended form peachy-keen recorded from 1953. Related: Peachiness.


peacock (n.)

c.1300, poucock, from Middle English po peacock + coc (see cock (n.)).   Po is from Old English pawa
peafowl (cock or hen), from Latin pavo (genitive pavonis), which, with Greek taos said to be
ultimately from Tamil tokei (but perhaps is imitative; Latin represented the peacock's sound as
paupulo).    The Latin word also is the source of Old High German pfawo, German Pfau, Dutch pauw,
Old Church Slavonic pavu. Used as the type of a vainglorious person from late 14c. Its flesh
superstitiously was believed to be incorruptible (even St. Augustine credits this). When he sees his
feet, he screams wildly, thinking that they are not in keeping with the rest of his body.
[Epiphanus]


peahen (n.)

c.1400, from Old English pawa peafowl (see peacock) + hen.


peak (n.)

pointed top, 1520s, variant of pike (n.4) sharp point. Meaning top of a mountain first recorded
1630s, though pike was used in this sense c.1400. Figurative sense is 1784. Meaning point formed by
hair on the forehead is from 1833. According to OED, The Peak in Derbyshire is older than the word
for mountaintop; compare Old English Peaclond, for the district, Pecsaetan, for the people who
settled there, Peaces &#230;rs for Peak Cavern; sometimes said to be a reference to an elf-denizen
Peac Puck.


peak (v.)

1570s, to rise in a peak, from peak (n.). Figurative meaning reach highest point first recorded
1958. Related: peaked; peaking.


peaked (adj.)

sickly-looking, 1835, from past participle of obsolete verb peak look sickly or thin, shrink, waste
away (1540s), which is perhaps from peak in sense of become pointed through emaciation. Related:
Peakedness.


peal (n.)

mid-14c., a ringing of a bell especially as a call to church service, generally considered a
shortened form of appeal (n.), with the notion of a bell that summons people to church (compare
similar evolution in peach (v.)). Extended sense of loud ringing of bells is first recorded 1510s.


peal (v.)

1630s, from peal (n.). Related: Pealed; pealing.


peanut (n.)

1807, earlier ground nut, ground pea (1769). The plant is native to S.America. Portuguese traders
took peanuts from Brazil and Peru to Africa by 1502 and it is known to have been cultivated in
Chekiang Province in China by 1573, probably arriving with Portuguese sailors who made stops in
Brazil en route to the Orient. Peanut butter attested by 1892; peanut brittle is from 1894. Peanut
gallery topmost rows of a theater is from 1874, American English; peanuts trivial sum is from 1934.


pear (n.)

Old English pere, peru pear, common West Germanic (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German pere, Old High
German pira, bira, Dutch peer), from Vulgar Latin *pera, variant of Latin pira, plural (taken for
fem. singular) of pirum pear, a loan word from an unknown source. It likely shares an origin with
Greek apion pear, apios pear tree.


pearl (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French perle (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin perla (mid-13c.), of unknown
origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *pernula, diminutive of Latin perna, which in Sicily meant pearl,
earlier sea-mussel, literally ham, haunch, gammon, so called for the shape of the mollusk shells.
Other theories connect it with the root of pear, also somehow based on shape, or Latin pilula
globule, with dissimilation. The usual Latin word for pearl was margarita (see margarite).    For
pearls before swine, see swine. Pearl Harbor translates Hawaiian Wai Momi, literally pearl waters,
so named for the pearl oysters found there; transferred sense of effective sudden attack is attested
from 1942 (in reference to Dec. 7, 1941).


pearly (adj.)

early 15c., from pearl + -y (2). Related: Pearliness. The pearly gates of Heaven (or the New
Jerusalem) are attested by 1708, from Rev. 21:21.


peart (adj.)

variant of pert (q.v.).


peasant (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French paisant (mid-14c.), Old French paisent local inhabitant (12c., Modern
French paysan), earlier paisenc, from pais country, region + Frankish suffix -enc -ing.   Pais is
from Late Latin pagensis (inhabitant) of the district, from Latin pagus country or rural district
(see pagan). As a style of garment in fashion (such as peasant blouse) from 1953.


peasantry (n.)

1550s, from peasant + -ry.


pease

Old English; see pea, of which this is the etymologically correct form.


peat (n.)

c.1200, in Scottish Latin, of unknown origin, probably from a Celtic root *pett- (cognates: Cornish
peyth, Welsh peth quantity, part, thing, Old Irish pet, Breton pez piece). The earliest sense is not
of the turf but of the cut piece of it, and the Celtic root may be connected to that of piece.


peaty (adj.)

1765, from peat + -y (2). Related: Peatiness.


peavey (n.)

pointed cant hook, a lumbering hook, 1878, said to be named for a John Peavey, blacksmith in
Bolivar, N.Y., who supposedly invented it c.1872. Other sources ascribe it to a Joseph Peavey of
Stillwater, Maine, and give a date of 1858.


pebble (n.)

small, smooth stone, late 13c., from Old English papolstan pebblestone, of unknown origin. Perhaps
imitative. Some sources compare Latin papula pustule, pimple, swelling.


pecan (n.)

1712, paccan the pecan tree, or a related hickory, from French pacane, from an Algonquian word
meaning nut (compare Cree pakan hard-shelled nut, Ojibwa bagaan, Abenaki pagann, Fox /paka:ni/).


peccadillo (n.)

slight sin, 1590s (earlier in corrupt form peccadilian, 1520s), from Spanish pecadillo, diminutive
of pecado a sin, from Latin peccatum a sin, fault, error, noun use of neuter past participle of
peccare to miss, mistake, make a mistake, do amiss; transgress, offend, be licentious, sin, perhaps
literally to stumble, from a PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, stumble, fall, related to the root of
foot (n.).


peccant (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin peccantem (nominative pecans) sinful, present participle of peccare to sin (see
peccadillo). As a noun from 1620s. Related: Peccancy.


peccary (n.)

pig-like animal of South America, 1610s, from Carib (Guiana or Venezuela) pakira, paquira.


peccavi (v.)

1550s, Latin, literally I have sinned; past tense of peccare to sin (see peccadillo). Related:
peccavimus we have sinned; peccavit he has sinned.


peck (v.)

c.1300, possibly a variant of picken (see pick (v.)), or in part from Middle Low German pekken to
peck with the beak. Related: Pecked; pecking.


peck (n.1)

late 13c., dry measure of one-quarter bushel, of unknown origin; perhaps connected with Old French
pek, picot (13c.), also of unknown origin (Barnhart says these were borrowed from English). Chiefly
of oats for horses; original sense may be allowance rather than a fixed measure, thus perhaps from
peck (v.).


peck (n.2)

act of pecking, 1610s, from peck (v.). It is attested earlier in thieves' slang (1560s) with a sense
of food, grub.


Peck&#039;s bad boy

unruly or mischievous child, 1883, from fictional character created by George Wilbur Peck
(1840-1916).


pecker (n.)

one who pecks, 1690s, agent noun from peck (v.); slang sense of penis is from 1902.


peckerwood (n.)

1859, U.S. Southern black dialectal inversion of woodpecker; in folklore, taken as the type of white
folks (1929) and symbolically contrasted with blackbird.


pecking (n.)

verbal noun from peck (v.), late 14c. As a behavior among hens, pecking order (1928) translates
German hackliste (T.J. Schjelderuo-Ebbe, 1922); transferred sense of human hierarchy based on rank
or status is from 1955.


peckish (adj.)

somewhat hungry, literally disposed to peck, 1785, from peck (v.) + -ish. Related: Peckishly;
peckishness.


Pecksniffian (adj.)

1851, after Mr. Pecksniff, unctuous hypocrite in Dickens' Martin Chuzzlewit (1844).


pectin (n.)

polysaccharide found in fruit and vegetables, crucial in forming jellies and jams, 1838, from French
pectine, coined early 1830s by French chemist Henri Braconnot (1781-1855) from acide pectique pectic
acid, a constituent of fruit jellies, from Greek pektikos curdling, congealing, from pektos curdled,
congealed, from pegnynai to make stiff or solid, from PIE root *pag-/*pak- to join together (see
pact). Related: Pectic.


pectoral (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to the breast, from Latin pectoralis of the breast, from pectus (genitive
pectoris) breast, chest, from PIE root *peg- breast.


pectoral (n.)

early 15c., ornament worn on the breast, from Middle French pectoral and directly from Latin
pectorale breastplate, noun use of neuter of adjective pectoralis (see pectoral (adj.)).    As a
shortened form of pectoral muscle, attested from 1758. Slang shortening pec for this is first
recorded 1966. Related: Pectorals; pecs.


peculate (v.)

1749, from Latin peculatus, past participle of peculari to embezzle, from peculum private property,
originally cattle (see peculiar). Related: Peculated; peculating; peculator.


peculation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from Latin peculari (see peculate).


peculiar (adj.)

mid-15c., belonging exclusively to one person, from Latin peculiaris of one's own (property), from
peculium private property, literally property in cattle (in ancient times the most important form of
property), from pecu cattle, flock, related to pecus cattle (see pecuniary). Meaning unusual is
first attested c.1600 (earlier distinguished, special, 1580s; for sense development, compare idiom).
Related: Peculiarly.


peculiarity (n.)

c.1600, exclusive possession; 1640s, special characteristic, from peculiar + -ity, or else from
Latin peculiaritas. Meaning an oddity is attested by 1777. Related: Peculiarities.


pecuniary (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin pecuniarius pertaining to money, from pecunia money, property, wealth, from pecu
cattle, flock, from PIE root *peku- wealth, movable property, livestock (source of Sanskrit pasu-
cattle, Gothic faihu money, fortune, Old English feoh cattle, money).    Livestock was the measure
of wealth in the ancient world. For a possible parallel sense development in Old English, see fee,
and compare, evolving in the other direction, cattle. Compare also Welsh tlws jewel, cognate with
Irish tlus cattle, connected via notion of valuable thing.


pecunious (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin pecuniosus abounding in money, from pecunia money (see pecuniary). Related:
Pecuniously; pecuniousness.


pedagogic (adj.)

1781, from Latin paedagogicus, from Greek paidagogikos suitable for a teacher, from paidagogos
teacher (see pedagogue).


pedagogical (adj.)

1610s, from Latin paedagogicus (see pedagogic) + -al (1). Related: Pedagogically.


pedagogue (n.)

late 14c., schoolmaster, teacher, from Old French pedagoge teacher of children (14c.), from Latin
paedagogus, from Greek paidagogos slave who escorts boys to school and generally supervises them,
later a teacher, from pais (genitive paidos) child (see pedo-) + agogos leader, from agein to lead
(see act (n.)). Hostile implications in the word are at least from the time of Pepys (1650s).
Related: Pedagogal.


pedagogy (n.)

1580s, from Middle French p&eacute;dagogie (16c.), from Latin paedagogia, from Greek paidagogia
education, attendance on boys, from paidagogos teacher (see pedagogue).


pedal (n.)

1610s, lever (on an organ) worked by foot, from French p&eacute;dale feet, trick with the feet, from
Italian pedale treadle, pedal, from Late Latin pedale (thing) of the foot, neuter of Latin pedalis
of the foot, from pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)).    Extended to various mechanical
contrivances by 1789. Pedal steel guitar is from 1969. Pedal-pushers type of women's trousers
suitable for bicycling is from 1944.    When college girls took to riding bicycles in slacks, they
first rolled up one trouser leg, then rolled up both. This whimsy has now produced a trim variety of
long shorts, called pedal pushers. [Life, Aug. 28, 1944]


pedal (v.)

1866 of musical organs, 1888 of bicycles, from pedal (n.). Related: Pedaled; pedaling.


pedant (n.)

1580s, schoolmaster, from Middle French p&eacute;dant (1560s) or directly from Italian pedante,
literally teacher, schoolmaster, of uncertain origin, apparently an alteration of Late Latin
paedagogantem (nominative paedagogans), present participle of paedagogare (see pedagogue). Meaning
person who trumpets minor points of learning first recorded 1590s.


pedantic (adj.)

formed in English c.1600, from pedant + -ic. The French equivalent is p&eacute;dantesque. Perhaps
first attested in John Donne's Sunne Rising, where he bids the morning sun let his love and him
linger in bed, telling it, Sawcy pedantique wretch, goe chide Late schooleboyes. Related: Pedantical
(1580s); pedantically.


pedanticism (n.)

19c., from pedantic + -ism. Earlier was pedantism (1590s).


pedantocracy (n.)

1842, from pedant + -cracy. Coined (in French) by Mill in a letter to Comte.


pedantry (n.)

1610s, from Italian pedanteria, from pedante, or from French p&eacute;danterie, from p&eacute;dant
(see pedant).


peddle (v.)

to retail, 1837 in modern use, a colloquial back-formation from peddler. Related: Peddled; peddling.


peddler (n.)

late 14c. (c.1300 as a surname, Will. Le Pedelare), from peoddere, peddere (c.1200, mid-12c. as a
surname), of unknown origin. It has the appearance of an agent noun, but no corresponding verb is
attested in Middle English. Perhaps a diminutive of ped panier, basket, also of unknown origin, but
this is attested only from late 14c. Pedlar, preferred spelling in U.K., is attested from late 14c.


pederast (n.)

1730s, from French p&eacute;d&eacute;raste, from Latin paederasta, from Greek paiderastes a lover of
boys (see pederasty).


pederasty (n.)

sodomy of a man with a boy, c.1600, from French p&#233;d&#233;rastie or directly from Modern Latin
p&aelig;derastia, from Greek paiderastia love of boys, from paiderastes pederast, lover of boys,
from pais (genitive paidos) child, boy (see pedo-) + erastes lover, from erasthai to love (see
Eros).


pedestal (n.)

1560s, base supporting a column, statue, etc., from Middle French pi&eacute;destal (1540s), from
Italian piedistallo base of a pillar, from pie foot + di of + stallo stall, place, seat, from a
Germanic source (see stall (n.1)).    Spelling in English influenced by Latin pedem foot.  An Old
English word for it was fotstan, literally foot-stone. Figurative sense of put (someone) on a
pedestal regard as highly admirable is attested from 1859.


pedestrian (adj.)

1716, prosaic, dull (of writing), from Latin pedester (genitive pedestris) plain, not versified,
prosaic, literally on foot (sense contrasted with equester on horseback), from pedes one who goes on
foot, from pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Meaning going on foot is first attested 1791
in English (it also was a sense of Latin pedester). The earlier adjective in English was pedestrial
(1610s).


pedestrian (n.)

walker, 1793, from pedestrian (adj.).


pediatric (adj.)

1849, from Greek paid-, stem of pais child (see pedo-) + -iatric.


pediatrician (n.)

1884, from pediatric + -ian.


pediatrics (n.)

1884; from pediatric; see -ics.


pedicel (n.)

1670s, from Modern Latin pedicellus, diminutive of pediculus (see pedicle).


pedicle (n.)

footstalk of a plant, 1620s, from Latin pediculus footstalk, little foot, diminutive of  pedem
(nominative pes) foot (see foot (n.)).


pediculosis (n.)

lice infestation, 1809, with -osis + pediculus, diminutive of pedis a louse, said in some sources to
be akin to pedere to break wind (see petard) on notion of foul-smelling insect [Watkins].


pediculous (adj.)

infested with lice; pertaining to lice, 1540s, from Latin pediculosus, from pediculus louse (see
pediculosis).


pedicure (n.)

1839, one whose business is surgical care of feet (removal of corns, bunions, etc.), from French
p&eacute;dicure, from Latin pes (genitive pedis) foot  (see foot (n.)) + curare to care for, from
cura (see care). In reference to the treatment itself, attested from 1890; specifically as a beauty
treatment, from 1900.


pedigree (n.)

early 15c., genealogical table or chart, from Anglo-French pe de gru, a variant of Old French pied
de gru foot of a crane, from Latin pedem accusative of pes foot (see foot (n.)) + gruem (nominative
grus) crane, cognate with Greek geranos, Old English cran; see crane (n.)).    On old manuscripts,
descent was indicated by a forked sign resembling the branching lines of a genealogical chart; the
sign also happened to look like a bird's footprint. Form influenced in Middle English by association
with degree. Meaning ancestral line is mid-15c.; of animals, c.1600. Related: Pedigreed.


pediment (n.)

triangular part of the facade of a Greek-style building, 1660s, alteration of periment, peremint
(1590s), of unknown origin, said to be a workmen's term [OED]; probably a dialectal garbling of
pyramid, the connection perhaps being the triangular shape. Sometimes associated with ped- foot.
Other possibilities include Latin pedamentum vine-stalk, prop, and Italian pedamento, which at the
time this word entered English meant foundation, basework, footing. Meaning base, foundation is from
1726, by inflience of Latin pedem foot.


pedo-

before vowels ped-, word-forming element meaning boy, child, from Greek pedo-, comb. form of pais
boy, child, especially a son, from PIE root *peu- small, little, few, young (see few (adj.)). The
British form paed- is better because it avoids confusion with ped-.


pedology (n.)

scientific study of the soil, 1924, from Greek pedon ground, earth, from PIE root *ped- (see foot
(n.)) + -logy. Related: Pedological. Earlier it was a word for the study of children (1894), from
pedo-.


pedometer (n.)

instrument for measuring distances covered by a walker, 1723, from French p&eacute;dom&egrave;tre
(1712), a hybrid coined from Latin pedis (genitive of pes foot; see foot (n.)) + Greek metron a
measure (see meter (n.2)). At first Englished as waywiser.


pedophile (n.)

1951, derived noun from pedophilia.


pedophilia (n.)

1900, from Greek pais (genitive paidos) child (see pedo-) + philos loving see -phile). First
attested in an abstract of a report by Krafft-Ebing.


pedophiliac (adj.)

1951, from pedophilia.


pedophilic (adj.)

1920, from pedophilia + -ic.


peduncle (n.)

1753, from Modern Latin pedunculus footstalk, diminutive of pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot
(n.)).


pedunculated (adj.)

1752, from Modern Latin pedunculatus, from pedunculus (see peduncle).


pee (v.)

1788, to spray with urine, euphemistic abbreviation of piss. Meaning to urinate is from 1879.
Related: Peed; peeing. Noun meaning act of urination is attested from 1902; as urine from 1961.
Reduplicated form pee-pee is attested from 1923.


peek (v.)

late 14c., piken look quickly and slyly, of unknown origin. The words peek, keek, and peep all were
used with more or less the same meaning 14c.-15c.; perhaps the ultimate source was Middle Dutch
kieken. Related: Peeked; peeking.


peek (n.)

a peek, glance, 1844, from peek (v.).


peekaboo (n.)

also peek-a-boo, as a children's game attested from 1590s; as an adjective meaning see-through,
open, it dates from 1895. From peek (v.) + boo.


peel (v.)

to strip off, developed from Old English pilian to peel, skin, decorticate, strip the skin or ring,
and Old French pillier, both from Latin pilare to strip of hair, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).
Probably also influenced by Latin pellis skin, hide. Related: Peeled; peeling. Figurative expression
keep (one's) eyes peeled be observant, be on the alert is from 1853, American English.


peel (n.2)

shovel-shaped instrument used by bakers, etc., c.1400, from Old French pele (Modern French pelle)
shovel, from Latin pala spade, shovel, baker's peel, of unknown origin.


peel (n.1)

piece of rind or skin, 1580s, from earlier pill, pile (late 14c.), from peel (v.)).


peel out (v.)

hot-rodders' slang, 1952, perhaps from peel blade or wash of an oar (1875, American English),
earlier shovel-shaped instrument (see peel (n.2). Or it might be from aircraft pilot phrase peel off
veer away from formation (World War II), or from earlier American English slang peel it run away at
full speed (1860).


peeler (n.)

policeman, 1817, British colloquial, originally a member of the Irish constabulary, named for Sir
(at that time Mr.) Robert Peel (1788-1850) who founded the Irish Constabulary (compare bobby). In
Middle English it meant robber, thief (mid-14c.). Meaning strip-tease artist (1951) is from peel
(v.) in colloquial sense of strip off clothing (1820).


peen (n.)

1680s, sharp or thin end of a hammer head, opposite the face, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Norwegian dialectal penn peen, Old Swedish p&aelig;na beat iron thin with a hammer).
Earlier as a verb, to beat thin with a hammer (1510s).


peep (v.1)

glance (especially through a small opening), mid-15c., perhaps alteration of Middle English piken
(see peek (v.)). Peeping Tom a curious prying fellow [Grose] is from 1796 (see Godiva).


peep (v.2)

make a short chirp, c.1400, probably altered from pipen (mid-13c.), ultimately imitative (compare
Latin pipare, French pepier, German piepen, Lithuanian pypti, Czech pipati, Greek pipos).


peep (n.2)

short chirp, early 15c., from peep (v.2); meaning slightest sound or utterance (usually in a
negative context) is attested from 1903. Meaning young chicken is from 1680s. The marshmallow peeps
confection are said to date from 1950s.


peep (n.1)

1520s, first in sense found in peep of day, from peep (v.1); meaning a furtive glance is first
recorded 1730.


peep-hole (n.)

1680s, from peep (v.1) + hole (n.).


peep-show (n.)

1851 (not typically salacious until c.1914), from peep (v.1) + show (n.).


peepee

1923, childish reduplication of pee.


peeper (n.)

1650s, one who peeps, agent noun from peep (v.1). Slang meaning eye is c.1700. From 1590s as young
chicken and 1857 as tree frog (American English), both from peep (v.2).


peer (n.)

c.1300, an equal in rank or status (early 13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French peir, Old French
per (10c.), from Latin par equal (see par (n.)). Sense of a noble (late 14c.) is from Charlemagne's
Twelve Peers in the old romances, who, like the Arthurian knights of the Round Table, originally
were so called because all were equal. Sociological sense of one of the same age group or social set
is from 1944. Peer review attested by 1970. Peer pressure is first recorded 1971.


peer (v.)

to look closely, 1590s, variant of piren (late 14c.), with a long -i-, probably related to or from
East Frisian piren to look, of uncertain origin. Influenced in form and sense by Middle English
peren (late 14c.), shortened form of aperen (see appear). Related: Peered; peering.


peerage (n.)

mid-15c., peers collectively, from peer (n.) + -age. Probably on model of Old French parage.


peerless (adj.)

c.1300, from peer (n.) + -less.


peeve (v.)

1907 (implied in peeved), back-formation from peevish. As a noun, attested by 1910. Related: Peeved;
peeving; peeves.


peevish (adj.)

late 14c., peyvesshe perverse, capricious, silly, of uncertain origin, possibly modeled on Latin
perversus reversed, perverse, past participle of pervertere to turn about (see pervert (v.)).
Meaning cross, fretful first recorded 1520s. Related: Peevishly; peevishness.


peewee (adj.)

1877, small, tiny, for children, a dialect word, possibly a varied reduplication of wee. Attested
earlier (1848) as a noun meaning a small marble. (Baseball Hall-of-Famer Harold Peewee Reese got his
nickname because he was a marbles champion before he became a Dodgers shortstop.) As a type of bird
(variously applied on different continents) it is attested from 1886, imitative of a bird cry.


peg (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle Dutch pegge peg, a common Low German word (Low German pigge peg, German Pegel
gauge rod, watermark, Middle Dutch pegel little knob used as a mark, Dutch peil gauge, watermark,
standard), of uncertain origin; perhaps from PIE *bak- staff used as support (see bacillus). To be a
square peg in a round hole be inappropriate for one's situation is attested from 1836; to take
someone down a peg is from 1580s, but the original literal sense is uncertain (most of the likely
candidates are not attested until centuries later). Peg leg wooden leg attested from 1765.


peg (v.)

fasten with or as if on a peg, 1590s, from peg (n.). Slang sense of identify, classify first
recorded 1920. Related: Pegged; pegging.


Pegasus

winged horse in Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Pegasos, usually said to be from
pege fountain, spring; a well fed by a spring (plural pegai), especially in springs of Ocean, near
which Medusa was said to have been killed by Perseus (Pegasus sprang from her blood). But this may
be folk etymology, and the ending of the word indicates non-Greek origin. Advances since the 1990s
in the study of the Luwians, neighbors of the Hittites in ancient Anatolia, show a notable
convergence of the Greek name with Piha&#353;&#353;a&#353;&#353;i, the name of a Luwian weather-god:
the mythological figure of Pegasus carrying the lightning and thunderbolt of Zeus, ... is likely to
represent an avatar of the Luwian Storm-God of Lightning .... [Alice Mouton, et al., eds., Luwian
Identities, 2013]


Peggy

fem. familiar proper name, alteration of Maggie  (see Margaret).


pegomancy (n.)

divination by fountains, 1727, from Latinized form of Greek pege fountain, spring (of unknown
origin) + -mancy.


peignoir (n.)

lady's loose robe, 1835, from French peignoir, from Middle French peignouoir garment worn over the
shoulders while combing the hair (16c.), from peigner to comb the hair, from Latin pectinare, from
pecten (genitive pectinis) a comb, related to pectere to comb (see fight (v.)). A gown put on while
coming from the bath; misapplied in English to a woman's morning gown.


Peirce

surname, attested from late 12c., from Old French Piers, nominative of proper name Pierre (see
Peter) .


pejoration (n.)

1650s, noun of action from pejorate (see pejorative).


pejorative (adj.)

depreciative, disparaging, 1888, from French p&eacute;joratif, from Late Latin peiorat-, past
participle stem of peiorare make worse, from Latin peior worse, related to pessimus worst, pessum
downward, to the ground, from PIE *ped-yos-, comparative of root *ped- to walk, stumble, impair (see
peccadillo). As a noun from 1882. English had a verb pejorate to worsen from 1640s.


Peking

former transliteration of what is now (in the pinyin system) called Beijing. In the Wade-Giles
system it was Peiping; this form Peking pre-dates Wade-Giles and was formed by the old British-run,
Hong Kong-based Chinese postal system.


Pekingese

1907, small long-haired dog of the pug type, so called because originally brought from the Imperial
Palace at Peking, China. Also Pekinese.


pelage (n.)

coat of a mammal, from French pelage hair or wool of an animal (16c.), from Old French pel hair,
from Latin pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


Pelagian

1530s (n.); 1570s (adj.), from Medieval Latin Pelagianus, from Pelagius, Latinized form of the name
of 4c. British monk who denied the doctrine of original sin. Combated by Augustine, condemned by
Pope Zosimus in 418 C.E. His name in Welsh was said to have been Morgan, literally sea-dweller
(hence his Church name, from Greek pelagos sea; see pelagic). Related: Pelagianism.


pelagic (adj.)

pertaining to the sea, 1650s, from Latin pelagicus, from Greek pelagikos, from pelagos sea, high
sea, open sea, main, from PIE *pelag- to spread out (source of Greek plagos side, Latin plaga
hunting net, curtain, region), possibly from root *plak- (1) to spread out, be flat (see placenta).


Pelasgian

late 15c., of the Pelasgi, from Latin Pelasgius, from Greek Pelasgios of the Pelasgi, from Pelasgoi
the Pelasgi, name of a prehistoric people of Greece and Asia Minor who occupied Greece before the
Hellenes, probably originally *Pelag-skoi, literally Sea-people (see pelagic).


pelf (n.)

mid-14c., stolen goods, from Anglo-French pelf, Old French pelfre booty, spoils (11c.), of unknown
origin; also see pilfer. Meaning money, riches, with a pejorative overtone first recorded c.1500.


pelican (n.)

Old English pellicane, from Late Latin pelecanus, from Greek pelekan pelican (so used by Aristotle),
apparently related to pelekas woodpecker and pelekys ax, perhaps so called from the shape of the
bird's bill. Spelling influenced in Middle English by Old French pelican. Used in Septuagint to
translate Hebrew qaath. The fancy that it feeds its young on its own blood is an Egyptian tradition
properly belonging to some other bird. Louisiana has been known as the Pelican state at least since
1859.


pell (n.)

a parchment, mid-15c., earlier skin, hide (mid-14c.), from Anglo-French pell, Old French pel skin
(13c., Modern French peau), from Latin pellem, pellis skin, leather, parchment, hide (see film
(n.)).


pell-mell (adv.)

confusedly, 1570s, from Middle French p&ecirc;le-m&ecirc;le, from Old French pesle mesle (12c.),
apparently a jingling rhyme on the second element, which is from the stem of the verb mesler to mix,
mingle (see meddle). Phonetic French form pelly melly is attested in English from mid-15c.


pellagra (n.)

chronic disease caused by dietary deficiency and characterized by skin eruptions, 1811, a hybrid
formed from Latin pellis skin (see film (n.)) + Greek agra a catching, seizure, related to agrein to
take, seize. But OED suggests it might be originally Italian pelle agra rough skin. Related:
Pellagrous.


pellet (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French pelote small ball (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *pilotta, diminutive of Latin
pila ball, playing ball, the game of ball, perhaps originally ball of hair, from pilus hair (see
pile (n.3)).


pellet (v.)

to form into pellets, 1590s, from pellet (n.).


pellicle (n.)

1540s, from Middle French pellicle (Modern French pellicule), from Latin pellicula small or thin
skin, diminutive of pellis skin, leather, parchment, hide (see film (n.)). Related: Pellicular.


pellucid (adj.)

transparent, translucent, 1610s, from Latin pellucidus transparent, from pellucere shine through,
from per- through (see per) + lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related: Pellucidly; pellucidity.


Peloponnesus (n.)

peninsula of southern Greece, late 15c., from Latin, from Greek Peloponnesos, second element
apparently nesos island (see Chersonese); first element said to be named for Pelops, son of
Tantalus, who killed him and served him to the gods as food (they later restored him to life). The
proper name is probably from pellos dark + ops face, eye. But the association with the peninsula
name likely is folk etymology. Related: Peloponnesian.


peloton (n.)

1706, small body of soldiers, platoon, from French peleton, derivative of pelote ball, heap, platoon
(11c.); see platoon.


pelt (v.)

to strike (with something), c.1500, of unknown origin; perhaps from early 13c. pelten to strike,
variant of pilten to thrust, strike, from an unrecorded Old English *pyltan, from Medieval Latin
*pultiare, from Latin pultare to beat, knock, strike. Or from Old French peloter to strike with a
ball, from pelote ball (see pellet (n.)) [Klein]. Watkins says the source is Latin pellere to push,
drive, strike. Related: Pelted; pelting.


pelt (n.)

skin of a fur-bearing animal, early 15c., of uncertain origin, perhaps a contraction of pelet (late
13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French pelete fine skin, membrane, diminutive of pel skin, from Latin
pellis skin, hide (see film (n.)). Or perhaps the source of the English word is Anglo-French
pelterie, Old French peletrie fur skins, from Old French peletier furrier, from pel.


pelvic (adj.)

1830, irregularly formed from pelvis + -ic. OED prefers the better-formed French pelvien.


pelvis (n.)

1610s, basin-like cavity formed by the bones of the pelvic girdle, from Modern Latin, from Latin
pelvis basin, laver, Old Latin peluis basin, from PIE *pel- container (cognates: Sanskrit palavi
vessel, Greek pelex helmet, pelike goblet, bowl, Old Norse and Old English full cup).


pemmican (n.)

1791, from Cree (Algonquian) /pimihka:n/ from /pimihke:w/ he makes grease, from pimiy grease, fat.
Lean meat, dried, pounded and mixed with congealed fat and ground berries and formed into cakes used
on long journeys. Also used figuratively for extremely condensed thought or matter.


pen (n.3)

slang, prison, 1884, shortening of penitentiary; earlier use (1845) probably is a figurative
extension of pen (n.2).


pen (n.1)

writing implement, late 13c., from Old French pene quill pen; feather (12c.) and directly from Latin
penna a feather, plume, in plural a wing, in Late Latin, a pen for writing, from Old Latin petna,
pesna, from PIE *pet-na-, suffixed form of root *pet- to rush; to fly (see petition (n.)).    Latin
penna and pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also a pinnacle; battlement (see pin (n.)) are
treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but confused) Latin words by Tucker
and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)) and see the feather/wing
sense as secondary.    In later French, this word means only long feather of a bird, while the
equivalent of English plume is used for writing implement, the senses of the two words thus are
reversed from the situation in English. Pen-and-ink (adj.) is attested from 1670s. Pen name is
recorded from mid-19c.


pen (v.2)

to enclose in a pen, c.1200, from Old English *pennian, from the source of pen (n.2). Related:
Penned; penning.


pen (n.2)

enclosure for animals, Old English penn, penne, enclosure, pen, fold, of uncertain origin, perhaps
related to Old English pinn pin, peg (see pin (n.)) on notion of a bolted gate or else structure
made of pointed stakes.


pen (v.1)

late 15c., from pen (n.). Related: Penned; penning.


pen-

Brythonic for head; common in place names in Cornwall and Wales (such as Penzance, see also
Pendragon).


pen-pal (n.)

also pen pal, 1931, from pen (n.1) + pal (n.). gradually replacing earlier pen-friend (1919).


penal (adj.)

pertaining to punishment, mid-15c., from Old French peinal (12c., Modern French p&#233;nal) and
directly from Medieval Latin penalis, from Latin poenalis pertaining to punishment, from poena
punishment, from Greek poine blood-money, fine, penalty, punishment, from PIE *kwoina, from root
*kwei- to pay, atone, compensate (cognates: Greek time price, worth, honor, esteem, respect, tinein
to pay a price, punish, take vengeance; Sanskrit cinoti observes, notes; Avestan kaena punishment,
vengeance; Old Church Slavonic cena honor, price; Lithuanian kaina value, price).


penalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of penalize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Penalised; penalising.


penalize (v.)

1868, from penal + -ize. Related: Penalized; penalizing.


penalty (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French penalit&eacute; and directly from Medieval Latin poenalitatem
(nominative poenalitas), from Latin poenalis (see penal). The sporting sense is first recorded 1885.
Ice hockey penalty box attested by 1931.


penance (n.)

late 13c., religious discipline or self-mortification as a token of repentance and as atonement for
some sin, from Anglo-French penaunce, Old French peneance (12c.), from Latin p&aelig;nitentia (see
penitence). Transferred sense is recorded from c.1300.


penates (n.)

Roman household gods, 1510s, from Latin penates gods of the inside of the house, related to penatus
sanctuary of a temple (especially that of Vesta), cognate with penitus within (see penetrate).


pence (n.)

late 14c., contraction of penies, collective plural of penny. Spelling with -ce reflects the
voiceless pronunciation.


penchant (n.)

1670s, from French penchant, noun use of present participle of Old French pencher to incline, from
Vulgar Latin *pendicare, a frequentative formed from Latin pendere to hang (see pendant (n.)).


pencil (n.)

early 14c., an artist's fine brush of camel hair, from Old French pincel artist's paintbrush (13c.,
Modern French pinceau), from Latin penicillus painter's brush, hair-pencil, literally little tail,
diminutive of peniculus brush, itself a diminutive of penis tail (see penis). Small brushes formerly
were used for writing before modern lead or chalk pencils; meaning graphite writing implement
apparently evolved late 16c. Derogatory slang pencil-pusher office worker is from 1881; pencil neck
weak person first recorded 1973.


pencil (v.)

1530s, to mark or sketch with a pencil-brush, from pencil (n.). In reference to lead pencils from
1760s. Related: Penciled; penciling. To pencil (something) in arrange tentatively is attested from
1942.


pend (v.)

c.1500, to depend, to hang, from French pendre, from Late Latin pendere to hang (see pendant). In
some cases short for depend.


pendant (n.)

early 14c., loose, hanging part of anything, from Anglo-French pendaunt hanging (c.1300), Old French
pendant (13c.), noun use of present participle of pendre to hang, from Latin pendere to hang, from
PIE *(s)pend-, extended form of root *(s)pen- to pull, draw, stretch (see span (v.)). Meaning
dangling part of an earring is attested from 1550s. Nautical sense of tapering flag is recorded from
late 15c. In this sense presumably a corruption of pennon [OED].


pendency (n.)

1630s, from pendent + -cy.


pendent (adj.)

c.1600 respelling of Middle English pendaunt hanging, overhanging (late 14c., from Old French
pendant; see pendant) on model of its Latin original, pendentem.


pendentive (n.)

1727, from French pendentif (mid-16c.), from Latin pendentem (nominative pendens) hanging, present
participle of pendere to hang (see pendent (adj.)).


pending (prep.)

1640s, during, in the process of, preposition formed from root of French pendant during, literally
hanging, present participle of pendere to hang, to suspend (see pendant). Meaning patterned on a
secondary sense of Latin pendente not decided, literally hanging, in legal phrase pendente lite
while the suit is pending. Use of the present participle before nouns caused it to be regarded as a
preposition. As an adjective from 1797.


pendragon (n.)

Welsh warlord (mainly known now in Arthurian Uther Pendragon), late 15c., title of a chief leader in
war of ancient Britain or Wales, from pen head (see pen-) + dragon, which figured on the standard of
a cohort.


pendular (adj.)

1734, from French pendulaire, from pendule, from pendre (see pendant).


pendulous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin pendulus hanging down, figuratively doubtful, uncertain, hesitating, from pendere
to hang (see pendant). Related: Pendulously.


pendulum (n.)

1660, from Modern Latin pendulum (1643), noun use of neuter of Latin adjective pendulus hanging
down, from pendere to hang (see pendant). The Modern Latin word is perhaps a Latinization of Italian
pendolo.


Penelope

fem. proper name, name of the faithful wife in the Odyssey, from Greek Penelopeia, probably related
to pene thread on the bobbin, from penos web, cognate with Latin pannus cloth garment (see pane
(n.)). Used in English as the type of the virtuous wife (1580) as it was in Latin.


penetrable (adj.)

early 15c., penetrating, from Latin penetrabilis penetrable, vulnerable, from penetrare (see
penetrate). Meaning capable of being penetrated is attested from 1530s; figurative use by 1590s.
Related: Penetrability.


penetrate (v.)

1520s, from Latin penetratus, past participle of penetrare to put or get into, enter into, related
to penitus within, inmost, penus innermost part of a temple, store of food, penates household gods.
Related: Penetrated; penetrating.


penetrating (adj.)

touching the feelings intensely, 1630s, figurative present participle adjective from penetrate (v.).


penetration (n.)

c.1600, insight, shrewdness, from Latin penetrationem (nominative penetratio) a penetrating or
piercing, noun of action from past participle stem of penetrare (see penetrate). The sexual sense is
attested from 1610s.


penguin (n.)

1570s, originally used of the great auk of Newfoundland (now extinct), shift in meaning to the
Antarctic bird (which looks something like it, found by Drake in Magellan's Straits in 1578) is from
1580s. Of unknown origin, though often asserted to be from Welsh pen head (see pen-) + gwyn white
(see Gwendolyn), but Barnhart says the proposed formation is not proper Welsh. The great auk had a
large white patch between its bill and eye. The French and Breton versions of the word ultimately
are from English.


penholder (n.)

1815, from pen (n.1) + holder.


penicillin (n.)

1929, coined in English by Alexander Fleming (1881-1955), who first recognized its antibiotic
properties, from Modern Latin Penicillium notatum (1867), the name of the mould from which it was
first obtained, from Latin penicillus paintbrush (see pencil (n.)), in reference to the shape of the
mould cells.


peninsula (n.)

1530s, from Latin p&aelig;ninsula a peninsula, literally almost an island, from p&aelig;ne almost +
insula island (see isle). Earlier translated as demie island.


peninsular (adj.)

1610s, from peninsula + -ar.


penis (n.)

1670s, perhaps from French p&eacute;nis or directly from Latin penis penis, earlier tail, from PIE
*pes- penis (cognates: Sanskrit pasas-, Greek peos, posthe penis, probably also Old English
f&aelig;sl progeny, offspring, Old Norse f&ouml;sull, German Fasel young of animals, brood). The
proper plural is penes. The adjective is penial. In psychological writing, penis envy is attested
from 1924.


penitence (n.)

c.1200, from Old French penitence (11c.) and directly from Latin paenitentia repentance, noun of
condition from paenitentum (nominative paenitens) penitent, present participle of paenitere cause or
feel regret, probably originally is not enough, is unsatisfactory, from paene nearby, almost.


penitent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French p&eacute;nitent (14c.) and directly from Latin paenitentem (see
penitence). As a noun, late 14c., from the adjective.


penitential (adj.)

c.1500, from Medieval Latin penitentialis, from Latin paenitentia repentance (see penitence).


penitentiary (n.)

early 15c., place of punishment for offenses against the church, from Medieval Latin penitentiaria,
from fem. of penitentiarius (adj.) of penance, from Latin paenitentia penitence (see penitence).
Meaning house of correction (originally an asylum for prostitutes) is from 1806, short for
penitentiary house (1776). Slang shortening pen is attested from 1884.


penknife (n.)

early 15c., from pen (n.1) + knife (n.). So called because such small knives were used to sharpen
quills.


penman (n.)

1610s, copyist, clerk, scrivener (obsolete), from pen (n.1) + man (n.).


penmanship (n.)

1690s, from obsolete penman copyist, clerk, scrivener + -ship.


pennant (n.)

1610s, rope for hoisting, probably a blend of pendant in the nautical sense of suspended rope and
pennon. Use for flag on a warship first recorded 1690s; flag symbolizing a sports championship
(especially baseball) is from 1880; as a synonym for championship it was first used 1915.


penniless (adj.)

destitute, early 14c., penyles, from penny + -less.


pennon (n.)

long, narrow flag (often triangular or swallow-tailed), late 14c., from Old French penon feathers of
an arrow; streamer, flag, banner, from penne feather, from Latin penna feather (see pen (n.1)).


Pennsylvania

American colony, later U.S. state, 1681, literally Penn's Woods, a hybrid formed from the surname
Penn (Welsh, literally head) + Latin sylvania (see sylvan). Not named for William Penn, the
proprietor, but, on suggestion of Charles II, for Penn's late father, Admiral William Penn
(1621-1670), who had lent the king the money that was repaid to the son in the form of land for a
Quaker settlement in America. The story goes that the younger Penn wanted to call it New Wales, but
the king's secretary, a Welshman of orthodox religion, wouldn't hear of it. Pennsylvania Dutch is
attested from 1824.


Pennsylvanian (adj.)

1698, from Pennsylvania + -an. In reference to a geological system, attested from 1891. As a noun
meaning a person of Pennsylvania, by 1685.


penny (n.)

Old English pening, penig, Northumbrian penning penny, from Proto-Germanic *panninggaz (cognates:
Old Norse penningr, Swedish p&auml;nning, Danish penge, Old Frisian panning, Old Saxon pending,
Middle Dutch pennic, Dutch penning, Old High German pfenning, German Pfennig, not recorded in
Gothic, where skatts is used instead), of unknown origin.    Offa's reformed coinage on light, broad
flans is likely to have begun c.760-5 in London, with an awareness of developments in Francia and
East Anglia. ... The broad flan penny established by Offa remained the principal denomination, with
only minor changes, until the fourteenth century. [Anna Gannon, The Iconography of Early Anglo-Saxon
Coinage, Oxford, 2003]    The English coin was originally set at one-twelfth of a shilling and was
of silver, later copper, then bronze. There are two plural forms: pennies of individual coins, pence
collectively. In translations it rendered various foreign coins of small denomination, especially
Latin denarius, whence comes its abbreviation d.   As American English colloquial for cent, it is
recorded from 1889. Penny-a-liner writer for a journal or newspaper is attested from 1834. Penny
dreadful cheap and gory fiction dates from c.1870. Phrase penny-wise and pound-foolish is recorded
from c.1600. Penny-pincher miserly person is recorded from 1906 (as an adjective penny-pinching is
recorded from 1858, American English). Penny loafers attested from 1960.


penny-ante (adj.)

cheap, trivial, 1935; extended from use in reference to poker played for insignificant stakes
(1855), from penny + ante.


pennyfarthing (adj.)

also penny farthing, penny-farthing, ineffective, 1887, from penny + farthing, the two together
making but a small sum. The noun, in reference to the kind of bicycle with a small wheel in back and
a big one in front (so called from the notion of different size coins) is first recorded 1927.


pennyroyal (n.)

herb, 1520s, alteration by folk etymology of Anglo-French puliol real; for second element see royal;
first element ultimately from Latin puleium thyme, of unknown origin.


pennyweight (n.)

Old English penega gewiht, originally the weight of a silver penny; see penny + weight (n.).


pennyworth (n.)

Old English peningwur&eth;; see penny + worth (adj.). Figurative of small amount from mid-14c.


penology (n.)

study of punishment and crime prevention, 1838, coined apparently by Francis Lieber, corresponding
member of the Philadephia Society for Alleviating the Miseries of Public Prisons, from pen- as in
penitentiary (ultimately from Latin poena penalty, punishment; see penal) + -ology study of.
Related: Penologist; penological.


Pensacola

name of a Muskogean tribe, from Choctaw, literally hair-people, from pashi hair of the head + oklah
people.


pension (n.)

mid-14c., payment for services, especially reward, payment out of a benefice (early 14c., in Anglo-
Latin), from Old French pension payment, rent (13c.) and directly from Latin pensionem (nominative
pensio) a payment, installment, rent, from past participle stem of pendere pay, weigh (see pendant).
Meaning regular payment in consideration of past service first recorded 1520s. Meaning boarding
house, boarding school first attested 1640s, from French, and usually in reference to places in
France or elsewhere on the Continent.


pension (v.)

1640s, to live in a pension, from pension (n.) or else from French pensionner. Meaning to grant a
pension is from 1702. Related: Pensioned; pensioning.


pensioner (n.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French pensionner, from Old French pensionnier (mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin
pensionarius, from pension (see pension (n.)).


pensive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French pensif thoughtful, distracted, musing (11c.), from penser to think, from
Latin pensare weigh, consider, frequentative of pendere weigh (see pendant). Related: Pensively;
pensiveness.


pent (adj.)

kept in, confined, 1540s, variant of penned, past participle of pen (v.2). Pent-up (also pent up) is
from 1580s.


penta-

word-forming element meaning five, containing five, from Greek penta- (before a vowel pent-), comb.
form of pente five, related to Aeolian pempte (see five), with -a- by analogy of hepta-, ennea-,
deka-.


pentacle (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin pentaculum pentagram, a hybrid coined from Greek pente five (see five) +
Latin -culum, diminutive (or instrumental) suffix. OED notes other similar words: Italian had
pentacolo anything with five points, and French pentacle (16c.) was the name of something used in
necromancy, perhaps a five-branched candlestick; French had pentacol amulet worn around the neck
(14c.), from pend- to hang + a to + col neck. The same figure as a pentagram, except in magical
usage, where it has been extended to other symbols of power, including a six-point star. Related:
Pentacular.


pentad (n.)

1650s, from Greek pentas (genitive pentados) group of five (see five). Meaning period of five years
is from 1880; meaning period of five days is from 1906, originally in meteorology.


pentagon (n.)

plane figure with five angles and five sides, 1560s, from Middle French pentagone or directly from
Late Latin pentagonum pentagon, from Greek pentagonon, noun use of neuter of adjective pentagonos
five-angled, from pente five (see five) + gonia angle (see knee (n.)). The U.S. military
headquarters Pentagon was completed 1942, so called for its shape; used allusively for U.S. military
leadership from 1945. Related: Pentagonal.    In nature, pentagonal symmetry is rare in inanimate
forms. Packed soap bubbles seem to strive for it but never quite succeed, and there are no mineral
crystals with true pentagonal structures. But pentagonal geometry is basic to many living things,
from roses and forget-me-nots to sea urchins and starfish. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of
Typographic Style, 1992]


pentagram (n.)

five-pointed star, 1820, from Greek pentagrammon, noun use of neuter of adj. pentagrammos having
five lines, from pente five (see five) + gramma what is written (see grammar).


pentameter (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French pentametre, from Latin pentameter, from Greek pentametros (adj.) having
five measures, from pente five (see five) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)). As a noun from 1580s.


pentangle (n.)

c.1300; see penta- + angle (n.). In some early uses perhaps a corruption of pentacle. Related:
Pentangular.


Pentateuch

first five books of the Bible, c.1400, from Late Latin pentateuchus (Tertullian, c.207), from Greek
pentateukhos (c.160), originally an adjective (abstracted from phrase pentateukhos biblos), from
pente five (see five) + teukhos implement, vessel, gear (in Late Greek book, via notion of case for
scrolls), literally anything produced, related to teukhein to make ready, from PIE *dheugh- to
produce something of utility  (see doughty).


pentathlon (n.)

athletic contest of five events, 1852, from Greek pentathlon the contest of five exercises, from
pente five (see five) + athlon prize, contest, of uncertain origin. Earlier in English in Latin form
pentathlum (1706). The Greek version consisted of jumping, sprinting, discus and spear throwing, and
wrestling. The modern version (1912) consists of horseback riding, fencing, shooting, swimming, and
cross-country running.


Pentecost

Old English Pentecosten Christian festival on seventh Sunday after Easter, from Late Latin
pentecoste, from Greek pentekoste (hemera) fiftieth (day), fem. of pentekostos, from pentekonta
fifty, from pente five (see five). The Hellenic name for the Old Testament Feast of Weeks, a Jewish
harvest festival observed on 50th day of the Omer (see Lev. xxiii:16).


pentecostal

1660s, pertaining to the Pentecost, from Latin pentecostalis (Tertullian), from pentecoste (see
pentecost). With a capital P- and meaning Pentecostalist, in reference to Christian sect emphasizing
gifts of the Holy Spirit (Acts ii), it is attested from 1904 (noun and adjective).


penthouse (n.)

pendize, early 14c., from Anglo-French pentiz, a shortening of Old French apentis attached building,
appendage, from Medieval Latin appendicium, from Latin appendere to hang (see append). Modern
spelling is from c.1530, by folk etymology influence of Middle French pente slope, and English house
(the meaning at that time was attached building with a sloping roof or awning). Originally a simple
structure (Middle English homilies describe Jesus' birthplace in the manger as a penthouse); meaning
apartment or small house built on the roof of a skyscraper first recorded 1921, from which time
dates its association with luxury.


Pentothal

trademark name of an anaesthetic and hypnotic, 1935, refashioning of Thiopental, from pento-, in
reference to the methylbutyl five-carbon group + first two letters of thiobarbiturate + chemical
product suffix -ol.


penult (adj.)

last but one, 1530s, abbreviation of penultima. As a noun from 1570s.


penultima (n.)

1580s, from Latin penultima (syllaba), the next to the last syllable of a word or verse, from fem.
of Latin adjective penultimus next-to-last, from paene almost + ultimus final (see ultimate).


penultimate (adj.)

1670s, from penultima (n.) on model of proximate.


penumbra (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin penumbra partial shadow outside the complete shadow of an eclipse, coined
1604 by Kepler from Latin p&aelig;ne almost + umbra shadow (see umbrage). Related: Penumbral.


penurious (adj.)

1590s, from penury + -ous, or else from Medieval Latin penuriosus, from Latin penuria penury.
Originally poverty-stricken, in a state of penury; meaning stingy is first attested 1630s. Related:
Penuriously.


penury (n.)

c.1400, from Latin penuria want, need; scarcity, related to paene scarcely.


Penzance

place in Cornwall, Pensans (late 13c.), literally Holy Headland, from Cornish penn head + sans holy.


peon (n.)

unskilled worker, 1826, from Mexican Spanish peon agricultural laborer (especially a debtor held in
servitude by his creditor), from Spanish peon day laborer, also pedestrian, originally foot soldier,
from Medieval Latin pedonem foot soldier (see pawn (n.2)). The word entered British English earlier
(c.1600) in the sense native constable, soldier, or messenger in India, via Portuguese peao
pedestrian, foot soldier, day laborer.


peonage (n.)

1848, American English, from peon + -age.


peony (n.)

a 16c. merger of Middle English pyony (from Old English peonie) and Old North French pione (Modern
French pivoine), both from Late Latin peonia, from Latin p&aelig;onia, from Greek paionia (fem. of
paionios), perhaps from Paion, physician of the gods (or Apollo in this aspect), and so called for
the plant's healing qualities. The root, flowers, and seeds formerly were used in medicine.


people (n.)

late 13c., humans, persons in general, from Anglo-French people, Old French peupel people,
population, crowd; mankind, humanity, from Latin populus a people, nation; body of citizens; a
multitude, crowd, throng, of unknown origin, possibly from Etruscan. The Latin word also is the
source of Spanish pueblo, Italian popolo. In English, it displaced native folk.     Meaning body of
persons comprising a community first recorded late 13c. in Anglo-French; meaning common people,
masses (as distinguished from the nobility) first recorded c.1300 in Anglo-French. Meaning one's own
tribe, group, etc. is from late 14c. The word was adopted after c.1920 by Communist totalitarian
states to give a spurious sense of populism to their governments. Legal phrase The People vs., in
U.S. cases of prosecution under certain laws, dates from 1801. People of the Book those whose
religion entails adherence to a book of divine revelation (1834) translates Arabic Ahl al-Kitab.


people (v.)

late 15c. (intransitive), c.1500 (transitive), from people (n.), or else from Middle French peupler,
from Old French peuple. Related: Peopled; peopling.


Peoria

small city in Illinois, U.S., originally the name of a subdivision of the Miami/Illinois people
(1673), from native /peewaareewa/. Their own name is said to mean carriers. The place name also is
found in Oklahoma and Iowa, but it is the Illinois city that has been proverbially regarded as the
typical measure of U.S. cultural and intellectual standards at least since Ambrose Bierce (c.1890).
Also the butt of baseball player jokes (c.1920-40, when it was part of the St. Louis Cardinals farm
system) and popularized in the catchphrase It'll play in Peoria (often negative), meaning the
average American will approve, which was popular in the Nixon White House (1969-74) but seems to
have had a vaudeville origin. Personification in little old lady in Peoria is said to be from Harold
Ross of the New Yorker. Peoria's rivals as embodiment of U.S. small city values and standards
include Dubuque, Iowa; Hoboken and Hackensack, N.J.; Oakland (Gertrude Stein: When you get there,
there isn't any there there) and Burbank, Calif., and the entire state of North Dakota.


pep (n.)

vigor, energy, 1912, shortened form of pepper (n.), which was used in the figurative sense of
spirit, energy from at least 1847. Pep rally is attested from 1945; pep talk from 1926. To pep
(something) up is from 1925.


pepper (n.)

Old English pipor, from an early West Germanic borrowing of Latin piper pepper, from Greek piperi,
probably (via Persian) from Middle Indic pippari, from Sanskrit pippali long pepper. The Latin word
is the source of German Pfeffer, Italian pepe, French poivre, Old Church Slavonic pipru, Lithuanian
pipiras, Old Irish piobhar, Welsh pybyr, etc. Application to fruits of the capsicum family
(unrelated, originally native of tropical America) is 16c.


pepper (v.)

to sprinkle as with pepper, 1610s, from pepper (n.). Old English had gepipera. Meaning to pelt with
shot, etc. is from 1640s. Related: Peppered; peppering.


pepper-box (n.)

1540s, from pepper (n.) + box (n.1). Meaning hot-tempered person is from 1867.


pepper-pot (n.)

1838, from pepper (n.) + pot (n.1).


peppercorn (n.)

late Old English, from pepper (n.) + corn (n.1).


peppermint (n.)

1690s, from pepper (n.) + mint (n.1). As a type of candy drop by 1829.


pepperoni (n.)

beef and pork sausage seasoned with pepper, 1919, American English, from Italian peperone chilli,
from pepe (see pepper (n.)).


peppery (adj.)

1690s, from pepper (n.) + -y (2). Figurative use from 1826. Related: Pepperiness.


peppy (adj.)

full of pep, 1915, from pep + -y (2).


Pepsi-Cola

U.S. patent filed Sept. 23, 1902, by Caleb D. Bradham (1867-1934), pharmacist and drugstore owner of
New Bern, N.C., probably from pepsin; early Pepsi ads tout it as a digestive aid.


pepsin (n.)

also pepsine, fermin in gastric juice, used medicinally for cases of indigestion, 1844, coined in
German (Theodor Schwann, 1835) from Greek pepsis digestion, from stem pep- (see peptic) + -in (2).


peptic (adj.)

1650s, from Latin pepticus, from Greek peptikos able to digest, from peptos cooked, digested, verbal
adjective of peptein to cook (see cook (n.)).


peptide (n.)

1906, from German peptid; see peptone + -ide, probably indicating a derivative.


peptone (n.)

1860, from German Pepton, from Greek pepton, neuter of peptos cooked, digested (see peptic).


per (prep.)

1580s (earlier in various Latin and French phrases), from Latin per through, during, by means of, on
account of, as in, from PIE root *per- (1) Base of prepositions and preverbs with the basic meanings
of 'forward,' 'through,' and a wide range of extended senses such as 'in front of,' 'before,'
'early,' 'first,' 'chief,' 'toward,' 'against,' 'near,' 'at,' 'around' [Watkins]. Cognates: Sanskrit
pari- around, about, through, pura before, formerly; Avestan pairi- around, paro before; Old Persian
pariy; Hittite para- on, forth; Greek peri around, about, near, beyond, paros before, para from
beside, beyond, pro before; Latin pro before, for, on behalf of, instead of, porro forward, prae
before; Old English fore (prep.) before, in front of; (adv.) before, previously; German vor for; Old
Church Slavonic pra-dedu great-grandfather; Russian pere- through; Lithuanian per through; Old Irish
air- Gothic fair-, German ver-, Old English fer-, intensive prefixes.


per annum

Latin, literally by the year, from per (see per) + annum, accusative singular of annus year (see
annual).


per capita

Latin, literally by the head, from per (see per) + capita head (see capital).


per diem

Latin, literally by the day, from per (see per) + diem, accusative singular of dies day (see
diurnal). As a noun from 1809.


per se

Latin, literally by itself; translating Greek kath auto (Aristotle).


per stirpes

Latin, by families, by stocks; in legal use, for inheritances, etc., opposed to per capita.


per-

word-forming element meaning through, throughout; thoroughly; entirely, utterly, from Latin
preposition per (see per (prep.)).


peradventure (adv.)

1620s, from Middle English peraventure (mid-15c.), from per auenture (late 13c.), from Old French
par aventure (see adventure). Refashioned as though from Latin.


perambulate (v.)

1560s, from Latin perambulatus, past participle of perambulare to walk through, go through, ramble
through, from per- through (see per) + ambulare to walk (see amble). Related: Perambulated;
perambulating.


perambulation (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-Latin (c.1300) and Anglo-French perambulacion, from Medieval Latin
perambulationem (nominative perambulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
perambulare (see perambulate).


perambulator (n.)

1610s, one who perambulates, agent noun in Latin form from perambulate. Sense of baby carriage is
first recorded 1856; often colloquially shortened to pram.


percale (n.)

1620s, name of a fabric imported from the East; in modern use, 1840, from French percale, perhaps
ultimately from Persian pargalah a rag.


perceivable (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French percevable, from per&ccedil;oivre (see perceive). Related: Perceivably.


perceive (v.)

c.1300, via Anglo-French parceif, Old North French *perceivre (Old French per&ccedil;oivre)
perceive, notice, see; recognize, understand, from Latin percipere obtain, gather, seize entirely,
take possession of, also, figuratively, to grasp with the mind, learn, comprehend, literally to take
entirely, from per thoroughly (see per) + capere to grasp, take (see capable).    Replaced Old
English ongietan. Both the Latin senses were in Old French, though the primary sense of Modern
French percevoir is literal, to receive, collect (rents, taxes, etc.), while English uses the word
almost always in the metaphorical sense. Related: Perceived; perceiving.


percent

1560s, per cent, from Modern Latin per centum by the hundred (see per and hundred). Until early 20c.
often treated as an abbreviation and punctuated accordingly.


percentage (n.)

1789, from percent + -age. Sense of profit, advantage is from 1862.


percentile (n.)

1885, coined by English scientist Francis Galton (1822-1911) from percent + -ile.


percept (n.)

1837, from Latin perceptum (a thing) perceived, noun use of neuter past participle of percipere (see
perceive). Formed on model of concept.


perceptible (adj.)

early 15c., perceptive, from Late Latin perceptibilis perceptible, from Latin percept-, past
participle stem of percipere (see perceive). Meaning capable of being perceived is from c.1600.
Related: Perceptibly; perceptibility.


perception (n.)

late 14c., receiving, collection, from Latin perceptionem (nominative perceptio) perception,
apprehension, a taking, from percipere perceive (see perceive). First used in the more literal sense
of the Latin word; in secondary sense, the taking cognizance of, it is recorded in English from
1610s. Meaning intuitive or direct recognition of some innate quality is from 1827.


perceptive (adj.)

1650s, from Latin percept-, past participle stem of percipere (see perceive) + -ive. In reference to
intelligence from 1860. From mid-15c. as the name of a type of optical instrument. Related:
Perceptively; perceptiveness.


perceptual (adj.)

1852; see percept + -al (1). Related: Perceptually.


perch (n.1)

where a bird rests, late 13c., originally only a pole, rod, stick, stake, from Old French perche
unit of linear measurement (5.5 yards), also measuring rod, pole, bar used to measure this length
(13c.), from Latin pertica pole, long staff, measuring rod, related to Oscan perek pole, Umbrian
perkaf twigs, rods. Meaning a bar fixed horizontally for a hawk or tame bird to rest on is attested
from late 14c.; this led to general sense of any thing that any bird alights or rests on (late
15c.). Figurative sense of an elevated or secure position is recorded from 1520s. The land-measuring
rod sense also was in Middle English (c.1200), hence surviving meaning measure of land equal to a
square lineal perch (usually 160 to the acre), mid-15c.


perch (n.2)

spiny-finned freshwater fish, c.1300, from Old French perche, from Latin perca perch, from Greek
perke a perch, from PIE root *perk- speckled, spotted (cognates: Sanskrit prsnih speckled,
variegated; Greek perknos dark-colored, perkazein to become dark), typically in names of animals.


perch (v.)

to roost, late 14c., from Old French perchier to sit on a perch (of a bird), from perche (n.) (see
perch (n.1)). Related: Perched; perching.


perchance (adv.)

mid-14c., parchaunce, from Old French par cheance, literally by chance. With Latin per substituted
c.1400 for French cognate par.


Percheron (n.)

1875, from French Percheron, adjective formed from le Perche, region south of Normandy where horses
were bred that were strong, light, and fast.


percipience (n.)

c.1770, from percipient + -ence.


percipient (adj.)

1690s, from Latin percipientem, present participle of percipere (see perceive). Earlier in English
as a noun, one who perceives (1660s).


Percocet

by 1991, a North American brand name for oxycodone/acetaminophen.


percolate (v.)

1620s, a back-formation from percolation, or else from Latin percolatus, past participle of
percolare to strain through. Figurative sense by 1670s. Related: Percolated; percolating.


percolation (n.)

1610s, from Latin percolationem (nominative percolatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
percolare to strain through, filter, from per- through (see per) + colare to strain, from colum a
strainer (see colander).


percolator (n.)

1795, agent noun in Latin form from percolate. Slang meaning house party is recorded from 1946.


percussion (n.)

early 15c., a striking, a blow; internal injury, contusion, from Latin percussionem (nominative
percussio) a beating, striking; a beat as a measure of time, noun of action from past participle
stem of percutere to strike hard, beat, smite; strike through and through, from per- through (see
per) + quatere to strike, shake (see quash). Reference to musical instruments is first recorded
1776.


percussionist (n.)

player of a percussion instrument, 1921, from percussion + -ist.


percussive (adj.)

1735, from Latin percuss-, past participle stem of percutere (see percussion) + -ive.


percutaneous (adj.)

1862, from Latin per cutem through the skin (see cuticle) + -ous. Related: Percutaneously.


perdition (n.)

mid-14c., fact of being lost or destroyed, from Old French perdicion loss, calamity, perdition of
souls (11c.) and directly from Late Latin perditionem (nominative perditio) ruin, destruction, noun
of action from past participle stem of Latin perdere do away with, destroy; lose, throw away,
squander, from per- through (here perhaps with intensive or completive force, to destruction) + dare
to put (see date (n.1)). Special theological sense of condition of damnation, spiritual ruin, state
of souls in Hell (late 14c.) has gradually extinguished the general use of the word.


perdurable (adj.)

mid-13c. (implied in perdurably), from Old French pardurable eternal, everlasting, perpetual (12c.),
from Late Latin perdurabilis, from perdurare, from per-, intensive prefix, + durare to endure (see
endure).


pere

1610s, a French priest, from French p&egrave;re father, from Latin patrem (nominative pater); see
father (n.). Attached to a name, to distinguish father from son of the same name, from 1802.


peregrinate (v.)

1590s, from Latin peregrinatus, past participle of peregrinari to travel abroad, be alien,
figuratively to wander, roam, travel about, from peregrinus foreign (see peregrine).


peregrination (n.)

early 15c., from Old French peregrination pilgrimage, long absence (12c.) or directly from Latin
peregrinationem (nominative peregrinatio) a journey, a sojourn abroad, noun of action from past
participle stem of peregrinari to journey or travel abroad, figuratively to roam about, wander, from
peregrinus from foreign parts, foreigner, from peregre (adv.) abroad, properly from abroad, found
outside Roman territory, from per- (see per) + agri, locative of ager field, territory, land,
country (see acre).


peregrine (n.)

also peregrin, type of falcon, 1550s, short for peregrine falcon (late 14c.), from Old French
faulcon pelerin (mid-13c.), from Medieval Latin falco peregrinus, from Latin peregrinus coming from
foreign parts (see peregrination). Sense may have been a bird caught in transit, as opposed to one
taken from the nest. Peregrine as an adjective in English meaning not native, foreign is attested
from 1520s.


peremptory (adj.)

decisive, mid-15c., legal term, from Anglo-French peremptorie, from Middle French peremtoire, from
Latin peremptorius destructive, decisive, final, from peremptor destroyer, from perimpere destroy,
cut off, from per- away entirely, to destruction (see per) + emere to take (see exempt (adj.)). Of
persons or their words, certain, assured, brooking no debate, 1580s. Related: Peremptorily.


perennial (adj.)

1640s, evergreen, formed in English from Latin perennis lasting through the year (or years), from
per- through (see per) + annus year (see annual). Botanical sense of Remaining alive through a
number of years is attested from 1670s; figurative meaning of enduring, permanent is from 1750.
Related: Perennially. For vowel change, see biennial. The noun meaning a perennial plant is from
1763.


perestroika (n.)

1981, from Russian perestroika, literally rebuilding, reconstruction, reform (of Soviet society,
etc.), from pere- re- (from Old Russian pere- around, again, from Proto-Slavic *per-, from PIE *per-
(1) forward, through; see per) + stroika building, construction, from Old Russian stroji order, from
PIE *stroi-, from root *stere- to spread (see structure (n.)). First proposed at the 26th Party
Congress (1981); popularized in English 1985 during Mikhail Gorbachev's leadership of the U.S.S.R.


perfect (adj.)

early 15c. alteration of Middle English parfit (c.1300), from Old French parfit finished, completed,
ready (11c.), from Latin perfectus completed, excellent, accomplished, exquisite, past participle of
perficere accomplish, finish, complete, from per- completely (see per) + facere to perform (see
factitious). Often used in English as an intensive (perfect stranger, etc.).


perfect (v.)

to bring to full development, late 14c., parfiten, from perfect (adj.). Related: Perfected;
perfecting.


perfecta (n.)

1971, from American Spanish perfecta, shortened from quiniela perfecta perfect quiniela, a bet in
horseracing (see quinella).


perfection (n.)

early 13c., from Old French perfection perfection, completeness (12c.), from Latin perfectionem
(nominative perfectio) a finishing, compling, perfection, noun of action from past participle stem
of perficere (see perfect (adj.)).


perfectionist (n.)

1650s, from perfection + -ist. Originally theological, one who believes moral perfection may be
attained in earthly existence; sense of one satisfied only with the highest standards is from 1934.
Related: Perfectionism.


perfective (adj.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin perfectivus, from Latin perfect-, past participle stem of perficere (see
perfect (adj.)). Grammatical use is from 1844.


perfectly (adv.)

c.1300, from perfect + -ly (2).


perfervid (adj.)

1830, as if from Latin *perfervidus, from per- completely (see per) + fervidus (see fervid).
Related: Perfervidly.


perfidious (adj.)

1590s, from Latin perfidiosus treacherous, from perfidia (see perfidy). Related: Perfidiously;
perfidiousness.


perfidy (n.)

1590s, from Middle French perfidie (16c.), from Latin perfidia faithlessness, falsehood, treachery,
from perfidus faithless, from phrase per fidem decipere to deceive through trustingness, from per
through (see per) + fidem (nominative fides) faith (see faith).    [C]ombinations of wickedness
would overwhelm the world by the advantage which licentious principles afford, did not those who
have long practiced perfidy grow faithless to each other. [Samuel Johnson, Life of Waller]


perforate (v.)

late 15c. (implied in perforated), a back-formation from perforation or else from Latin perforatus,
past participle of perforare to bore through, pierce through. Related: Perforating.


perforation (n.)

early 15c., hole made through something; mid-15c., action of perforating, from Middle French
perforation or directly from Late Latin perforationem (nominative perforatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin perforare bore or pierce through, from per- through (see per) + forare
to pierce (see bore (v.1)).


perforce (adv.)

early 14c., par force, from Old French par force (12c.), literally by force (see force). With Latin
per substituted 17c. for French cognate par.


perform (v.)

c.1300, carry into effect, fulfill, discharge, via Anglo-French performer, altered (by influence of
Old French forme form) from Old French parfornir to do, carry out, finish, accomplish, from par-
completely (see per-) + fornir to provide (see furnish).    Theatrical/musical sense is from c.1600.
The verb was used with wider senses in Middle English than now, including to make, construct;
produce, bring about; also come true (of dreams), and to performen muche time was to live long.
Related: Performed; performing.


performance (n.)

late a5c., accomplishment (of something), from perform + -ance. Meaning a thing performed is from
1590s; that of action of performing a play, etc. is from 1610s; that of a public entertainment is
from 1709. Performance art is attested from 1971.


performative

1955, adjective and noun, coined by British philosopher of language J.L. Austin (1911-1960), from
perform + -ive.


performer (n.)

1580s, agent noun from perform (v.). Theatrical sense is from 1711.


perfume (n.)

1530s, fumes from a burning substance, from Middle French parfum (16c.), from parfumer to scent,
from Old Proven&ccedil;al perfumar or cognate words in dialectal Italian (perfumare) or Spanish
(perfumar), from Latin per- through (see per) + fumare to smoke (see fume (n.)). Meaning fluid
containing agreeable essences of flowers, etc., is attested from 1540s.


perfume (v.)

1530s, to fill with smoke or vapor, from perfume (n.) or from Middle French parfumer. Meaning to
impart a sweet scent to is from 1530s. Related: Perfumed; perfuming.


perfunctory (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin perfunctorius careless, negligent, literally like one who wishes to get
through a thing, from Latin perfungus, past participle of perfungi discharge, busy oneself, get
through, from per- through + fungi perform (see function (n.)). Related: Perfunctorily.


perfuse (v.)

1520s, from Latin perfusus, past participle of perfundere to pour over, besprinkle, from per- +
fundere (see found (v.2)).


perfusion (n.)

1570s, from Middle French perfusion and directly from Latin perfusionem (nominative perfusio) a
pouring over, noun of action from past participle stem of perfundere pour out, from per- throughout
(see per) + fundere pour (see found (v.2)).


pergola (n.)

latticework structure for climbing plants, 1670s, from Italian pergola, from Latin pergula school,
lecture room; projecting roof, vine arbor, of uncertain origin; perhaps from pergere to come
forward.


perhaps (adv.)

1520s, formed from Middle English per, par by, through (see per-) + plural of hap chance (see
happen), on model of peradventure, perchance, etc. which now have been superseded by this word.
Perhappons possibly, by chance is recorded from late 15c.


peri (n.)

1777, from Persian pari, from Avestan pairika. Race of superhuman female beings originally
represented as malevolent, later as angelic genii (compare sense evolution of English fairy, to
which it is not related).


peri-

word-forming element meaning around, about, enclosing, from Greek peri (prep.) around, about,
beyond, cognate with Sanskrit pari around, about, through, Latin per, from PIE *per- (1) forward,
through (see per).


perianth (n.)

envelope of a flower, 1706, from French p&eacute;rianthe, from Modern Latin perianthium (17c.),
literally that which is round the flower, from peri- (see peri-) + Greek anthos flower (see anther).


pericarditis (n.)

1799, from pericardium + -itis.


pericardium (n.)

early 15c., Latinized form of Greek perikardion (membrane) around the heart (Galen), from peri
(prep.) around, about (see peri-) + kardia heart (see heart). Related: Pericardiac.


Pericles

Athenian statesman (c.495-429 B.C.E.), from Greek Perikles, literally far-famed, from peri all
around (see peri-) + -kles fame (see Damocles). His leadership of Athens marks its intellectual and
material zenith. Related: Periclean.


pericope (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin pericope section of a book, from Greek perikope a section of a book,
literally a cutting all round, from peri- around (see peri-) + kope a cutting (see hatchet).


peridot (n.)

type of gemstone, mid-14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French peritot (early 13c., Modern
French p&eacute;ridot), of unknown origin.


perigee (n.)

point at which a celestial body is nearest the Earth, 1590s, from Modern Latin perigeum (15c.), from
Late Greek peregeion, used by Ptolemy as a noun, properly neuter of adjective perigeios near the
earth, from peri ges, from peri near (see peri-) + ges, genitive of ge earth  (see Gaia).


perihelion (n.)

point at which a celestial body is nearest the Sun, 1680s, coined in Modern Latin (perihelium) by
Kepler (1596) from Latinizations of Greek peri near (see peri-) + helios sun (see sol). Subsequently
re-Greeked.


peril (n.)

c.1200, from Old French peril danger, risk (10c.), from Latin periculum an attempt, trial,
experiment; risk, danger, with instrumentive suffix -culum and element also found in experiri to
try, cognate with Greek peria trial, attempt, experience, empeiros experienced, Old Irish aire
vigilance, Gothic ferja watcher, Old English f&aelig;r danger, fear (see fear (n.)).


perilous (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French perillos perilous, dangerous (Modern French p&eacute;rilleux) dangerous,
hazardous, from Latin periculosus dangerous, hazardous, from periculum a danger, attempt, risk (see
peril). Related: Perilously; perilousness.


perimeter (n.)

early 15c., line around a figure or surface, from Latin perimetros, from Greek perimetron
circumference, from peri-  around (see peri-) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)). Military sense of
boundary of a defended position is attested from 1943.


perinatal (adj.)

1952, from peri- + natal.


perineum (n.)

region of the body between the anus and the genital organs (jocularly called a taint), early 15c.,
from Medieval Latin perinaeon, Late Latin perineum, from Greek perinaion, perinaios, from peri- near
(see peri-) + inan to carry off by evacuation, of unknown origin.


period (n.)

early 15c., course or extent of time, from Middle French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin periodus recurring portion, cycle, from Latin periodus a complete sentence, also cycle of the
Greek games, from Greek periodos cycle, circuit, period of time, literally a going around, from
peri- around (see peri-) + hodos a going, way, journey (see cede).    Sense of repeated cycle of
events led to that of interval of time. Meaning dot marking end of a sentence first recorded c.1600,
from similar use in Medieval Latin (in late 16c. English it meant full pause at the end of a
sentence). Sense of menstruation dates from 1822. Educational sense of portion of time set apart for
a lesson is from 1876. Sporting sense attested from 1898. As an adjective from 1905; period piece
attested from 1911.


periodic (adj.)

1640s, from French p&eacute;riodique (14c.), from Latin periodicus, from periodus (see period).
Periodic table in chemistry (1889) is from notion of the arrangement, in which similar properties
recur at intervals in elements in the same area as you read down the rows of the table. This sense
of the word is attested from 1872 (periodic law).


periodical (adj.)

c.1600, from periodic + -al (1). As a noun meaning magazine published at regular intervals, attested
from 1798. Related: Periodically.


periodicity (n.)

1805, from French p&eacute;riodicit&eacute; (1796), from p&eacute;riodique, from Latin periodicus
(see periodic).


periodontal (adj.)

1848, literally around the tooth, from peri- + Greek odon (genitive odontos) tooth (see tooth).


periodontics (n.)

1948, from periodontia (1914; see periodontal) + -ics. Periodontic (adj.) is attested by 1889.


periodontist (n.)

1913; see periodontal + -ist.


periodontitis (n.)

1842; see periodontal + -itis.


periodontium (n.)

1828; see periodontal.


periorbital (adj.)

1838, from medical Latin periorbita, a hybrid from Greek peri (see peri-) + Latin orbita (see
orbit).


periosteum (n.)

1590s, from Modern Latin periosteum, Late Latin periosteon, from Greek periosteon, neuter of
periosteos round the bones, from peri- (see peri-) + osteon (see osseous).


peripatetic (n.)

c.1400, disciple of Aristotle, from Old French perypatetique (14c.), from Latin peripateticus
pertaining to the disciples or philosophy of Aristotle, from Greek peripatetikos given to walking
about (especially while teaching), from peripatein walk up and down, walk about, from peri- around
(see peri-) + patein to walk, tread (see find (v.)). Aristotle's custom was to teach while strolling
through the Lyceum in Athens. In English, the philosophical meaning is older than that of person who
wanders about (1610s).


peripatetic (adj.)

1560s in the philosophical sense, 1640s in the literal sense; see peripatetic (n.).


peripeteia (n.)

also peripetia, 1590s, from Greek peripeteia a turn right about; a sudden change (of fortune, in a
tragedy), from peri- around (see peri-) + stem of piptein to fall (see symptom).


peripheral (adj.)

1803, from periphery + -al (1). An earlier formation was peripherial (1670s). Related: Peripherally.
As a noun, peripherals, peripheral devices of a computer, is from 1966.


periphery (n.)

late 14c., atmosphere around the earth, from Old French periferie (Modern French
p&#233;riph&#233;rie), from Medieval Latin periferia, from Late Latin peripheria, from Greek
peripheria circumference, outer surface, line round a circular body, literally a carrying around,
from peripheres rounded, moving round, revolving, peripherein carry or move round, from peri- round
about (see peri-) + pherein to carry (see infer). Meaning outside boundary of a surface attested in
English from 1570s; general sense of boundary is from 1660s.


periphrasis (n.)

1530s, from Latin periphrasis circumlocution, from Greek periphrasis, from periphrazein speak in a
roundabout way, from peri- round about (see peri-) + phrazein to express (see phrase (n.)).


periphrastic (adj.)

1805, from French p&#233;riphrastique and directly from Greek periphrastikos, from periphrazein (see
periphrasis). Related: Periphrastical (1630s).


periscope (n.)

viewing apparatus on a submarine, 1899, formed in English from peri- around + -scope instrument for
viewing. Earlier (1865) a technical term in photography. Related: Periscopic.


perish (v.)

mid-13c., from periss- present participle stem of Old French perir perish, be lost, be shipwrecked
(12c.), from Latin perire to be lost, perish, literally to go through, from per- through,
completely, to destruction (see per) + ire to go (see ion). Related: Perished; perishing.


perishable (adj.)

late 15c., perysabyl, from Middle French p&#233;rissable, and later (in modern form), 1610s,
directly from perish + -able. As a noun, perishables, in reference to foodstuffs, is attested from
1895.


peristalsis (n.)

1859, Modern Latin peristalsis; see peristaltic.


peristaltic (adj.)

1650s, from Modern Latin, from Greek peristaltikos (Galen), literally contracting around, from peri
(see peri-) around, about + stalsis checking, constriction, related to stellein draw in, bring
together; set in order (see diastole).


peristyle (n.)

1610s, from French p&eacute;ristyle row of columns surrounding a building (mid-16c.), from Latin
peristylum, from Greek peristylon colonnade around a temple or court, noun use of neuter of
peristylos surrounded with a colonnade, from peri- around (see peri-) + stylos pillar (see stet).


peritoneum (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin peritonaeum, from Greek peritonaion abdominal membrane, literally part
stretched over, noun use of neuter of peritonaios stretched over, from peri- around (see peri-) +
teinein to stretch (see tenet). Related: Peritoneal.


peritonitis (n.)

1776, medical Latin, coined c.1750 by French pathologist Fran&#231;ois-Boissier de la Croix de
Sauvages (1706-1767) from Greek peritonos (from peritonaion; see peritoneum) + -itis.


periwig (n.)

1520s, perwyke, popular corruption of perruck, from Middle French perruque (see peruke).


periwinkle (n.1)

evergreen plant, c.1500, diminutive of parvink (12c.), from Old English perwince, from Late Latin
pervinca periwinkle (4c.), from Latin, perhaps from pervincire to entwine, bind, from per-
thoroughly (see per) + vincire to bind, fetter (see wind (v.1)).


periwinkle (n.2)

kind of sea snail, 1520s, apparently an alteration of Old English pinewincle (probably by influence
of Middle English parvink; see periwinkle (n.1)); from Old English pine-, which probably is from
Latin pina mussel, from Greek pine. The second element is wincel corner; spiral shell, from Proto-
Germanic *winkil-, from PIE root *weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).


perjure (v.)

mid-15c. swear falsely (implied in perjured; late 13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French parjurer to
break one's word, renege on a promise (11c.), from Latin periurare to swear falsely, break one's
oath (see perjury). Reflexive sense is from 18c.


perjury (n.)

late 14c., act of swearing to a statement known to be false, via Anglo-French perjurie (late 13c.)
and Old French parjur&#233;e perjury, false witness, both from Latin periurium a false oath, from
periurare swear falsely, from per- away, entirely (see per) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)).
Related: Perjurious.


perk (v.)

late 14c., to make oneself trim or smart, perhaps from Old North French perquer to perch (Modern
French percher; see perch (n.1)), on notion of a bird preening its plumage. Sense of raise oneself
briskly is first attested 1520s; perk up recover liveliness is from 1650s. Related: Perked; perking.


perk (n.)

1869, shortened and altered form of perquisite (q.v.); as a verb, 1934 as shortened and altered form
of percolate.


perky (adj.)

1820, from perk (v.) + -y (2). Of young women's breasts since at least 1937. Related: Perkily;
perkiness.


perm (n.)

1927, shortened form of permanent wave (1909). The verb is first recorded 1928.


permaculture (n.)

by 1978, from permanent + agriculture or culture.


permafrost (n.)

1943, coined in English by Russian-born U.S. geologist Siemon W. Muller (1900-1970) from perm(anent)
frost.


permanence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French permanence and directly from Medieval Latin permanentia (early 14c.),
from Latin permanens (see permanent). Related: Permanency.


permanent (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French permanent (14c.) or directly from Latin permanentem (nominative
permanens) remaining, present participle of permanere endure, hold out, continue, stay to the end,
from per- through  (see per) + manere stay (see mansion). As a noun meaning permanent wave, by 1909.
Of clothing, permanent press attested from 1964.


permanently (adv.)

late 15c., from permanent + -ly (2).


permeability (n.)

1733, from permeable + -ity, or else from French perm&#233;abilit&#233;.


permeable (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin permeabilis that can be passed through, passable, from Latin permeare to
pass through, go over, from per- through (see per) + meare to pass, from PIE root *mei- (1) to
change (see mutable). Related: Permeably.


permeant (adj.)

1640s, from Latin permeantem (nominative permeans), present participle of permeare to pass through
(see permeable).


permeate (v.)

1650s, from Latin permeatus, past participle of permeare to pass through (see permeable). Related:
Permeated; permeating.


permeation (n.)

1620s, noun of action from Latin permeare (see permeate).


Permian

1841, pertaining to the uppermost strata of the Paleozoic era, named by British geologist Sir
Roderick Impey Murchison (1792-1871) for the region of Perm in northwestern Russia, where rocks from
this epoch are found.


permissible (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French permissible (15c.) and directly from Medieval Latin permissibilis, from
permiss-, past participle stem of Latin permittere (see permit (v.)).


permission (n.)

early 15c., from Latin permissionem (nominative permissio), noun of action from past participle stem
of permittere (see permit (v.)).


permissive (adj.)

c.1600, allowing to pass through, from Old French permissif, from Latin permiss-, past participle
stem of permittere to let go, let pass, let loose (see permit (v.)). In sense of tolerant, liberal
it is first recorded 1956; by 1966 it had definite overtones of sexual freedom. Earlier it meant
permitted, allowed (early 15c.). Related: Permissively; permissiveness.


permit (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French permetre and directly from Latin permittere let pass, let go, let
loose; give up, hand over; let, allow, grant, permit, from per- through (see per) + mittere let go,
send (see mission). Related: Permitted; permitting.


permit (n.)

written statement of permission or license, 1714, from permit (v.).


permutate (v.)

1898 in modern use, change the order of, from Latin permutatus, past participle of permutare (see
permutation). Probably regarded by those who use it as a back-formation from permutation [OED].
Related: Permutated; permutating.


permutation (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French permutacion change, shift (14c.), from Latin permutationem (nominative
permutatio) a change, alteration, revolution, noun of action from past participle stem of permutare
change thoroughly, exchange, from per- thoroughly (see per) + mutare to change (see mutable).


permute (v.)

late 14c., to change one for another, from French permuter or directly from Latin permutare to
change thoroughly (see permutation). Mathematical sense from 1878.


pernicious (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French pernicios (13c., Modern French pernicieux) and directly from Latin
perniciosus destructive, from pernicies destruction, death, ruin, from per- completely (see per) +
necis violent death, murder, related to necare to kill, nocere to hurt, injure, harm, noxa harm,
injury (see noxious). Related: Perniciously; perniciousness.


pernickety (adj.)

1808 (pernicktie, in Jamieson), precise, fastidious, extended form of Scottish pernicky, of
uncertain origin, perhaps somehow from particular.


perorate (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from peroration, or else from Latin peroratus, past participle of perorare.
Related: Perorated; perorating.


peroration (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin perorationem (nominative peroratio) the ending of a speech or argument of a
case, from past participle stem of perorare argue a case to the end, bring a speech to a close, from
per- to the end (see per) + orare to speak, plead (see orator).


peroxide (n.)

1804, formed in English from per- large amount + oxide. Peroxide blonde is attested from 1918.


perp (n.)

American English police slang shortening of perpetrator (as in perp walk); by 1940s.


perpendicular (adj.)

late 15c., from adverb (late 14c.), from Old French perpendiculer, from Latin perpendicularis
vertical, as a plumb line, from perpendiculum plumb line, from perpendere balance carefully, from
per- thoroughly (see per) + pendere to weigh, to hang (see pendant). As a noun from 1570s. Related:
Perpendicularly; perpendicularity.


perpensity (n.)

attention, 1704, from Latin perpensus deliberate, past participle of perpendere balance carefully
(see perpendicular) + -ity. Noted as obsolete by late 19c.


perpetrate (v.)

1540s, from Latin perpetratus, past participle of perpetrare to perform, to accomplish, from per-
completely + patrare carry out, originally bring into existence, from pater father (see father
(n.)). Earlier in English was perpetren, mid-15c., from Old French perpetrer. Neither good nor bad
in Latin, first used in English in statutes, hence its sense of to perform criminally. Related:
Perpetrated; perpetrating.


perpetration (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin perpetrationem (nominative perpetratio) an accomplishing, performing, noun
of action from past participle stem of perpetrare to perform, accomplish (see perpetrate).


perpetrator (n.)

literally the one who did it (in English usually an evil act), 1560s, from Late Latin perpetrator,
agent noun of perpetrare to perform, to accomplish (see perpetrate). Fem. forms are perpetratress
(1811, of Nero's poisoner Locusta); perpetratrix (1862, in reference to Charlotte Corday).


perpetual (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French perpetuel without end (12c.) and directly from Latin perpetualis
universal, in Medieval Latin permanent, from perpetuus continuous, universal, from perpetis,
genitive of Old Latin perpes lasting, probably from per- through + root of petere to seek, go to,
aim at (see petition (n.)). Related: Perpetually. Perpetual motion is attested from 1590s.


perpetuate (v.)

1520s, a back-formation from perpetuation or else from Latin perpetuatus, past participle of
perpetuare to make perpetual, from perpetuus (see perpetual). Related: Perpetuated; Perpetuating.


perpetuation (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin perpetuationem (nominative perpetuatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of perpetuare (see perpetuate).


perpetuity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French perpetuit&eacute; permanence, duration (13c., Modern French
perp&eacute;tuit&eacute;) and directly from Latin perpetuitatem (nominative perpetuitas)
uninterrupted duration, continuity, continuous succession, from perpetuus (see perpetual).


perpetuous (adj.)

perpetual, 1610s, from Latin perpetuus continuous, unbroken, uninterrupted (see perpetual).


perplex (v.)

late 14c. as an adjective, perplexed, puzzled, bewildered, from Latin perplexus involved, confused,
intricate; but Latin had no corresponding verb *perplectere. The Latin compound would be per through
(see per) + plexus entangled, past participle of plectere to twine, braid, fold (see complex
(adj.)).    The form of the English adjective shifted to perplexed by late 15c., probably to conform
to other past participle adjectives. The verb is latest attested of the group, in 1590s, evidently a
back-formation from the adjective. Related: Perplexing, which well describes the history of the
word.


perplexed (adj.)

late 15c., past participle adjective; see perplex. A case of a past participle form attested
centuries before the verb (perplex isn't recorded until 17c.). Related: Perplexedly; perplexedness.


perplexity (n.)

c.1300, bewilderment, from Old French perplexite confusion, perplexity, from Late Latin
perplexitatem (nominative perplexitas), from Latin perplexus confused, involved, interwoven, from
per- completely + plexus entangled, past participle of plectere to twine (see complex (adj.)). From
1590s as something that causes perplexity.


perquisite (n.)

mid-15c., property acquired other than by inheritance, from Medieval Latin perquisitum thing gained,
profit, in classical Latin, thing sought after, noun use of neuter past participle of perquirere to
seek, ask for, from per- thoroughly (see per) + qu&aelig;rere to seek (see query (v.)). For Latin
vowel change, see acquisition. General meaning fee or profit on top of regular wages first recorded
1560s.


Perrier

proprietary name of a natural mineral water from southern France, first attested in English 1904.


Perry

surname attested from late 12c., literally dweller by the pear tree.


perse (adj.)

late 14c., blue, bluish-gray, later purplish-black, from Old French pers (dark) blue, livid; wan,
pale, from Late Latin persus, perhaps a back-formation from one of the early European forms of
Persia.


persea (n.)

sacred fruit-bearing tree of Egypt and Persia, c.1600, from Latin persea, from Greek persea. Used
from early 19c. of a genus of trees and shrubs in the West Indies.


persecute (v.)

mid-15c., to oppress for the holding of a belief or opinion, from Middle French pers&eacute;cuter
pursue, torment, open legal action (14c.), from Latin persecutus, past participle of persequi to
pursue (see persecution). Related: Persecuted; persecuting.


persecution (n.)

mid-14c., oppression for the holding of a belief or opinion, from Old French persecucion
persecution, damage, affliction, suffering (12c.) and directly from Latin persecutionem (nominative
persecutio), noun of action from past participle stem of persequi follow, pursue, hunt down; proceed
against, prosecute, start a legal action, from per- through (see per) + sequi follow (see sequel).
Psychological persecution complex is recorded from 1961; earlier persecution mania (1892).


persecutor (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French persecutour, Old French persecutor persecutor, enemy (12c., Modern
French pers&eacute;cuteur), from Latin persecutor, agent noun from persequi (see persecution).


Perseid (n.)

meteor from an annual shower that appears to radiate from the constellation Perseus, 1867, from
Modern Latin Perseides (plural), from Greek Perseis daughter of Perseus (see Perseus; also see -id).
The name might have been introduced in English via the writings of Italian astronomer Giovanni
Schiaparelli. Other recorded old names for them in English include August meteors and Tears of St.
Lawrence.


Persephone

wife of Hades, queen of the netherworld, identified with Kore, daughter of Zeus and Demeter, from
Greek Persephone (see person).


Persepolis

ancient capital of Persia, founded 6c. B.C.E. by Darius the Great; from Greek, literally city of the
Persians, from Perses Persians (see Persian) + -polis city (see polis). The modern Iranian name for
the place is Takht-e-jamshid, literally throne of Jamshid, a legendary king whose name was
substituted when Darius was forgotten.


Perseus

son of Zeus and DanaÃ«, slayer of Medusa, from Greek Perseus, of unknown origin.


perseverance (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French perseverance persistence, endurance (12c., Modern French
pers&eacute;v&eacute;rance) and directly from Latin perseverantia steadfastness, constancy, from
perseverantem (nominative perseverans), from perseverare (see persevere).


perseverant (adj.)

mid-14c. (implied in perseverantly), from Middle French pers&eacute;v&eacute;rant (12c.), present
participle of pers&eacute;v&eacute;rer (see persevere).


perseverate (v.)

1915, in psychology, a back-formation from perseveration. Related: Perseverating; perseverative.


perseveration (n.)

early 15c., duration, quality of persisting; will to persevere, from Old French perseveracion
persistence, stubbornness (13c.) and directly, from Latin perseverationem (nominative perseveratio),
noun of action from past participle stem of perseverare (see persevere). Psychological sense (1915)
is from German.


persevere (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French perseverer continue, persevere, endure and directly from Latin perseverare
continue steadfastly, persist, from persevereus very strict, earnest, from per- very (see per) +
severus strict (see severity). Related: Persevered; persevering.


Persia

from Latin Persia Persia, from Greek Persis, from Old Persian Parsa (cognate with Persian Fars,
Hebrew Paras, Arabic Faris).


Persian

c.1400, percynne (adj.), Old English Perse (n.), both from Latin *Persianus (the adjective via Old
French persien), from Persia Persia (see Persia). First record of Persian cat is from 1785.


persiflage (n.)

1757, from French persiflage, from persifler to banter (18c.), from Latin per- through (see per) +
French siffler to whistle, hiss, from collateral form of Latin sibilare to hiss, possibly of
imitative origin. Said to have been introduced in English by Chesterfield.


persimmon (n.)

1610s, from Powhatan (Algonquian) pasimenan fruit dried artificially, from pasimeneu he dries fruit,
containing proto-Algonquian */-min-/ fruit, berry.


Persis

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Persis, literally a Persian woman, related to Perses
Persian (see Persian).


persist (v.)

1530s, from Middle French persister (14c.), from Latin persistere abide, continue steadfastly, from
per- thoroughly (see per) + sistere come to stand, cause to stand still (see assist). Related:
Persisted; persisting.


persistence (n.)

1540s, from Middle French persistance, from persistant lasting, enduring, permanent, from Latin
persistentem (nominative persistens), present participle of persistere (see persist). Often spelled
persistance 16c. Related: Persistency.


persistent (adj.)

1723, from persistence or from Latin persistentem (nominative persistens), present participle of
persistere (see persist). Related: Persistently.


persnickety (adj.)

1889, alteration of pernickety (q.v.).


person (n.)

early 13c., from Old French persone human being, anyone, person (12c., Modern French personne) and
directly from Latin persona human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character,
originally mask, false face, such as those of wood or clay worn by the actors in later Roman
theater. OED offers the general 19c. explanation of persona as related to Latin personare to sound
through (i.e. the mask as something spoken through and perhaps amplifying the voice), but the long o
makes a difficulty .... Klein and Barnhart say it is possibly borrowed from Etruscan phersu mask.
Klein goes on to say this is ultimately of Greek origin and compares Persephone.    Of corporate
entities from mid-15c. The use of -person to replace -man in compounds and avoid alleged sexist
connotations is first recorded 1971 (in chairperson). In person by bodily presence is from 1560s.
Person-to-person first recorded 1919, originally of telephone calls.


persona (n.)

1917, outward or social personality, a Jungian psychology term, from Latin persona person (see
person). Used earlier (1909) by Ezra Pound in the sense literary character representing voice of the
author. Persona grata is Late Latin, literally an acceptable person, originally applied to
diplomatic representatives acceptable to the governments to which they were sent; hence also persona
non grata (plural person&aelig; non grat&aelig;).


personable (adj.)

pleasing in one's person, early 15c., from person + -able, or else from Middle French personable.
Related: Personably.


personage (n.)

mid-15c., body of a person (with regard to appearance), from Old French personage size, stature,
also a dignitary (13c.), from Medieval Latin personaticum (11c.), from persona (see person). Meaning
a person of high rank or distinction is attested from c.1500 in English; as a longer way to say
person, the word was in use from 1550s (but often slyly ironical, with suggestion that the subject
is overly self-important).


personal (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the self, from Old French personal (12c., Modern French personnel), from
Late Latin personalis pertaining to a person, from Latin persona (see person). Meaning aimed at some
particular person (usually in a hostile manner) first attested 1610s. The noun sense of newspaper
item about private matters is attested from 1888. As a classified ad addressed to an individual, it
is recorded from 1861. Personal computer is from 1976.


personality (n.)

late 14c., quality or fact of being a person, from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative
personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of a distinctive character is first
recorded 1795, from French personnalit&eacute;.Personality is the supreme realization of the innate
idiosyncrasy of a living being. It is an act of courage flung in the face of life, the absolute
affirmation of all that constitutes the individual, the most successful adaptation to the universal
conditions of existence, coupled with the greatest possible freedom of self-determination. [C.G.
Jung, 1875-1961]Meaning person whose character stands out from that of others is from 1889.
Personality cult is attested from 1956.


personalization (n.)

1849, from personalize + -ation.


personalize (v.)

1747, from personal + -ize. Related: Personalized; personalizing.


personally (adv.)

late 14c., from personal + -ly (2). Meaning as far as I'm concerned is from 1849.


personalty (n.)

legal term, late 15c., from Anglo-French personaltie, corresponding to Middle French personalite,
from Medieval Latin personalitas (see personality).


personhood (n.)

1878, from person + -hood.


personification (n.)

1755, noun of action from personify. Sense of embodiment of a quality in a person is attested from
1807.


personify (v.)

1727 to attribute personal form to things or abstractions (especially as an artistic or literary
technique), from person + -fy or from French personnifier (17c.), from personne. Meaning to
represent, embody attested from 1806. Related: Personified; personifying.


personnel (n.)

1837, from French personnel (a contrastive term to mat&eacute;riel), noun use of personnel (adj.)
personal, from Old French personel (see personal).


perspective (n.)

late 14c., science of optics, from Old French perspective and directly from Medieval Latin
perspectiva ars science of optics, from fem. of perspectivus of sight, optical from Latin perspectus
clearly perceived, past participle of perspicere inspect, look through, look closely at, from per-
through (see per) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Sense of art of drawing objects so as to give
appearance of distance or depth is first found 1590s, influenced by Italian prospettiva, an artists'
term. The figurative meaning mental outlook over time is first recorded 1762.


Perspex

1935, trade name in Britain for what in the U.S. is called Plexiglas or Lucite, irregularly formed
from Latin perspect-, past participle stem of perspicere look through, look closely at  (see
perspective).


perspicacious (adj.)

1630s, formed as an adjective to perspicacity, from Latin perspicax sharp-sighted, having the power
of seeing through; acute (see perspicacity). Related: Perspicaciously; perspicaciousness.


perspicacity (n.)

1540s, from Middle French perspicacit&eacute; (15c.) and directly from Late Latin perspicacitas
sharp-sightedness, discernment, from Latin perspicax sharp-sighted, having the power of seeing
through, from perspicere look through, look closely at (see perspective).


perspicuity (n.)

late 15c., of things; 1540s, of expressions, from Latin perspicuitas transparency, clearness, from
perspicuus, from perspicere look through, look closely at (see perspective).


perspicuous (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin perspicuus transparent, clear, evident, from perspicere look through, look
closely at (see perspective). Related: Perspicuously; perspicuousness.


perspiration (n.)

1610s, from French perspiration (1560s), noun of action from perspirer perspire, from Latin
perspirare blow or breathe constantly, from per- through (see per) + spirare to breathe, blow (see
spirit (n.)). Applied to excretion of invisible moistures through the skin (1620s), hence used as a
euphemism for sweat from 1725.


perspire (v.)

1640s, to evaporate through the pores, a back-formation from perspiration and in part from Latin
perspirare to breathe, to blow constantly (see perspiration). Meaning to sweat is a polite usage
attested from 1725. Medical men tried to maintain a distinction between sensible (sweat) and
insensible perspiration:  [I]t is sufficient for common use to observe, that perspiration is that
insensible discharge of vapour from the whole surface of the body and the lungs which is constantly
going on in a healthy state; that it is always natural and always salutary; that sweat, on the
contrary, is an evacuation, which never appears without some uncommon effort, or some disease to the
system, that it weakens and relaxes, and is so far from coinciding with perspiration, that it
obstructs and checks it. [Charles White, A Treatise on the Management of Pregnant and Lying-in
Women, London, 1791]  Related: Perspired; perspiring.


persuadable (adj.)

capable of being persuaded, 1737, from persuade + -able. Fowler recommends this over the older
adjective, persuasible (late 14c.), from Latin persuasibilis convincing, persuasive, from persuad-,
past participle stem of persuadere (see persuade). This originally meant having power to persuade,
but c.1500 it also acquired the meaning capable of being persuaded and the older sense became
obsolete.


persuade (v.)

1510s, from Middle French persuader (14c.), from Latin persuadere to bring over by talking, (see
persuasion). Related: Persuaded; persuading.


persuasion (n.)

late 14c., action of inducing (someone) to believe (something); argument to persuade, inducement,
from Old French persuasion (14c.) and directly from Latin persuasionem (nominative persuasio) a
convincing, persuading, noun of action from past participle stem of persuadere persuade, convince,
from per- thoroughly, strongly (see per) + suadere to urge, persuade, from PIE *swad- sweet,
pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). Meaning religious belief, creed is from 1620s.


persuasive (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French persuasif, from Medieval Latin persuasivus, from Latin persuas-, past
participle stem of persuadere persuade, convince (see persuasion). Related: Persuasively;
persuasiveness. Replaced earlier persuasible in this sense (see persuadable).


pert (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in pertly), evident, unconcealed, shortened form of Middle English apert open,
frank, from Old French apert, from Latin apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see overt).
Sense of saucy, bold first recorded late 14c. Less pejorative meaning lively, brisk, in good spirits
(c.1500) survives in U.S. dialectal peart (with Middle English alternative spelling). Related:
Pertness.


pertain (v.)

early 14c., from Old French partenir to belong to and directly from Latin pertinere to reach,
stretch; relate, have reference to; belong, be the right of; be applicable, from per- through (see
per) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Related: Pertained; pertaining.


pertinacious (adj.)

1620s, from pertinacy (late 14c.; see pertinacity) + -ous. Related: Pertinaciously.


pertinacity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French pertinacit&eacute; (early 15c.), from Old French pertinace obstinate,
stubborn, from Latin pertinacem (nominative pertinax) very firm, tenacious, steadfast, persevering,
from per- very (see per) + tenax (see tenacious). It drove out earlier pertinacy (late 14c.).


pertinence (n.)

1650s, from French pertenance or formed in English from pertinent + -ence.


pertinent (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French purtinaunt (late 13c.), Old French partenant (mid-13c.) and directly
from Latin pertinentem (nominative pertinens) pertaining, present participle of pertinere to relate,
concern (see pertain). Related: Pertinently.


perturb (v.)

late 14c., from Old French perturber disturb, confuse (14c.) and directly from Latin perturbare to
confuse, disorder, disturb, especially of states of the mind, from per- through (see per) + turbare
disturb, confuse, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). Related: Perturbed; perturbing.


perturbate (adj.)

1560s, from Latin perturbatus troubled, disturbed, agitated, past participle of perturbare (see
perturb).


perturbation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French perturbacion disturbance, confusion (14c.) and directly from Latin
perturbationem (nominative perturbatio) confusion, disorder, disturbance, noun of action from past
participle stem of perturbare (see perturb).


perturbed (adj.)

1510s, past participle adjective from perturb (v.).


pertussis (n.)

whooping cough, 1670s (Sydenham), from Modern Latin pertussis, from per- thoroughly + tussis cough,
of unknown origin.


Peru

from Spanish Peru, said to be from Quechua pelu river. Related: Peruvian.


peruke (n.)

1540s, natural head of hair, from Middle French perruque (late 15c.), from Italian perrucca head of
hair, wig, of uncertain origin; supposed by some to be connected to Latin pilus hair, but the
phonetic difficulties are considerable [OED]. Meaning artificial head of hair, periwig is attested
from 1560s.


perusal (n.)

c.1600, from peruse + -al (2).


peruse (v.)

late 15c., use up, wear out, go through, from Middle English per- completely (see per) + use (v.).
Meaning read carefully is first recorded 1530s, but this could be a separate formation. Meaning read
casually is from 19c. Related: Perused; perusing.


perv (n,)

also perve, 1944, slang shortening of (sexual) pervert (n.). As a slang verb, by 1941 as to act
erotically (intransitive), by 1959 as to eroticize something (transitive).


pervade (v.)

1650s, from Latin pervadere spread or go through, from per- through + vadere to go (see vamoose).
Related: Pervaded; pervading.


pervasive (adj.)

1750, from Latin pervas-, past participle stem of pervadere (see pervade) + -ive.


perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


perversion (n.)

late 14c., action of turning aside from truth, corruption, distortion (originally of religious
beliefs), from Latin perversionem (nominative perversio) a turning about, noun of action from past
participle stem of pervertere (see pervert (v.)). Psychological sense of disorder of sexual behavior
in which satisfaction is sought through channels other than those of normal heterosexual intercourse
is from 1892, originally including homosexuality.Perversions are defined as unnatural acts, acts
contrary to nature, bestial, abominable, and detestable. Such laws are interpretable only in
accordance with the ancient tradition of the English common law which ... is committed to the
doctrine that no sexual activity is justifiable unless its objective is procreation. [A.C. Kinsey,
et.al., Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, 1948]


perversity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French perversit&eacute; depravity, degeneracy (12c.), from Latin perversitatem
(nominative perversitas) forwardness, untowardness, from perversus (see perverse).


pervert (v.)

c.1300 (transitive), to turn someone aside from a right religious belief to a false or erroneous
one, from Old French pervertir pervert, undo, destroy (12c.) and directly from Latin pervertere
overthrow, overturn, figuratively to corrupt, subvert, abuse, literally turn the wrong way, turn
about, from per- away (see per) + vertere to turn (see versus).    Related: Perverted; perverting.
Replaced native froward, which embodies the same image. Old English had mishweorfed perverted,
inverted, an identical formation to the Latin word using native elements.


pervert (n.)

1660s, one who has forsaken a doctrine or system regarded as true, apostate, from pervert (v.).
Psychological sense of one who has a perversion of the sexual instinct is attested from 1897
(Havelock Ellis), originally especially of homosexuals.


perverted (adj.)

1660s, turned from the right way, past participle adjective from pervert (v.). With implied sexual
sense by 1897.


pervious (adj.)

penetrable, accessible, permeable, 1610s, from Latin pervius that may be passed through (see
impervious).


pesky (adj.)

1775, originally in New England dialect, perhaps a dialectal formation from pest (compare plaguy
confounded, annoying, disagreeable). Partridge suggests an origin in Essex dialect.


peso (n.)

Spanish coin, 1550s, from Spanish peso, literally a weight, from Latin pensum, properly past
participle of pendere to hang, to cause to hang (see pendant).


pessary (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin pessarium, from Greek pessarion medicated tampon of wool or lint, diminutive
of pessos pessary, earlier oval stone used in games, perhaps of Semitic origin.


pessimism (n.)

1794 worst condition possible, borrowed (by Coleridge) from French pessimisme, formed (on model of
French optimisme) from Latin pessimus worst, originally bottom-most, from PIE *ped-samo-,
superlative of root *pes- foot (see foot (n.)). As a name given to the doctrines of Schopenhauer,
Hartmann, etc., that this is the worst possible world, or that everything tends toward evil, it is
first recorded 1835, from German pessimismus (Schopenhauer, 1819). The attempt to make a verb of it
as pessimize (1862) did not succeed.


pessimist (n.)

1820, one who habitually expects the worst (Knowles' dictionary, 1835, defines it as A universal
complainer), from 19c. French pessimiste (see pessimism).


pessimistic (adj.)

1866, from pessimist + -ic.


pest (n.)

1550s (in imprecations, a pest upon ____, etc.), plague, pestilence, from Middle French peste
(1530s), from Latin pestis deadly contagious disease; a curse, bane, of uncertain origin. Meaning
noxious or troublesome person or thing first recorded c.1600.


pester (v.)

1520s, to clog, entangle, encumber, probably a shortening of Middle French empestrer place in an
embarrassing situation (Modern French emp&ecirc;trer, Walloon epasturer), from Vulgar Latin
*impastoriare to hobble (an animal), from Latin im- in + Medieval Latin pastoria (chorda) (rope) to
hobble an animal, from Latin pastoria, fem. of pastorius of a herdsman, from pastor herdsman (see
pastor (n.)). Sense of annoy, trouble (1560s) is from influence of pest. Related: Pestered;
pestering.


pesticide (n.)

1939, a hybrid coined from English pest + Latinate -cide.


pestiferous (adj.)

mid-15c., mischievous, pernicious, figurative use of Latin pestiferus that brings plague or
destruction, variant of pestifer bringing plague, destructive, noxious, from pestis plague (see
pest) + ferre carry (see infer). Related: Pestiferously; pestiferousness.


pestilence (n.)

c.1300, from Old French pestilence plague, epidemic (12c.) and directly from Latin pestilentia a
plague, an unwholesome atmosphere, noun of condition from pestilentem (nominative pestilens)
infected, unwholesome, noxious, from pestis deadly disease, plague (see pest).


pestilent (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin pestilentem (nominative pestilens), from pestilis of the nature of a plague,
from pestis deadly contagious disease (see pest (n.)). Related: Pestilently.


pestilential (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin pestilentialis, from Latin pestilentia plague (see pestilence).
Related: Pestilentially.


pestle (n.)

mid-14c. (as a surname late 13c.), from Old French pestel, from Latin pistillum pounder, pestle,
related to pinsere to pound, from PIE *pis-to-, suffixed form of root *peis- to crush (cognates:
Sanskrit pinasti pounds, crushes, pistah anything ground, meal, Greek ptissein to winnow, Old Church
Slavonic pi&#353;o, pichati to push, thrust, strike, pi&#353;enica wheat, Russian pseno millet).


pesto (n.)

olive oil-based pasta sauce, 1937, from Italian pesto, contracted form of pestato, past participle
of pestare to pound, to crush, in reference to the crushed herbs and garlic in it, from Latin root
of pestle.


pet (n.1)

tamed animal, originally in Scottish and northern England dialect (and exclusively so until mid-
18c.), of unknown origin. Sense of indulged child (c.1500) is recorded slightly earlier than that of
animal kept as a favorite (1530s), but the latter may be the primary meaning. Probably associated
with or influenced by petty. As a term of endearment by 1849. Teacher's pet is attested from 1890.
Pet-shop from 1928.    Know nature's children all divide her care;  The fur that warms a monarch
warm'd a bear.  While man exclaims, 'See all things for my use!'  'See man for mine!' replies a
pamper'd goose:     [Alexander Pope, Essay on Man]


pet (n.2)

peevishness, offense at feeling slighted, 1580s, in phrase take the pet take offense. Perhaps from
pet (n.1) on a similar notion to that in American English that gets my goat, but the underlying
notion is obscure, and the form of the original expression makes this doubtful. This word seems to
have been originally a southern English term, while pet (n.1) was northern and Scottish.


pet (v.)

1620s, treat as a pet, from pet (n.1). Sense of to stroke is first found 1818. Slang sense of kiss
and caress is from 1920 (implied in petting). Related: Petted.


pet peeve (n.)

thing that provokes one most, 1919, from pet (n.1) in the adjectival sense especially cherished
(1826), here in jocular or ironic use with peeve (n.).


PETA

acronym for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals; the groupâ&euro;&trade;s website says it
was founded in 1980.


petal (n.)

1726 (earlier petala, 1704), from Modern Latin petalum petal (17c.), from Greek petalon a leaf; leaf
of metal, thin plate, noun use of neuter of adj. petalos outspread, broad, flat, from PIE root
*pete- to spread out (see pace (n.)). Related: Petaline.


petard (n.)

1590s, small bomb used to blow in doors and breach walls, from French p&eacute;tard (late 16c.),
from Middle French p&eacute;ter break wind, from Old French pet a fart, from Latin peditum, noun use
of neuter past participle of pedere to break wind, from PIE root *pezd- to fart (see feisty).
Surviving in phrase hoist with one's own petard (or some variant) blown up with one's own bomb,
which is ultimately from Shakespeare (1605):For tis the sport to haue the enginer Hoist with his
owne petar (Hamlet III.iv.207).See hoist.


petcock (n.)

also pet-cock, 1864, from cock (n.2); the signification of the first element is uncertain.


Pete

familiar form of masc. proper name Peter. For Pete's sake is attested from 1903 in a list of
children's expressions published in Massachusetts, probably a euphemistic use of the disciple's name
in place of Christ; as an exclamation or quasi-oath, Peter! was in use 14c., but this likely is not
connected to the modern use.


petechia (n.)

plural petechiae, small crimson or purple spots on skin, c.1795 (from 1580s in English texts as an
Italian word), Modern Latin, from Italian petecchia specks or freckles on the face, in plural form
petecchie measles, of unknown origin. Related: Petechial.


Peter

masc. proper name, 12c., from Old English Petrus (genitive Pet(e)res, dative Pet(e)re), from Latin
Petrus, from Greek Petros, literally stone, rock, translation of Syriac kefa stone (Latinized as
Cephas), nickname Jesus gave to apostle Simon Bar-Jona (Matt. xvi:17), historically known as St.
Peter, and consequently a popular name among Christians (Italian Pietro, Spanish and Portuguese
Pedro, Old French Pierres, French Pierre, etc.). Slang for penis is attested from 1902, probably
from identity of first syllable.    The common form of this very common name in medieval England was
Peres (Anglo-French Piers), hence surnames Pierce, Pearson, etc. Among the diminutive forms were
Parkin and Perkin. To rob Peter to pay Paul (1510s, also in early 17c. French as descouvrir S.
Pierre pour couvrir S. Pol) might be a reference to the many churches dedicated to those two saints,
and have sprung from the fairly common practice of building or enriching one church with the ruins
or revenues of another. But the alliterative pairing of the two names is attested from c.1400 with
no obvious connection to the saints:    Sum medicyne is for peter &thorn;at is not good for poul,
for &thorn;e diuersite of complexioun. [Lanfranc's Chirurgia Magna, English translation]


peter (v.)

cease, stop, 1812, of uncertain origin. To peter out become exhausted, is 1846 as miners' slang.
Related: Petered; petering.


Peter Pan (n.)

name of boy-hero in J.M. Barrie's play Peter Pan, or The Boy Who Wouldn't Grow Up (1904). Used
allusively for an immature adult man from 1914 (by G.B. Shaw, in reference to the Kaiser).


Peter Principle

1968, in a hierarchy, every employee tends to rise to his level of incompetence, named for (and by)
Laurence Johnston Peter (1919-1990) Canadian-born U.S. educationalist and author, who described it
in his book of the same name (1969).


petiole (n.)

footstalk of a leaf, 1753, from French p&eacute;tiole (18c.), from Late Latin petiolus, misspelling
of peciolus stalk, stem, literally little foot, diminutive of pediculus foot stalk, itself a
diminutive of pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Given its modern sense by Linnaeus.


petit (adj.)

mid-14c., trifling, from Old French petit small, little, young, few in numbers (11c.), probably from
stem of Late Latin pitinnus small, of uncertain origin; it corresponds to no known Latin form and
perhaps is from a Celtic root pett- part, piece, bit also found in Italian pezza, English piece.
Attested as a surname from 1086. Replaced by petty in most usages, except in established forms such
as petit bourgeois conventional middle-class (1832; used in English by Charlotte Bront&#235; earlier
than by Marx or Engels); petit mal (1842, literally little evil, mild form of epilepsy), and petit
four (1884), which in French means little oven, from Old French four oven, from Latin furnus.


petit fours

see petit.


petite (adj.)

little, 1784 (from 1712 in French phrases taken into English), from French petite, fem. of petit
little (see petit). As a size in women's clothing, attested from 1929.


petition (n.)

early 14c., a supplication or prayer, especially to a deity, from Old French peticion request,
petition (12c., Modern French p&#233;tition) and directly from Latin petitionem (nominative petitio)
a blow, thrust, attack, aim; a seeking, searching, in law a claim, suit, noun of action from past
participle stem of petere to make for, go to; attack, assail; seek, strive after; ask for, beg,
beseech, request; fetch; derive; demand, require, from PIE root *pet-, also *pete- to rush; to fly
(cognates: Sanskrit pattram wing, feather, leaf, patara- flying, fleeting; Hittite pittar wing;
Greek piptein to fall, potamos rushing water, pteryx wing; Old English fe&eth;er feather; Latin
penna feather, wing; Old Church Slavonic pero feather; Old Welsh eterin bird). Meaning formal
written request to a superior (earthly) is attested from early 15c.


petition (v.)

c.1600, from petition (n.). Related: Petitioned; petitioning.


petitioner (n.)

early 15c., from petition (n.).


Petrarchan (adj.)

1827 (Keats uses Petrarchal, 1818), from Francesco Petrarch (Italian Petrarca) the poet (1304-1374).


petrel (n.)

seabird, 1670s, pitteral, modern spelling first recorded 1703 by English explorer William Dampier
(1651-1715), who wrote the bird was so called from its way of flying with its feet just skimming the
surface of the water, which recalls the apostle's walk on the sea of Galilee (Matt. xiv:28); if so,
it likely was formed in English as a diminutive of Peter (Late Latin Petrus). If this is folk
etymology, the true source of the name is undiscovered. French p&eacute;trel (1760) probably is from
English.


petri dish (n.)

1892, named for German bacteriologist Julius Petri (1852-1922), who first devised it c.1887.


petrifaction (n.)

early 15c., action or process of hardening, from petrify on model of satisfaction, etc.


petrification (n.)

1610s, from French petrification (16c.), Latinized noun of action from Middle French
p&eacute;trifier (see petrify). Etymologically better than the more common petrifaction.


petrified (adj.)

1660s, turned to stone, past participle adjective from petrify (v.). Figurative meaning paralyzed
(with fright, etc.) is from 1720.


petrify (v.)

1590s, from Middle French p&eacute;trifier to make or become stone (16c.), from Latin petra rock,
crag (see petrous) + -ficare, from facere to make, do (see factitious). Metaphoric sense of paralyze
with fear or shock first recorded 1771. Related: Petrified; petrifying.


petro- (1)

before vowels petr-, word-forming element used from 19c., from comb. form of Greek petros stone,
petra rock (see petrous).


petro- (2)

word-forming element used from mid-20c. to mean of or having to do with petroleum products, from
petroleum.


petrochemical (adj.)

1913, from petro- (1) + chemical (adj.). As a noun from 1942.


petrodollar (n.)

1974, surplus of petroleum exports over imports of all other goods, as a notational unit of currency
(in reference to OPEC nations), formed in English from petro- (2) + dollar.


petroglyph (n.)

1870, from French p&eacute;troglyphe, from Greek petra rock (see petrous) + glyphe carving (see
glyph).


petrol (n.)

gasoline, 1895, from French p&eacute;trol (1892); earlier used (1580s) in reference to the unrefined
substance, from Middle French petrole petroleum, from Old French (13c.), from Medieval Latin
petroleum (see petroleum).


petroleum (n.)

early 15c. petroleum, rock oil (mid-14c. in Anglo-French), from Medieval Latin petroleum, from Latin
petra rock (see petrous) + oleum oil (see oil (n.)).


petrology (n.)

1811 (erroneously as petralogy), from petro- (1) rock + -ology.


Petronilla

also Petronella, fem. proper name, a feminine diminutive of Latin Petronius. Also the name of a
saint much-invoked against fevers and regarded as a daughter of St. Peter. The name was accordingly
regarded to be a derivative of Peter and became one of the most popular of girls' names, the
vernacular Parnell being still used as a proper name as late as the 18th century in Cornwall
[Reaney].


petrous (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French petreux, from Latin petrosus stony, from petra rock, from Greek petra
rock, cliff, ledge, shelf of rock, rocky ridge, of uncertain origin. Possibly from PIE root *per- to
lead, pass over, if the original meaning is bedrock and the notion is what one comes through to
[Watkins].


petticoat (n.)

early 15c., pety coote, literally a small coat, from petty + coat (n.). Originally a padded coat
worn by men under armor, applied mid-15c. to a garment worn by women and young children. By 1590s,
the typical feminine garment, hence a symbol of female sex or character.Men declare that the
petticoatless female has unsexed herself and has left her modesty behind. [Godey's Magazine, April
1896]


pettifogger (n.)

1560s, from petty; the second element possibly from obsolete Dutch focker, from Flemish focken to
cheat, or from cognate Middle English fugger, from Fugger the renowned family of merchants and
financiers of 15c.-16c. Augsburg. In German, Flemish and Dutch, the name became a word for
monopolist, rich man, usurer.A 'petty Fugger' would mean one who on a small scale practices the
dishonourable devices for gain popularly attributed to great financiers; it seems possible that the
phrase 'petty fogger of the law,' applied in this sense to some notorious person, may have caught
the popular fancy. [OED first edition, in a rare burst of pure speculation]However, OED also calls
attention to pettifactor legal agent who undertakes small cases (1580s), which, though attested
slightly later, might be the source of this. Related: Pettifoggery.


pettifogging

1570s as a verbal noun; c.1600 as a past participle adjective; see pettifogger. A verb pettifog is
rare and attested only from 1640s.


petting (n.)

1873, fondling indulgence, verbal noun from pet (v.). Meaning amorous caressing, foreplay is from
1920 (in F. Scott Fitzgerald).


pettish (adj.)

1550s, impetuous, evidently from pet (n.2) in its ill humor sense + -ish. Meaning peevish, easily
annoyed is from 1590s.    It has naturally been assoc. with PET sb.1, as being a characteristic
habit of a pet or indulged and spoiled child; but the connexion of sense is not very clear or simple
.... [OED]  Related: Pettishly; pettishness.


petty (adj.)

late 14c., small, from phonemic spelling of Old French petit small (see petit). In English, not
originally disparaging (as still in petty cash, 1834; petty officer, 1570s). Meaning of small
importance is recorded from 1520s; that of small-minded is from 1580s. Related: Pettily; pettiness.
An old name for Northern Lights was petty dancers.


petulance (n.)

c.1600, insolence, immodesty, from French p&eacute;tulance (early 16c.), from Latin petulantia
sauciness, impudence, noun of quality from petulantem (see petulant). Meaning peevishness is
recorded from 1784, from influence of pettish, etc. It displaced earlier petulancy (1550s).


petulant (adj.)

1590s, immodest, wanton, saucy, from Middle French petulant (mid-14c.), from Latin petulantem
(nominative petulans) wanton, froward, saucy, insolent, present participle of petere to attack,
assail; strive after; ask for, beg, beseech (see petition (n.)). Meaning peevish, irritable first
recorded 1775, probably by influence of pet (n.2). Related: Petulantly.


petunia (n.)

1825, from Modern Latin Petunia (1789), from French petun (16c.), an obsolete word for tobacco
plant, from Portuguese petum, evidently from Guarani (Paraguay) pety. The petunia has a botanical
affinity to the tobacco plant. See tobacco.


pew (n.)

late 14c., raised, enclosed seat for certain worshippers (ladies, important men, etc.), from Old
French puie, puy balcony, elevation, from Latin podia, plural of podium elevated place, also balcony
in a Roman theater (see podium). Meaning fixed bench with a back, for a number of worshippers is
attested from 1630s.


pewee (n.)

flycatcher, lapwing, 1810, variant of pewit (q.v.). See also peewee.


pewit (n.)

lapwing (still the usual name for it in Scotland), 1520s, imitative of its cry (compare Flemish
piewit-voghel, Middle Low German kivit, German kiwitz; also see kibitz).


pewter (n.)

early 14c., any of various alloys having tin as their main constituent (the usual form is one part
lead to four parts tin), from Old French peautre (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *peltrum pewter (source
of Spanish peltre, Italian peltro), of uncertain origin. Related: Pewterer.


peyote (n.)

mescal cactus, 1849, from Mexican Spanish peyote, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) peyotl, said to mean
caterpillar; the cactus so called from the downy button on top.


Pez

Austrian candy product, in U.S. use by 1956, said to be from letters in German Pfefferminz
peppermint.


pH

1909, from German PH, introduced by S.P.L. S&ouml;rensen, from P, for German Potenz potency, power +
H, symbol for the hydrogen ion that determines acidity or alkalinity.


ph

now in English usually representing f, originally it was the combination used by Romans to represent
Greek letter phi (cognate with Sanskrit -bh-, Germanic -b-), which at first was an aspirated p,
later the same sound as German -pf-. But by 2c. B.C.E. had become a simple sound made by blowing
through the lips (bilabial spirant).    Roman f, like modern English f, was dentilabial; by c.400,
however, the sounds had become identical and in some Romanic languages (Italian, Spanish), -ph-
regularly was replaced by -f-. This tendency took hold in Old French and Middle English, but with
the revival of classical learning the words subsequently were altered back to -ph- (except fancy and
fantastic), and due to zealousness in this some non-Greek words in -f- began to appear confusedly in
-ph-, though these forms generally have not survived.


Ph.D

attested from 1869; abbreviation of Latin Philosophiae Doctor Doctor of Philosophy.


phaeton (n.)

type of light four-wheeled carriage, 1742, from French (1735), from Greek Phaethon name of the son
of Helios and Clymene, who tried to drive his father's sun-chariot but crashed after almost setting
fire to the whole earth. His name is literally shining, from phaein to shine, gleam, from phaos
light (see fantasy). Earlier as a name for a reckless driver (1590s).


phage (n.)

virus that destroys bacteria, 1917, an abbreviated form of bacteriophage.


phago-

word-forming element meaning eating, from Greek phago- eating, devouring, (see -phagous).


phagocyte (n.)

1884, from German phagocyten (plural), coined in German in 1884 by Dr. Elias Metchnikoff (1845-1916)
from Greek phago- eating, devouring (see -phagous) + -cyte (see cyto-). Related: Phagocytosis.


phalange (n.)

mid-15c., phalanx, ancient military division, from Middle French phalange phalanx (13c.), from Latin
phalangem (nominative phalanx); see phalanx. It is the earlier form of this word in English.


phalanstery (n.)

1846, from French phalanst&egrave;re, name for one of the socialistic communities of c.1,800 people,
living together as family, proposed as the basic unit of society in the system of French social
scientist Fran&ccedil;ois-Marie-Charles Fourier (1772-1837), coined by Fourier from phalange,
properly phalanx (see phalanx) + ending after monast&egrave;re monastery.


phalanx (n.)

1550s, line of battle in close ranks, from Latin phalanx compact body of heavily armed men in battle
array, or directly from Greek phalanx (genitive phalangos) line of battle, battle array, also finger
or toe bone, originally round piece of wood, trunk, log, of unknown origin. Perhaps from PIE root
*bhelg- plank, beam (source of Old English balca balk; see balk (n.)). The Macedonian phalanx
consisted of 50 close files of 16 men each. In anatomy, originally the whole row of finger joints,
which fit together like infantry in close order. Figurative sense of number of persons banded
together in a common cause is attested from 1600 (compare Spanish Falangist, member of a fascist
organization founded in 1933).


phallic (adj.)

pertaining to the phallus, 1789, from Greek phallikos, from phallos (see phallus). First record of
phallic symbol is from 1809.


phallocentric (adj.)

1927, from comb. form of phallus + -centric.


phallus (n.)

1610s, an image of the penis, from Latin phallus, from Greek phallos penis, also carving or image of
an erect penis (symbolizing the generative power in nature) used in the cult of Dionysus, from PIE
*bhel-no-, from root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (cognates: Old Norse boli bull, Old English
bulluc little bull, and possibly Greek phalle whale; see bole). Used of the penis itself (often in
symbolic context) from 1924, originally in jargon of psychoanalysis.


phanero-

before vowels phaner-, word-forming element meaning visible, manifest, from Greek phanero-, comb.
form of phaneros visible, manifest, from phainein to show (see phantasm).


phantasm (n.)

early 13c., fantesme, from Old French fantosme a dream, illusion, fantasy; apparition, ghost,
phantom (12c.), and directly from Latin phantasma an apparition, specter, from Greek phantasma
image, phantom, apparition; mere image, unreality, from phantazein to make visible, display, from
stem of phainein to bring to light, make appear; come to light, be seen, appear; explain, expound,
inform against; appear to be so, from PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (cognates: Sanskrit bhati shines,
glitters, Old Irish ban white, light, ray of light). Spelling conformed to Latin from 16c. (see ph).
A spelling variant of phantom, differentiated, but so that the differences are elusive [Fowler].


phantasma (n.)

1590s, from Latin phantasma (see phantasm).


phantasmagoria (n.)

1802, name of a magic lantern exhibition brought to London in 1802 by Parisian showman Paul de
Philipstal, the name an alteration of French phantasmagorie, said to have been coined 1801 by French
dramatist Louis-S&eacute;bastien Mercier as though to mean crowd of phantoms, from Greek phantasma
image, phantom, apparition (see phantasm) + second element probably a French form of Greek agora
assembly (but this may have been chosen more for the dramatic sound than any literal sense).
Transferred meaning shifting scene of many elements is attested from 1822. Related:
Phantasmagorical.


phantasmal (adj.)

1813, from phantasm + -al (1). Related: Phantasmally.


phantom (n.)

c.1300, fantum illusion, unreality, from Old French fantosme (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *fantauma,
from Latin phantasma an apparition (see phantasm). The ph- was restored in English late 16c. (see
ph). Meaning specter, spirit, ghost is attested from late 14c.; that of something having the form,
but not the substance, of a real thing is from 1707. As an adjective from early 15c.


pharaoh (n.)

title of the kings of ancient Egypt, Old English Pharon, from Latin Pharaonem, from Greek Pharao,
from Hebrew Par'oh, from Egyptian Pero', literally great house.


pharisaic (adj.)

1610s, from Church Latin pharisaicus, from Greek pharisaikos, from pharisaios (see Pharisee).
Related: Pharisaical (1530s).


Pharisee (n.)

from Old English Fariseos, Old French pharise (13c.), and directly from Late Latin Pharis&aelig;us,
from Greek Pharisaios, from Aramaic perishayya, emphatic plural of perish separated, separatist,
corresponding to Hebrew parush, from parash he separated. Ancient Jewish sect (2c. B.C.E.-1c. C.E.)
distinguished by strict observance but regarded as pretentious and self-righteous, at least by Jesus
(Matt. xxiii:27). Meaning self-righteous person, formalist, hypocrite is attested from 1580s.


pharmaceutical (adj.)

1640s (pharmaceutic in the same sense is from 1540s), from Late Latin pharmaceuticus of drugs, from
Greek pharmakeutikos, from pharmakeus preparer of drugs, poisoner (see pharmacy). Related:
Pharmaceuticals; pharmaceutically.


pharmacist (n.)

1811; see pharmacy + -ist. Replaced obsolete pharmacian (1720). The Latin word was pharmacopola, the
Greek pharmakopoles.


pharmacokinetics (n.)

1960, from pharmaco- + kinetic.


pharmacologist (n.)

1728, from pharmacology + -ist.


pharmacology (n.)

1721, formed in Modern Latin (1680s) from pharmaco- + -logy. Related: Pharmacological.


pharmacopeia (n.)

also pharmacopoeia, official book listing drugs and containing directions for their preparation,
1620s, from medical Latin, from Greek pharmakopoiia preparation of drugs, from pharmakon drug (see
pharmacy) + poiein to make (see poet). First used as a book title by Anutius Foesius (1528-1595) of
Basel. Related: Pharmacopeial.


pharmacy (n.)

late 14c., a medicine, from Old French farmacie a purgative (13c.), from Medieval Latin pharmacia,
from Greek pharmakeia use of drugs, medicines, potions, or spells; poisoning, witchcraft; remedy,
cure, from pharmakeus (fem. pharmakis) preparer of drugs, poisoner, sorcorer from pharmakon drug,
poison, philter, charm, spell, enchantment. Meaning use or administration of drugs is attested from
c.1400; that of place where drugs are prepared and dispensed is first recorded 1833. The ph- was
restored 16c. in French, 17c. in English (see ph).


Pharos (n.)

as a word for a lighthouse, 1550s, in reference to the island of Pharos off the coast of Alexandria,
on which Ptolemy Philadelphius built a mighty lighthouse.


pharyngeal (adj.)

pertaining to the pharynx, 1799, from Modern Latin pharyngeus, from pharynx (see pharynx) + -al (1).
Alternative pharyngal is attested from 1835, from Modern Latin pharyngem with -al (1) substituted.


pharyngitis (n.)

1824, from stem of pharynx + -itis.


pharynx (n.)

1690s, from Greek pharynx (genitive pharyngos) windpipe, throat, related to pharanx cleft, chasm.


phase (n.)

1705, phase of the moon, back-formed as a singular from Modern Latin phases, plural of phasis, from
Greek phasis appearance (of a star), phase (of the moon), from stem of phainein to show, to make
appear (see phantasm). Latin singular phasis was used in English from 1660. Non-lunar application is
first attested 1841. Meaning temporary difficult period (especially of adolescents) is attested from
1913.


phase (v.)

to synchronize, 1895, from phase (n.). Meaning to carry out gradually is from 1949, hence phase in
introduce gradually (1954), phase out (1954). Related: Phased; phasing.


phat (adj.)

hip-hop slang, great, excellent, 1992, originating perhaps in the late 1980s and meaning at first
sexiness in a woman. The word itself is presumably a variant of fat (q.v.) in one of its slang
senses, with the kind of off-beat spelling preferred in street slang (compare boyz). The spelling is
attested as far back as 1678, as an erroneous form of fat (a classical over-correction; see ph).
This spelling is said by some to be an acronym, and supposed originals are offered: pretty hot and
tasty, or pretty hips and thighs among them, all unconvincing. These, too may have been innovations
given as explanations to women who felt insulted by the word.


phatic (adj.)

1923, coined by Polish-born British anthropologist Bronis&#322;aw Malinowski (1884-1942) from Greek
phatos spoken, that may be spoken, from phanai to speak, say (see fame (n.)) + -ic.


pheasant (n.)

late 13c. (mid-12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French fesaunt, Old French faisan (13c.) pheasant,
from Latin phasianus, from Greek phasianos a pheasant, literally Phasian bird, from Phasis, river
flowing into the Black Sea in Colchis, where the birds were said to have been numerous. The ph- was
restored in English late 14c. (see ph). The excrescent -t is due to confusion with -ant suffix of
nouns formed from present participle of verbs in first Latin conjugation (peasant, tyrant, etc.).


pheme (n.)

words as grammatical units in a language, 1906, coined by U.S. philosopher Charles S. Pierce
(1839-1914), from Greek pheme (see fame (n.)).


phene

as an element in names of chemicals derived from benzene, from French ph&#232;ne, proposed 1836 by
French scientist Auguste Laurent as an alternative name for benzene because it had been found in
coal tar, a byproduct of the manufacture of illuminating gas, from Greek phainein to bring to light
(see phantasm). Related: Phenyl (radical which forms the basis of derivatives of benzene); pheno-
(comb. form).


phenetic (adj.)

coined 1960, from Greek phainein to appear (see phantasm) + -etic. Related: Phenetically.


pheno-

before vowels phen-, word-forming element in science meaning pertaining to or derived from benzene,
from phene.


phenobarbital (n.)

1919, from pheno- + barbital (see barbiturate).


phenol (n.)

carbolic acid, 1844, from pheno- + -ol. Discovered in coal tar in 1834; used as an antiseptic from
1867. Related: Phenolic.


phenology (n.)

study of the influence of climate on recurring natural phenomena, 1881, from German
(ph&#228;nologisch, Karl Fritsch, 1853) from Latin phaeno-, from Greek phaino-, from phainein to
show (see phantasm) + -logy. Related: Phenological (1875).


phenom (n.)

shortened form of phenomenon, U.S. baseball slang, first recorded 1890.


phenomena (n.)

plural of phenomenon. Sometimes also erroneously used as a singular.


phenomenal (adj.)

1803, of the nature of a phenomenon, a hybrid from phenomenon + -al (1). Meaning remarkable,
exceptional is from 1850.    [Phenomenal] is a metaphysical term with a use of its own. To divert it
from this proper use to a job for which it is not needed, by making it do duty for remarkable,
extraordinary, or prodigious, is a sin against the English language. [Fowler]    Related:
Phenomenally.


phenomenalism (n.)

1865 (John Grote), from phenomenal + -ism. Related: Phenomenalist.


phenomenology (n.)

1797, from German Ph&auml;nomenologie, used as the title of the fourth part of the Neues Organon of
German physicist Johann Heinrich Lambert (1728-1777), coined from Greek phainomenon (see phenomenon)
+ -logia (see -logy). Psychological sense, especially in Gestalt theory, is from 1930. Related:
Phenomenological.


phenomenon (n.)

1570s, fact, occurrence, from Late Latin ph&aelig;nomenon, from Greek phainomenon that which appears
or is seen, noun use of neuter present participle of phainesthai to appear, passive of phainein (see
phantasm). Meaning extraordinary occurrence first recorded 1771. Plural is phenomena.


phenotype (n.)

observable characteristics of an individual, 1911, from German phaenotypus (Wilhelm Johannsen,
1909); see pheno- + type (n.).  Related: Phenotypic.


phenyl (n.)

radical base of phenol, 1850, from French ph&#233;nyle; see pheno-.


pheromone (n.)

chemical released by an animal that causes a specific response when detected by another animal of
the same species, but the exact definition is much debated; 1959, coined (by Karlson &amp;
L&uuml;scher) from Greek pherein to carry (see infer) + ending as in hormone.


phew

vocalic gesture expressing weariness, etc., attested from c.1600.


phi

twenty-first letter of the Greek alphabet; see ph.


Phi Beta Kappa

undergraduate honorary society, 1776, from initials of Greek philosophia biou kybernetes philosophy,
guide of life.


phial (n.)

late 14c., from Old French fiole flask, phial (12c.), probably from Medieval Latin phiola, from
Latin phiala, from Greek phiale broad, flat drinking vessel, of unknown origin.


Philadelphia

city in Pennsylvania, U.S., from Greek, taken by William Penn to mean brotherly love, from philos
loving (see -phile) + adelphos brother (see Adelphia). Also the name recalls that of the ancient
city in Lydia, mentioned in the New Testament, which was so called in honor of Attalos II
Philadelphos, 2c B.C.E. king of Pergamon, who founded it. His title is said to have meant loving the
brethren. Philadelphia lawyer clever, shrewd attorney attested from 1788 in London, said originally
to have been applied to Andrew Hamilton, who obtained the famous acquittal of J.P. Zenger on libel
charges in 1735.    [C]ricket and coaching were after all popular in their day in places besides
Philadelphia. It was merely that Philadelphia kept on with them longer than most places. This is a
perennial Philadelphia trick, and gives to Philadelphia a sort of perpetual feeling of loss.
Philadelphians are always just now getting rid of things that are picturesque, like those gas lamps
on the streets, only because everybody else got rid of them long ago. [Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial
Philadelphians, 1963]


philander (v.)

1737, from the noun meaning a lover (1700), from Philander, popular name for a lover in stories,
drama, and poetry, from Greek adjective philandros with love for people, perhaps mistaken as meaning
a loving man, from phil- loving (see philo-) + andr-, stem of aner man (see anthropo-). Related:
Philandered; philandering.


philanderer (n.)

1816, agent noun from philander (v.).


philanthrope (n.)

1734, from Latin philanthropos, from Greek philanthropos loving mankind (see philanthropy).


philanthropic (adj.)

1789, from French philanthropique (18c.), from Greek philanthropikos (adj.), from philanthropia
humanity, benevolence, kindliness (see philanthropy). Related: Philanthropical; philanthropically
(1787).


philanthropist (n.)

1731, from philanthropy + -ist. Related: Philanthropism.


philanthropy (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin philanthropia, from Greek philanthropia kindliness, humanity, benevolence,
love to mankind (from gods, men, or things), from philanthropos (adj.) loving mankind, useful to
man, from phil- loving  (see philo-) + anthropos mankind (see anthropo-). Originally in English in
the Late Latin form; modern spelling attested from 1620s.


philately (n.)

stamp-collecting, 1865, from French philat&#233;lie, coined by French stamp collector Georges Herpin
(in Le Collectionneur de Timbres-poste, Nov. 15, 1864), from Greek phil- loving (see philo-) +
ateleia exemption from tax, the closest word Herpin could find in ancient Greek to the concept of
postage stamp (from a- without + telos tax; see toll (n.)). A reminder of the original function of
postage stamps, now often forgotten: the cost of letter-carrying formerly was paid by the recipient;
stamps indicated it had been pre-paid by the sender, thus the letters were carriage-free.    It is a
pity that for one of the most popular scientific pursuits one of the least popularly intelligible
names should have been found. [Fowler] Stampomania (1865) also was tried. Stamp-collecting is from
1862.  Related: Philatelic; philatelism; philatelist.


Philemon

masc. proper name, in Greek mythology a pious man, husband of Baucis; from Greek philemon, literally
loving, affectionate, from philein to love (see philo-).


philharmonic (adj.)

1813 (in the name of a society founded in London for the promotion of instrumental music), from
French philharmonique (1739), from Italian filarmonico, literally loving harmony, from Greek philos
loving (see philo-) + ta harmonika theory of harmony, music, from neuter plural of harmonikos (see
harmonic). The Society name was taken up in the names of many symphony orchestras.


philhellene (adj.)

1824, loving the Greeks, from Greek, from philos loving (see -phile) + Hellen Greek (see Hellenic).
Originally in English in reference to the cause of Greek independence. Related: Philhellenic.


Philip

masc. proper name, from Latin Philippus, from Greek Philippos fond of horses, from philos beloved,
loving (see philo-) + hippos horse (see equine). In 16c., Philip and Cheyney was a way to say any
two common men.


Philippa

fem. proper name, modern, fem. of Philip.


philippic (n.)

1590s, bitter invective discourse, from Middle French philippique, from Latin (orationes)
Philippic&aelig;, translation of Greek Philippikoi (logoi), the speeches made in Athens by
Demosthenes in 351-341 B.C.E. urging Greeks to unite and fight the rising power of Philip II of
Macedon. The Latin phrase was used of the speeches made by Cicero against Marc Antony in 44 and 43
B.C.E.


Philippines

from Spanish Islas Filipinas, literally the islands of Philip, named for Philip II, king of Spain.
Related: Philippine.


Philistine

Old Testament people of coastal Palestine who made war on the Israelites, early 14c., from Old
French Philistin, from Late Latin Philistinus, from Late Greek Philistinoi (plural), from Hebrew
P'lishtim, people of P'lesheth (Philistia); compare Akkad. Palastu, Egyptian Palusata; the word
probably is the people's name for itself.


philistine (n.)

person deficient in liberal culture, 1827, originally in Carlyle, popularized by him and Matthew
Arnold, from German Philister enemy of God's word, literally Philistine, inhabitants of a Biblical
land, neighbors (and enemies) of Israel (see Philistine). Popularized in German student slang
(supposedly first in Jena, late 17c.) as a contemptuous term for townies, and hence, by extension,
any uncultured person. Philistine had been used in a humorous figurative sense of the enemy in
English from c.1600.


Phillips

proper name of a cross-slot screw and corresponding screwdriver, 1935, named for its inventor, U.S.
businessman Henry F. Phillips (1890-1958) of Portland, Ore. It was designed for car makers, hence
the handyman's complaint that they are difficult to un-screw. Phillips lost the patent in 1949.


Philly

familiar or colloquial shortening of Philadelphia, attested by 1890, but from 1858 as the popular
name of a ferry boat of that name that crossed the Delaware River from the city to Camden, and a
city baseball team has been the Phillies since 1883.


philo-

before vowels phil-, word-forming element meaning loving, fond of, tending to, from Greek philo-,
comb. form of philos dear (adj.), friend (n.), from philein to love, of unknown origin. Productive
of a great many compounds in ancient Greek.


philodendron (n.)

1837, from the Modern Latin genus name (1830), from Greek philodendron, neuter of philodendros
loving trees, from philo- loving (see philo-) + dendron tree (see dendro-). The plant so called
because it clings to trees.


philologist (n.)

1640s, literary person; 1716, student of language, from philology + -ist.


philology (n.)

late 14c., love of learning, from Latin philologia love of learning, love of letters, love of study,
literary culture, from Greek philologia love of discussion, learning, and literature; studiousness,
from philo- loving (see philo-) + logos word, speech (see logos).    Meaning science of language is
first attested 1716 (philologue linguist is from 1590s; philologer linguistic scholar is from
1650s); this confusing secondary sense has not been popular in the U.S., where linguistics is
preferred. Related: Philological.


philomel (n.)

nightingale, late 14c., from Greek Philomela, poetic name of the nightingale, in mythology the
daughter of Pandion, transformed into a nightingale; probably literally lover of song, from philos
loving + melos a tune, song; but perhaps lover of apples (Greek mela). In the myth, proper name of
Pandion's daughter, who was turned into a nightingale (Ovid).


philophobia (n.)

by 1976, from philo- + -phobia.


philoprogenitive (adj.)

prolific, 1815, irregularly formed from philo- + Latin progenit-, past participle stem of progignere
(see progeny). Related: Philoprogenitiveness. Important words among the phrenologists.


philosophe (n.)

Enlightenment rationalist and skeptic, especially in reference to any of the French
Encyclop&aelig;dists, often disparaging (when used by believers), 1774, from French philosophe,
literally philosopher (see philosopher). Usually italicized in English, but nativized by Peter Gay
(The Enlightenment, 1966) and others. Also philosophist (1798).


philosopher (n.)

from Old English philosophe, from Latin philosophus philosopher, from Greek philosophos philosopher,
sage, one who speculates on the nature of things and truth, literally lover of wisdom, from philos
loving (see -phile) + sophos wise, a sage (see sophist). Modern form with -r appears early 14c.,
from an Anglo-French or Old French variant of philosophe, with an agent-noun ending.  Pythagoras was
the first who called himself philosophos, instead of sophos, 'wise man,' since this latter term was
suggestive of immodesty. [Klein] Philosophy also was used of alchemy in Middle Ages, hence
Philosophers' stone (late 14c., translating Medieval Latin lapis philosophorum, early 12c.), a
reputed solid substance supposed by alchemists to change baser metals into gold or silver; also
identified with the elixir and thus given the attribute of prolonging life indefinitely and curing
wounds and disease. (French pierre philosophale, German der Stein der Weisen).


philosophic (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French philosophique and directly from Late Latin philosophicus, from Greek
philosophikos, from philosophia philosophy (see philosophy).


philosophical (adj.)

late 14c.; see philosophy + -ical. Related: Philosophically.


philosophize (v.)

1590s, from philosophy + -ize. Related: Philosophized; philosophizing. The earlier verb was simply
philosophy (late 14c.).


philosophy (n.)

c.1300, knowledge, body of knowledge, from Old French filosofie philosophy, knowledge (12c., Modern
French philosophie) and directly from Latin philosophia and from Greek philosophia love of
knowledge, pursuit of wisdom; systematic investigation, from philo- loving (see philo-) + sophia
knowledge, wisdom, from sophis wise, learned; of unknown origin.Nec quicquam aliud est philosophia,
si interpretari velis, praeter studium sapientiae; sapientia autem est rerum divinarum et humanarum
causarumque quibus eae res continentur scientia. [Cicero, De Officiis]   <hr />   [Philosophical
problems] are, of course, not empirical problems; but they are solved through an insight into the
workings of our language, and that in such a way that these workings are recognized -- despite an
urge to misunderstand them. The problems are solved, not through the contribution of new knowledge,
rather through the arrangement of things long familiar. Philosophy is a struggle against the
bewitchment (Verhexung) of our understanding by the resources of our language. [Ludwig Wittgenstein,
Philosophical Investigations, 1953]  Meaning system a person forms for conduct of life is attested
from 1771.


philtre (n.)

also philter, love potion, 1580s, from Middle French philtre (1560s), from Latin philtrum (plural
philtra) love potion, from Greek philtron a love-charm, literally to make oneself beloved, from
philein to love (from philos loving; see philo-) + instrumental suffix -tron.


philtrum (n.)

dimple in the middle of the upper lip, 1703, medical Latin, from Greek philtron, literally love
charm (see philtre).


phimosis (n.)

1670s, from Greek phimosis, literally muzzling, from phimos a muzzle.


phishing (n.)

in the cyber scam sense, by 2000 (some sources cite usage from 1995); alteration of fishing (n.);
perhaps by influence of phreak and the U.S. rock band Phish, which had been performing since 1983.


phiz (n.)

1680s, jocular abbreviation of physiognomy; hence face, countenance, facial expression.


phlebitis (n.)

1820, medical Latin, from phlebo- vein + -itis inflammation.


phlebo-

word-forming element in medicine meaning vein, from Greek phlebo-, comb. form of phleps vein, of
uncertain origin.


phlebotomist (n.)

1650s, from phlebotomy + -ist. Related: Phlebotomize.


phlebotomy (n.)

bloodletting, c.1400, flebotomye, from Old French flebotomie (13c., Modern French phl&#233;botomie),
from medical Latin phlebotomia, from Greek phlebotomia blood-letting, from phlebotomos opening
veins, from phleps (genitive phlebos) vein + -tomia cutting of, from tome a cutting (see tome).


phlegm (n.)

late 14c., fleem viscid mucus (the stuff itself and also regarded as a bodily humor), from Old
French fleume (13c., Modern French flegme), from Late Latin phlegma, one of the four humors of the
body, from Greek phlegma humor caused by heat, lit inflammation, heat, from phlegein to burn,
related to phlox (genitive phlogos) flame, blaze, from PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, from root *bhel-
(1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Modern form is attested from c.1660. The cold, moist
humor of the body, in medieval physiology, it was believed to cause apathy.


phlegmatic (adj.)

cool, calm, self-possessed, and in a more pejorative sense, cold, dull, apathetic, 1570s, from
literal sense abounding in phlegm (as a bodily humor) (mid-14c., fleumatik), from Old French
fleumatique (13c., Modern French flegmatique), from Late Latin phlegmaticus, from Greek phlegmatikos
abounding in phlegm (see phlegm).A verry flewmatike man is in the body lustles, heuy and slow. [John
of Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


phlegmy (adj.)

1540s, from phlegm + -y (2).


phloem (n.)

1870, from German phlo&#235;m (1858), coined by German botanist Karl Wilhelm von N&#228;geli
(1817-1891) from Greek phloos, phloios bark of trees, of uncertain origin, + passive suffix -ema.


phlogiston (n.)

1730, hypothetical inflammatory principle, formerly believed to exist in all combustible matter,
from Modern Latin (1702), from Greek phlogiston (1610s in this sense), neuter of phlogistos burnt
up, inflammable, from phlogizein to set on fire, burn, from phlox (genitive phlogos) flame, blaze
(see bleach (v.)). Theory propounded by Stahl (1702), denied by Lavoisier (1775), defended by
Priestley but generally abandoned by 1800. Related: Phlogistic; phlogisticated.


phlox (n.)

1706, from Latin, where it was the name of a flower (Pliny), from Greek phlox kind of plant with
showy flowers (probably Silene vulgaris), literally flame, related to phlegein to burn (see bleach
(v.)). Applied to the North American flowering plant by German botanist Johann Jakob Dillenius
(1684-1747).


Phnom Penh

Cambodian capital, literally mountain of plenty, from Cambodian phnom mountain, hill + penh full.


phobia (n.)

irrational fear, horror, aversion, 1786, perhaps on model of similar use in French, abstracted from
compounds in -phobia, from Greek -phobia, from phobos fear, panic fear, terror, outward show of
fear; object of fear or terror, originally flight (still the only sense in Homer), but it became the
common word for fear via the notion of panic, fright (compare phobein put to flight, frighten), from
PIE root *bhegw- to run (cognates: Lithuanian begu to flee; Old Church Slavonic begu flight, bezati
to flee, run; Old Norse bekkr a stream). Psychological sense attested by 1895.


phobic (adj.)

1888, from phobia + -ic. As a noun from 1968. The Greek adjective was phobetikos liable to fear.


phobophobia (n.)

morbid dread of being alarmed, 1890; see phobia.


phoebe (n.)

small North American flycatcher, pewit, 1700, phebe, so called in imitation of its cry; spelling
altered (1839) by influence of the woman's proper name Phoebe.


Phoebe

fem. proper name, late 14c., originally a name of Artemis as the goddess of the moon, from Latin
Phoebe, from Greek phoibos bright, pure, of unknown origin. The fem. form of Phoebus, an epithet of
Apollo as sun-god.


Phoebus

epithet of Apollo as sun-god, late 14c., from Latin Phoebus, from Greek Phoibos, literally bright,
shining, radiant, of unknown origin. Related: Phoeban.


Phoenician (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French phenicien, from Latin Phoenice, from Greek Phoinike Phoenicia
(including Carthage), perhaps literally land of the purple (i.e., source of purple dye, the earliest
use of which was ascribed to the Phoenicians by the Greeks). Identical with phoenix (q.v.), but the
relationship is obscure. In reference to a language from 1836; as an adjective from c.1600.


phoenix (n.)

Old English and Old French fenix, from Medieval Latin phenix, from Latin phoenix, from Greek
phoinix, mythical bird of Arabia which flew to Egypt every 500 years to be reborn, also the date
(fruit and tree), also Phoenician, literally purple-red, perhaps a foreign word (Egyptian has been
suggested), or from phoinos blood-red. Exact relation and order of the senses in Greek is
unclear.&ETH;one wudu wearda&thorn; wundrum f&aelig;gerfugel fe&thorn;rum se is fenix hatan[Phoenix,
c.900]Spelling assimilated to Greek 16c. (see ph). Figurative sense of that which rises from the
ashes of what was destroyed is attested from 1590s. The city in Arizona, U.S., so called because it
was founded in 1867 on the site of an ancient Native American settlement.


phone (n.1)

1884, shortening of telephone (n.). Phone book first recorded 1925; phone booth 1927; phone bill
1901.


phone (v.)

1884, from phone (n.). Related: Phoned; phoning.


phone (n.2)

elementary sound of a spoken language, 1866, from Greek phone (see fame (n.)).


phoneme (n.)

distinctive sound or group of sounds, 1889, from French phon&#232;me, from Greek phonema a sound
made, voice, from phonein to sound or speak, from phone sound, voice, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak
(see fame (n.)).


phonemic (adj.)

1933, from phoneme + -ic. Related: Phonemics (1936); phonemically.


phonetic (adj.)

representing vocal sounds, 1803, from Modern Latin phoneticus (1797), from Greek phonetikos vocal,
from phonetos to be spoken, utterable, verbal adjective of phonein to speak clearly, utter, from
phone sound, voice (see fame (n.)).


phonetics (n.)

scientific study of speech, 1841, from phonetic; also see -ics.


phonic (adj.)

pertaining to sound, 1793, from Greek phone voice (see fame (n.)) + -ic.


phonics (n.)

1680s, science of sound, from Greek phone sound (see fame (n.)) + -ics. As a method of teaching
reading it is first attested 1908, though the system dates from 1844.


phono-

word-forming element meaning sound, voice, from Greek phono-, comb. form of phone voice, sound (see
fame (n.)).


phonogram (n.)

1845, a written symbol, from phono- + -gram. From 1879 as a sound recording.


phonograph (n.)

1835, character representing a sound, literally writer of sounds, from phono- sound + -graph
instrument for recording; something written. Meaning an instrument that produces sounds from records
(talking phonograph, invented by Thomas A. Edison) it is attested from 1877. The recording made from
it at first was called a phonogram (1879).


phonographic (adj.)

1840, originally in reference to shorthand; see phono- + graphic. Modern sense from 1878.


phonolite (n.)

a kind of volcanic rock that rings when struck, c.1830, literally sounding stone, from phono- +
-lite. Based on German klingstein.


phonological (adj.)

1818, from phonology + -ical. Related: Phonologically.


phonology (n.)

1799, from phono- + -logy.


phonophobia (n.)

1877, from phono- + -phobia.


phony (adj.)

also phoney, not genuine, 1899, perhaps an alteration of fawney gilt brass ring used by swindlers.
His most successful swindle was selling painted or phony diamonds. He had a plan of taking cheap
stones, and by doctoring them make them have a brilliant and high class appearance. His confederates
would then take the diamonds to other pawnbrokers and dispose of them. [The Jewelers Review, New
York, April 5, 1899]    The noun meaning phony person or thing is attested from 1902.


phooey

expression of contempt, 1929, from Yiddish, from German pfui (attested in English from 1866);
popularized by Walter Winchell. Phoo vocalic gesture expressing contemptuous rejection is recorded
from 1640s.


phoresis (n.)

see phoresy.


phoresy (n.)

1914, from French phor&eacute;sie (1896), from Greek phoresis being carried, from pherein to carry
(see infer).


phosphate (n.)

a salt of phosphoric acid, 1795, from French phosphate (1787), from phosphore (see phosphorus) +
-ate (3).


phosphor (n.)

morning star, 1630s, from Latin phosphorus the morning star (see phosphorus). Meaning anything
phosphorescent is from 1705.


phosphorescence (n.)

1796, from verb phosphoresce (1794; see phosphorescent) + -ence.


phosphorescent (adj.)

1766, from Modern Latin phosphorus (see phosphorus) + -escent. Related: Phosphorescently.


phosphoric (adj.)

1784, from French phosphorique, from  phosphore (see phosphorous). Related: Phosphorical (1753).


phosphorous (adj.)

1777, phosphorescent, from phosphorus + -ous. The chemical sense (1794) is immediately from French
phosphoreux.


phosphorus (n.)

substance or organism that shines of itself, 1640s, from Latin phosphorus light-bringing, also the
morning star (a sense attested in English from 1620), from Greek Phosphoros morning star, literally
torchbearer, from phos light, contraction of phaos light, daylight (related to phainein to show, to
bring to light; see phantasm) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer).    As the name of
a non-metallic chemical element, it is recorded from 1680, originally one among several substances
so called; the word used exclusively of the element from c.1750. It was discovered in 1669 by
Henning Brand, merchant and alchemist of Hamburg, who derived it from urine. Lavoisier demonstrated
it was an element in 1777. According to Flood, It is the first element whose discoverer is known.


photic (adj.)

1843, pertaining to light; 1899, pertaining to the parts of the ocean penetrated by sunlight, from
Greek phot-, comb. form of Greek phos light (related to phainein to show, to bring to light; see
phantasm) + -ic.


photo (n.)

1860, shortening of photograph. The verb is first recorded 1865, from the noun. Photo finish is
attested from 1936. Photo opportunity first recorded 1974.


photo-

word-forming element meaning light or photographic or photoelectric, from Greek photo-, comb. form
of phos (genitive photos) light, from PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (see phantasm).


photocopier (n.)

1934, agent noun from photocopy (v.).


photocopy (v.)

1924 in the sense of make a photographic reproduction, from photo- photographic + copy (v.). The
usual modern meaning arose 1942 with the advent of xerography. The noun is recorded from 1934.
Related: Photocopied; photocopying.


photogenic (adj.)

1839, produced or caused by light, from photo- light + -genic produced by (see genus). Originally in
photogenic drawing, the early term for photography; meaning photographing well is first attested
1928, from photo- as short for photograph.


photograph (n.)

1839, picture obtained by photography, coined by Sir John Herschel from photo- + -graph instrument
for recording; something written. It won out over other suggestions, such as photogene and
heliograph. Neo-Anglo-Saxonists prefer sunprint; and sun-picture (1846) was an early Englishing of
the word. The verb, as well as photography, are first found in a paper read before the Royal Society
on March 14, 1839. Related: Photographed; photographing.


photographer (n.)

1843, agent noun from photograph (v.). (Photographist also is attested from 1843).


photographic (adj.)

1839, from photograph + -ic. Photographic memory is from 1940. Related: Photographical;
photographically.


photography (n.)

1839, from photo- + -graphy. See photograph.


photoinduction (n.)

1947, from photo- + induction.


photojournalism (n.)

1944, from photo- + journalism. Related: Photojournalist.


photomontage (n.)

1931, from photo + montage.


photon (n.)

unit of electromagnetic radiation, 1926 in modern sense, from photo- light + -on unit.


photoperiodism (n.)

1920, from photoperiod (1920, from photo- + period) + -ism.


photophobia (n.)

1799, from photo- + -phobia. Related: Photophobic.


photoshop (v.)

to edit an image using a computer program, 1992, originally, and properly still, only in reference
to Photoshop, a bitmap graphics editor trademarked and published by Adobe, released in 1990. Like
Taser and Dumpster, it has a tendency to become generic, but if you use it that way in print their
lawyers will still send you The Letter. Related: Photoshopped; photoshopping.


photosphere (n.)

1660s, orb of light, from photo- + -sphere. Astronomical sense is from 1848.


photostat (n.)

1909, a type of copying machine (trademark Commercial Camera Company, Providence, R.I.) whose name
became a generic noun and verb (1914) for photocopy; from photo- + stat.


photosynthesis (n.)

1898, loan-translation of German Photosynthese, from photo- light (see photo-) + synthese synthesis
(see synthesis). Another early word for it was photosyntax.    [T]he body of the work has been
rendered into English with fidelity, the only change of moment being the substitution of the word
photosynthesis for that of assimilation. This change follows from a suggestion by Dr. Barnes, made a
year ago before the American Association at Madison, who clearly pointed out the need of a
distinctive term for the synthetical process in plants, brought about by protoplasm in the presence
of chlorophyll and light. He proposed the word photosyntax, which met with favor. In the discussion
Professor MacMillan suggested the word photosynthesis, as etymologically more satisfactory and
accurate, a claim which Dr. Barnes showed could not be maintained. The suggestion of Dr. Barnes not
only received tacit acceptance by the botanists of the association, but was practically approved by
the Madison Congress in the course of a discussion upon this point. [The Botanical Gazette, vol.
XIX, 1894]


photosynthesize (v.)

1910, from photosynthesis + -ize. Related: Photosynthesized; photosynthesizing.


phototropism (n.)

1899, from German phototropie (1892), from photo- + tropism.


photovoltaic (adj.)

1923, from photo- + voltaic. Related: Photovoltaics (see -ics).


phrasal (adj.)

1871, from phrase (v.) + -al (1). Related: Phrasally.


phrase (n.)

1520s, manner or style of expression, also group of words with some unity, from Late Latin phrasis
diction, from Greek phrasis speech, way of speaking, enunciation, phraseology, from phrazein to
express, tell, from phrazesthai to consider, from PIE *gwhren- to think (see frenetic). The musical
sense of short passage is from 1789.


phrase (v.)

to put into a phrase, 1560s; see phrase (n.). Related: Phrased; phrasing.


phraseology (n.)

1550s, coined erroneously in Greek as phraseologia (1550s), from Greek phrasis way of speaking (see
phrase (n.)) + -logia (see -logy). The correct form would be *phrasiology. Originally a phrase book,
meaning way of arranging words, characteristic style of expression is from 1660s.


phrasing (n.)

1610s, verbal noun from phrase (v.).


phreak (n.)

1972, originally in phone phreak, one of a set of technically creative people who electronically
hacked or defrauded telephone companies of the day.    The phreaks first appeared on the US scene in
the early 1960s, when a group of MIT students were found to have conducted a late night dialling
experiment on the Defense Department's secret network. They were rewarded with jobs when they
explained their system to Bell investigators. ... The name phone phreak identified the enthisiasts
with the common underground usage of freak as someone who was cool and used drugs. [New Scientist,
Dec. 13, 1973]    The ph- in phone may have suggested the alteration, and this seems to be the
original of the 1990s slang fad for substituting ph- for f- (as in phat).


phrenetic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French frenetike mad, crazy (13c.), from Latin phreneticus, from Greek phren
diaphragm, heart, mind (see phreno-). A doublet of frantic.


phrenic (adj.)

pertaining to the diaphragm, 1704, from Modern Latin phrenicus, from Greek phren diaphragm, mind
(see phreno-) + -ic.


phreno-

before vowels phren-, word-forming element meaning mind, also diaphragm, from Greek phreno-, comb.
form of phrene properly diaphragm, muscle which parts the abdomen from the thorax; in Homer extended
to parts around the heart, breast, hence heart (as a seat of passions), mind, seat of thoughts,
wits, senses, of unknown origin.


phrenology (n.)

1815, literally mental science, from phreno- + -logy study of. Applied to the theory of mental
faculties originated by Gall and Spurzheim that led to the 1840s mania for reading personality clues
in the shape of one's skull and the bumps of the head. Related: Phrenological; phrenologist.


Phrygian

late 15c., native of Phrygia, region in ancient Asia Minor; Phrygian mode in ancient Greek music
theory was held to be of a warlike character. Phrygian cap (1796) was the type adopted by freed
slaves in Roman times, and subsequently identified as the cap of Liberty.


phthisic (adj.)

late 14c., tysyk of or pertaining to a wasting disease, from Old French tisike, phtisique
consumptive (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *phthisicus, from Greek phthisikos consumptive, from phthisis
wasting, consumption (see phthisis). Earlier in English as a noun meaning wasting disease of the
lungs (mid-14c.). Related: Phthisical.    The old pronunciation dropped the ph-, but this will
probably recover its sound now that everyone can read.


phthisis (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin phthisis consumption, from Greek phthisis wasting, consumption; perishing,
decay; waxing, from phthiein to decay, waste away, from PIE root *dhgwhei- to perish, die away
(cognates: Sanskrit ksitih destruction, ksinati perishes).


phyco-

word-forming element in science meaning seaweed, algae, from Latinized comb. form of Greek phykos
seaweed, sea wrack.


phycology (n.)

study of seaweeds, 1847, from phyco- + -logy. Related: Phycological; phycologist.


phylactery (n.)

late 14c., small leathern box containing four Old Testament texts, from Old French filatiere (12c.)
and directly from Medieval Latin philaterium, from Late Latin phylacterium reliquary, from Greek
phylacterion safeguard, amulet, noun use of neuter of adjective phylakterios serving as a
protection, from phylakter watcher, guard, from phylassein to guard or ward off, from phylax
(genitive phylakos) guard, of unknown origin. Sometimes worn on the forehead, based on a literal
reading of scripture:Ye shall bind them [my words] for a sign upon your hands, and they shall be for
frontlets between your eyes. [Deut. xi:18]


phyletic (adj.)

racial, pertaining to race, 1873, probably coined in German from Greek phyletikos of one's tribe,
from phyletes fellow tribesman, from phyle (see phylo-).


Phyllis

fem. proper name, generic proper name for a comely rustic maiden in pastoral poetry (1630s), from
Latin Phyllis, a girl's name in Virgil, Horace, etc., from Greek Phyllis, female name, literally
foliage of a tree, from phyllon leaf, from PIE *bholyo- leaf, from root *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). In English, often spelled
Phillis, probably from influence of phil- loving. Her sweetheart usually was Philander.


phyllo-

before vowels phyll-, word-forming element meaning leaf, from Greek phyllo-, comb. form of phyllon
leaf (see folio).


phyllophagous (adj.)

leaf-eating, 1819, from phyllo- + -phagous.


phylo-

before vowels phyl-, word-forming element from comb. form of Greek phylon, phyle a tribe, also a
political subdivision in ancient Athens, from base of phyein to bring forth, produce, make to grow,
whence also physis nature (see physic).


phylogenesis (n.)

1870, coined in German by Haeckel, from phylo- + genesis.


phylogeny (n.)

genesis and evolution of a phylum, 1869, from German Phylogenie, coined 1866 by German biologist
Ernst Heinrich Haeckel (1834-1919) from Greek phylon race (see phylo-) + -geneia origin, from -genes
born (see genus). Related: Phylogenic.


phylum (n.)

division of the plant or animal kingdom, 1868, Modern Latin, coined by French naturalist Georges
L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832) from Greek
phylon race, stock, related to phyle tribe, clan (see physic). The immediate source of the English
word probably is from German.


physic (n.)

c.1300, fysike, art of healing, medical science, also natural science (c.1300), from Old French
fisike natural science, art of healing (12c.) and directly from Latin physica (fem. singular of
physicus) study of nature, from Greek physike (episteme) (knowledge) of nature, from fem. of
physikos pertaining to nature, from physis nature, from phyein to bring forth, produce, make to grow
(related to phyton growth, plant, phyle tribe, race, phyma a growth, tumor) from PIE root *bheue- to
be exist, grow (see be). Spelling with ph- attested from late 14c. (see ph). As a noun, medicine
that acts as a laxative, 1610s. The verb meaning to dose with medicine is attested from late 14c.


physical (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to material nature (in medicine, opposed to surgical), from Medieval
Latin physicalis of nature, natural, from Latin physica study of nature (see physic). Meaning
pertaining to matter is from 1590s; meaning having to do with the body, corporeal is attested from
1780. Meaning characterized by bodily attributes or activities is attested from 1970. Physical
education first recorded 1838; abbreviated form phys ed is from 1955. Physical therapy is from 1922.
Related: Physically.


physical (n.)

a physical examination, by 1934, from physical (adj.).


physicality (n.)

1590s, from physical + -ity.


physician (n.)

early 13c., fisicien a healer, a medical practitioner, from Old French fisiciien physician, doctor,
sage (12c., Modern French physicien means physicist), from fisique art of healing, from Latin
physica natural science (see physic). Distinguished from surgeon from c.1400. The ph- spelling
attested from late 14c. (see ph).


physicist (n.)

1836, from physics + -ist. Coined by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, to
denote a cultivator of physics as opposed to a physician.    As we cannot use physician for a
cultivator of physics, I have called him a physicist. We need very much a name to describe a
cultivator of science in general. I should incline to call him a Scientist. Thus we might say, that
as an Artist is a Musician, Painter, or Poet, a Scientist is a Mathematician, Physicist, or
Naturalist. [William Whewell, The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, London, 1840]


physico-

word-forming element meaning physical, physically; natural, from Latinized comb. form of Greek
physikos natural, physical (see physic).


physicological (adj.)

1704, from physicologic logic illustrated by physics, from physico- + logic. Related:
Physicologically.


physics (n.)

1580s, natural science, from physic in sense of natural science. Also see -ics. Based on Latin
physica (neuter plural), from Greek ta physika, literally the natural things, name of Aristotle's
treatise on nature. Specific sense of science treating of properties of matter and energy is from
1715.


physio-

word-forming element meaning nature, natural, physical, from Greek physio-, comb. form of physios
nature (see physic).


physiognomy (n.)

late 14c., art of judging characters from facial features, from Old French phizonomie and directly
from Late Latin physiognomia, from Greek physiognomia the judging of a person's nature by his
features, from physio- (see physio-) + gnomon (genitive gnomonos) judge, indicator (see gnomon).
Meaning face, countenance, features is from c.1400. Related: Physiognomical.


physiological (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to natural science, from physiology + -ical. From 1814 as pertaining to
physiology. Related: Physiologically.


physiology (n.)

1560s, study and description of natural objects, from Middle French physiologie or directly from
Latin physiologia natural science, study of nature, from Greek physiologia natural science, inquiry
into nature, from physio- nature (see physio-) + logia study (see -logy). Meaning science of the
normal function of living things is attested from 1610s. Related: Physiologic; physiologist.


physiotherapy (n.)

1905, from physio- + therapy. Related: Physiotherapist.


physique (n.)

1826, from French physique, noun use of physique (adj.) physical, from Latin physicus natural,
physics, from Greek physikos, from physis nature (see physic).


phyto-

word-forming element meaning plant, from Greek phyton plant, literally that which has grown, from
phyein to grow (see physic).


phytoplankton (n.)

1897, from phyto- + plankton.


pi (n.)

Greek letter, from Hebrew, literally little mouth. As the name of the mathematical constant, from
1841 in English, used in Latin 1748 by Swiss mathematician Leonhart Euler (1707-1783), as an
abbreviation of Greek periphereia periphery. For the meaning printer's term for mixed type, see pie
(3).


pianissimo (adv.)

1724, from Italian pianissimo very softly, from Latin pianissimus, superlative of pianus (see
piano).


pianist (n.)

1822, from French pianiste, from Italian pianista; see piano + -ist. Earlier in English in the
French form, pianiste (1816).


piano (n.)

1803, from French piano (18c.), Italian piano, shortened forms of pianoforte (q.v.). As an adverb,
softly, in musical directions (superlative pianissimo), attested from 1680s. Piano wire attested
from 1831.


pianoforte (n.)

1767, from Italian, from piano e forte soft and loud, in full, gravicembalo col piano e forte
harpsichord with soft and loud (c.1710), said to have been so named by inventor Bartolomeo
Cristofori (1655-1731) of Padua because the ability via dampers to vary the tone is one of the main
changes from the harpsichord. Italian piano (adj.) ultimately is from Latin planus flat, smooth,
even, later soft (see plane (n.1)).


pianola (n.)

c.1896, trademark name (1901) of a player piano, from piano, the ending perhaps abstracted from
viola and meant as a diminutive suffix. The pianola's popularity led to a rash of product names
ending in -ola, especially Victrola (q.v.), and slang words such as payola.


piaster (n.)

also piastre, 1620s, Spanish dollar, piece of eight, also used as the name of a monetary unit and
coin of Turkey (1610s, in Turkish called ghurush, but originally debased Spanish dollars), from
French piastre, from Italian piastra thin metal plate, short for impiastro plaster, from Latin
emplastrum, from Greek emplastron (see plaster). The Italian word was applied to the Spanish silver
peso, later to the Turkish coin based on it. Compare shinplaster.


piazza (n.)

1580s, public square in an Italian town, from Italian piazza, from Latin platea courtyard, broad
street, from Greek plateia (hodos) broad (street); see place (n.). According to OED, mistakenly
applied in English 1640s to the colonnade of Covent Garden, designed by Inigo Jones, rather than to
the marketplace itself; hence the verandah of a house (1724, chiefly American English).


pibroch (n.)

kind of bagpipe music, 1719, from Gaelic piobaireachd, literally piper's art, from piobair a piper
(from piob pipe, an English loan word; see pipe (n.1)) + -achd, suffix denoting function.


pic (n.)

1884 as a shortening of picture (n.). Short for motion picture from 1936. Colloquial piccy is
recorded from 1889.


pica (n.1)

size of type of about six lines to the inch (12 point), 1580s, probably from pica, name of a book of
rules in Church of England for determining holy days (late 15c. in Anglo-Latin), probably from Latin
pica magpie (see pie (n.2)); the book so called perhaps from the color and the pied look of the old
type on close-printed pages. The type size was that generally used to print ordinals.


pica (n.2)

pathological craving for substance unfit for food (such as chalk), 1560s, from Medieval Latin pica
magpie  (see pie (n.2)), probably translating Greek kissa, kitta magpie, jay, also false appetite.
The connecting notion may be the birds' indiscriminate feeding.


picador (n.)

1797, from Spanish picador, literally pricker, from picar to pierce, from Vulgar Latin *piccare to
pierce (see pike (n.2)). He pricks the bull with a lance to provoke it.


Picardy

from Old French pic (Modern French pique) pike (see pike (n.2)); the characteristic weapon of the
people who lived in this part of northern France in ancient times.


picaresque (adj.)

1810, from Spanish picaresco roguish, from picaro rogue, of uncertain origin, possibly from picar to
pierce, from Vulgar Latin *piccare (see pike (n.2)). Originally in roman picaresque rogue novel, the
classic example being Gil Blas.


picaroon (n.)

1620s, rogue, thief, adventurer; pirate, sea-robber; small pirate ship, from Spanish picaron,
augmentative of picaro rogue (see picaresque); also see -oon.


picayune (n.)

1804, coin of small value, probably from Louisiana French picaillon coin worth 5 cents, earlier the
French name of an old copper coin of Savoy (1750), from Proven&ccedil;al picaioun small copper coin,
from picaio money, of uncertain origin. Adjectival figurative sense of paltry, mean recorded from
1813.


piccalilli (n.)

pickle of chopped vegetables, 1769, piccalillo, perhaps a fanciful elaboration of pickle. Spelling
with an -i attested from 1845.


piccaninny (n.)

also pickaninny, 1650s, from West Indies patois, formed as a diminutive from Spanish peque&ntilde;o
or Portuguese pequeno little, small, of uncertain origin, related to French petit (see petit
(adj.)). As late as 1836 applied affectionately to any small child or baby, regardless of race.


piccolo (n.)

1856, piccolo flute, from French piccolo, from Italian flauto piccolo small flute, from piccolo
small, perhaps a children's made-up word, or from picca point, or from Vulgar Latin root *pikk-
little, related to *piccare to pierce (see pike (n.2)). Other sources suggest it is from the same
source as French petit (see petit (adj.)).


pick (v.)

early 13c., picken to peck; c.1300, piken to work with a pick, probably representing a fusion of Old
English *pician to prick, (implied by picung a piercing, pricking, an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata)
with Old Norse pikka to prick, peck, both from a Germanic root (source also of Middle Dutch picken,
German picken to pick, peck), perhaps imitative. Influence from Middle French piquer to prick, sting
(see pike (n.2)) also is possible, but that French word generally is not considered a source of the
English word. Related: Picked; picking.    Meaning to eat with small bites is from 1580s. The
meaning to choose, select, pick out emerged late 14c., from earlier meaning to pluck with the
fingers (early 14c.). Sense of to rob, plunder (c.1300) weakened to a milder sense of steal petty
things by late 14c. Of forcing locks with a pointed tool, by 1540s. Meaning to pluck (a banjo) is
recorded from 1860. To pick a quarrel, etc. is from mid-15c.; to pick at find fault with is from
1670s. Pick on single out for adverse attention is from late 14c.; pick off shoot one by one is
recorded from 1810; baseball sense of to put out a runner on base is from 1939. Also see pick up. To
pick and choose select carefully is from 1660s (choose and pick is attested from c.1400).


pick (n.1)

c.1200, pointed tool for breaking up rock or ground, variant of pike (n.4). Meaning sharp tool is
from mid-14c.


pick (n.2)

mid-15c., a blow with a pointed instrument, from pick (v.). Meaning plectrum for a guitar, lute,
etc. is from 1895; as a type of basketball block, from 1951; meaning choicest part or example is
first recorded 1760.


pick up (v.)

early 14c. as a verbal phrase, lift and take, from pick (v.) + up (adv.). Of persons, make
acquaintance or take along, especially for sexual purposes, 1690s. Meaning cause (someone) to revive
is from 1857. Sense of tidy up is from 1861; that of arrest is from 1871; meaning gain speed is from
1922; meaning to pay (a check, tab, etc.) is from 1945. Pick-me-up stimulating alcoholic drink is
attested from 1867.


pickaxe (n.)

also pick-axe, early 15c., folk etymology alteration (by influence of axe) of Middle English picas
(mid-13c.), via Anglo-French piceis, Old French pocois (11c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
picosa pick, related to Latin picus woodpecker (see pie (n.2)).


picked (adj.)

chosen for excellence, 1540s, past participle adjective from pick (v.).


pickelhaube (n.)

Prussian spiked helmet, 1875, from German Pickelhaube, from pickel (ice)pick, pickaxe, + haube hood,
bonnet. But the German word is attested 17c., long before the helmet type came into use, and
originally meant simply helmet; Palmer reports a German theory (Andresen) that it is a folk-
etymology: as if from Pickel and haube, a cap or coif[;] more correctly written Biekelhaube, [it] is
for Beckelhaube, a word most probably derived from becken, a basin.


picker (n.)

1520s, one who steals; literal use one who picks is from 1660s; agent noun from pick (v.). From 1923
as one who plays the banjo. Picker-upper attested from 1936.


pickerel (n.)

young pike, late 13c., diminutive of pike, the fish (see pike (n.3)), with French pejorative suffix
-rel; perhaps formed in Anglo-French.


picket (n.)

1680s, pointed stake (for defense against cavalry, etc.), from French piquet pointed stake, from
piquer to pierce (see pike (n.2)). Sense of troops posted to watch for enemy first recorded 1761;
that of striking workers stationed to prevent others from entering a factory is from 1867. Picket
line is 1856 in the military sense, 1945 of labor strikes.


picket (v.)

1745, to enclose with pickets, from picket (n.). The sense in labor strikes, protests, etc., is
attested from 1867. Related: Picketed; picketing.


pickle (n.)

c.1400, probably from Middle Dutch pekel pickle, brine, or related words in Low German and East
Frisian (Dutch pekel, East Frisian p&auml;kel, German p&ouml;kel), of uncertain origin or original
meaning. Klein suggests the name of a medieval Dutch fisherman who developed the process. Originally
a sauce served with meat or fowl; meaning cucumber preserved in pickle first recorded 1707, via use
of the word for the salty liquid in which meat, etc. was preserved (c.1500). Figurative sense of
sorry plight first recorded 1560s, from the time when the word still meant a sauce served on meat
about to be eaten. Meaning troublesome boy is from 1788, perhaps from the notion of being imbued
with roguery.


pickle (v.)

1550s, from pickle (n.). Related: Pickled; pickling.


pickled (adj.)

drunk, American English slang, 1900, figurative past participle adjective from pickle (v.).


picklock (n.)

1550s, from pick (v.) + lock (n.).


pickpocket (n.)

also pick-pocket, 1590s, from pick (v.) + pocket (n.). Earlier was pick-purse (late 14c.). As a verb
from 1670s.


pickup (n.)

also pick-up, that which is picked up, 1848; see pick up (v.). As act of picking up from 1882.
Meaning capacity for acceleration is from 1909; that of recovery is from 1916. In reference to a
game between informal teams chosen on the spot, from 1905 (as an adjective in this sense by 1936).
Meaning small truck used for light loads, 1937, is shortened from pickup truck (pickup body is
attested from 1928). The notion probably being of a vehicle for use to pick up (feed, lumber, etc.)
and deliver it where it was needed.


picky (adj.)

1867, from pick (v.) + -y (2). Related: Pickiness. The earliest recorded uses are in reference to
eating.


picnic (n.)

1748 (in Chesterfield's Letters), but rare before c.1800 as an English institution; originally a
fashionable pot-luck social affair, not necessarily out of doors; from French piquenique (1690s),
perhaps a reduplication of piquer to pick, peck, from Old French (see pike (n.2)), or the second
element may be nique worthless thing, from a Germanic source. Figurative sense of something easy is
from 1886. Picnic table recorded from 1926, originally a folding table.


picnic (v.)

go on a picnic, 1842, from picnic (n.). Related: Picnicked; picnicking. The -k- is inserted to
preserve the k sound of -c- before a suffix beginning in -i-, -y-, or -e- (compare
traffic/trafficking, panic/panicky, shellac/shellacked).


pico-

word-forming element used in making names for very small unites of measure, 1915 (formally adopted
c.1952 as a scientific prefix meaning one trillionth), from Spanish pico a little over, a small
balance, literally sharp point, beak, of Celtic origin (compare Gaulish beccus beak).


picosecond (n.)

1966, from pico- + second (n.).


Pict (n.)

an ancient people of Great Britain, late 14c., from Late Latin Picti (late 3c., probably a nickname
given them by Roman soldiers), usually taken as derived from picti painted, but probably ultimately
from the Celtic name of the tribe, perhaps Pehta, Peihta, literally the fighters (compare Gaulish
Pictavi, a different people, who gave the name to the French city of Poitiers). They painted and
tattooed themselves, which may have suggested a Roman folk-etymology alteration of the name. The Old
English name for the people was Peohtas.In Scottish folk-lore the Pechts are often represented as a
dark pygmy race, or an underground people; and sometimes identified with elves, brownies, or
fairies. [OED]  Related: Pictish; Pictland.


pictogram (n.)

1910, from stem of Latin pictus painted, past participle of pingere to paint (see paint (v.)) +
-gram.


pictograph (n.)

picture or symbol representing an idea, 1851, from Latin pictus painted, past participle of pingere
to paint (see paint (v.)) + -graph something written. First used in reference to American Indian
writing. Related: Pictography.


pictorial (adj.)

1640s, from Latin pictorius of a painter, from pictor painter, from past participle stem of pingere
to make pictures (see paint (v.)) + -al (1). The noun meaning journal in which pictures are the main
feature is first recorded 1844. Related: Pictorially.


picturable (adj.)

1796, from picture (v.) + -able. Related: Picturably.


picture (n.)

early 15c., drawing, painting, from Latin pictura painting, from pictus, past participle of pingere
to make pictures, to paint, to embroider, (see paint (v.)). Picture window is from 1938. Picture
post-card first recorded 1899. Phrase every picture tells a story first attested 1900, in
advertisements for an illustrated life of Christ. To be in (or out of) the picture in the figurative
sense dates to 1900.    Expression a picture is worth a thousand words, attested from 1918, probably
was from the publication trade (the notion that a picture was worth 1,000 words is in printers'
publications by 1911). The phrase also was in use in the form worth a million words, the form used
by American newspaper editor Arthur Brisbane (1864-1936) in an editorial much-read c.1916 titled
What is a Good Newspaper in the New York Evening Journal. In part it read, After news and humor come
good pictures. In this day of hurry we learn through the eye, and one picture may be worth a million
words. It seems to have emerged into general use via the medium of advertising (which scaled down
the number and also gave the expression its spurious origin story as a Japanese proverb or some such
thing, by 1919). Earlier various acts or deeds (and in one case the arrow) were said to be worth a
thousand words.


picture (v.)

late 15c. in the literal sense; 1738 in the mental sense, from picture (n.). Related: Pictured;
picturing.


picturephone (n.)

1964, from picture (n.) + phone (n.1).


pictures (n.)

movies, 1912, short for moving pictures.


picturesque (adj.)

1703, on pattern of French pittoresque, a loan-word from Italian pittoresco, literally pictorial
(1660s), from pittore painter, from Latin pictorem (nominative pictor); see painter (n.1). As a noun
from 1749. Related: Picturesquely; picturesqueness.


piddle (v.)

1540s, to peddle, to work in a trifling way, of uncertain origin, apparently a frequentative form.
Meaning to pick at one's food is from 1610s; that of urinate is from 1796. Related: Piddled;
piddler; piddling.


piddling (adj.)

insignificant, trifling, 1550s, past participle adjective from piddle (v.).


pidgin (n.)

1876, from pigeon English (1859), the reduced form of the language used in China for communication
with Europeans, from pigeon (1826), itself a pidgin word, representing a Chinese pronunciation of
business. Meaning extended 1891 to any simplified language.


pie (n.1)

pastry, mid-14c. (probably older; piehus bakery is attested from late 12c.), from Medieval Latin pie
meat or fish enclosed in pastry (c.1300), perhaps related to Medieval Latin pia pie, pastry, also
possibly connected with pica magpie (see pie (n.2)) on notion of the bird's habit of collecting
miscellaneous objects. Figurative of something to be shared out by 1967.    According to OED, not
known outside English, except Gaelic pighe, which is from English. In the Middle Ages, a pie had
many ingredients, a pastry but one. Fruit pies began to appear c.1600. Figurative sense of something
easy is from 1889. Pie-eyed drunk is from 1904. Phrase pie in the sky is 1911, from Joe Hill's
Wobbly parody of hymns. Pieman is not attested earlier than the nursery rhyme Simple Simon (c.1820).
Pie chart is from 1922.


pie (n.2)

magpie, mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French pie (13c.), from Latin pica magpie (see
magpie). In 16c., a wily pie was a cunning person.


pie (n.3)

also pi, printers' slang for a mass of type jumbled together (also pi, pye), 1650s, perhaps from pie
(n.1) on notion of a medley, or pie (n.2); compare pica (n.1). As a verb from 1870. Related: Pied.


piebald (adj.)

of two different colors, 1580s, formed from pie (n.2) magpie + bald in its older sense of spotted,
white; in reference to the black-and-white plumage of the magpie. Hence, of mixed character,
mongrel. Technically only of black-and-white colorings.


piece (n.)

c.1200, fixed amount, measure, portion, from Old French piece piece, bit portion; item; coin (12c.),
from Vulgar Latin *pettia, probably from Gaulish *pettsi (compare Welsh peth thing, Breton pez
piece, a little), perhaps from an Old Celtic base *kwezd-i-, from PIE root *kwezd- a part, piece
(cognates: Russian chast' part). Related: Pieces.    Sense of portable firearm first recorded 1580s;
that of chessman is from 1560s. Meaning person regarded as a sex object is first recorded 1785
(compare piece of ass, human beings colloquially called piece of flesh from 1590s; also compare
Latin scortum bimbo, anyone available for a price, literally skin). Meaning a portion of a distance
is from 1610s; that of literary composition dates from 1530s. Piece of (one's) mind is from 1570s.
Piece of work remarkable person echoes Hamlet. Piece as a coin is attested in English from 1570s,
hence Piece of eight, old name for the Spanish dollar (c.1600) of the value of 8 reals.    PIECE. A
wench. A damned good or bad piece; a girl who is more or less active and skilful in the amorous
congress. Hence the (Cambridge) toast, may we never have a PIECE (peace) that will injure the
constitution. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


piece (v.)

to mend by adding pieces, late 14c., from piece (n.). Sense of to join, unite, put together is from
late 15c. Related: Pieced; piecing.


piece de resistance (n.)

1831, from French pi&egrave;ce de r&eacute;sistance, originally the most substantial dish in a meal.
Lit. piece of resistance; there seems to be disagreement as to the exact signification.


piecemeal (adv.)

c.1300 (originally two words), from piece (n.) + Old English m&aelig;lum at a time, dative plural of
m&aelig;l appointed time, food served (see meal (n.1)). The second element once was more commonly
used, as in Old English styccem&aelig;lum bit by bit, gearm&aelig;lum year by year. One-word form
from 15c.


piecework (n.)

also piece-work, 1540s, from piece (n.) + work (n.).


pied (adj.)

late 14c., as if it were the past participle of a verb form of Middle English noun pie magpie (see
pie (n.2)), in reference to the bird's black and white plumage. Earliest use is in reference to the
pyed freres, an order of friars who wore black and white. Also in pied piper (1845, in Browning's
poem based on the German legend; used allusively by 1939).


pied a terre (n.)

small town house or rooms used for short residences, 1829, French, pied &#224; terre, literally foot
on the ground.


piedmont (n.)

name given to the fertile upland region along the eastern slope of the Appalachians, 1755,
originally piemont, from Italian Piemonte, literally mountain foot, name of the region at the foot
of the Alps in northern Italy (see Piedmont). With -d- added by 1855. Applied to similar features of
other mountain ranges by 1860.


Piedmont

region in northern Italy, from Old Italian pie di monte foot of the mountains, from pie foot (see
foot (n.)) + monte mountain (see mount (n.)). Related: Piedmontese.


piepowder (n.)

early 13c., wayfarer, itinerant merchant, etc., folk etymology alteration of Old French pie pouldre
or Medieval Latin pede-pulverosus, both literally dusty-footed (see foot (n.) + powder (n.)).


pier (n.)

mid-12c., support of a span of a bridge, from Medieval Latin pera, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Old North French pire a breakwater, from Vulgar Latin *petricus, from Latin petra rock (see
petrous), but OED is against this. Meaning solid structure in a harbor, used as a landing place for
vessels, is attested from mid-15c.


pierce (v.)

late 13c. make a hole in; force one's way through, from Anglo-French perser, Old French percier
pierce, transfix, drive through (12c., Modern French percer), probably from Vulgar Latin
*pertusiare, frequentative of Latin pertusus, past participle of pertundere to thrust or bore
through, from per- through (see per) + tundere to beat, pound, from PIE *tund-, from root *(s)teu-
to push, strike, knock, beat, thrust (see obtuse). Related: Pierced; piercing.


pierced (adj.)

c.1400, past participle adjective from pierce (v.).


piercer (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from pierce (v.).


piercing (adj.)

in reference to cold, sound, etc., early 15c., present participle adjective from pierce (v.).
Figuratively, of pain, grief, etc., from late 14c. Related: Piercingly.


piercing (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from pierce (v.).


Pierian (adj.)

literally of Pieria, 1590s, from Latin Pierius Pieria, from Greek Pieria, district in northern
Thessaly, reputed home of the Muses; thus pertaining to poetry.    A little Learning is a dang'rous
Thing;  Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian Spring:  [Pope, Essay on Criticism, 1711]


Pierre

Modern French form of masc. proper name represented in Modern English by Peter (q.v.). The city in
South Dakota, U.S., was named for Pierre Chouteau (1789-1865) who set up an Indian trading post here
in 1837.


pierrot (n.)

stock character in French pantomime, in English, a buffoon, from French Pierrot, diminutive of
Pierre; considered a typical name of a French peasant.


Piers

common Old French form of masc. proper name Peter (q.v.).


Pieta (n.)

Virgin holding the dead body of Christ, 1640s, from Italian pieta, from Latin pietatem (see piety).


pietism (n.)

also Pietism, 1690s, from German Pietismus, originally applied in derision to the movement to revive
personal piety in the Lutheran Church, begun in Frankfurt c.1670 by Philipp Jakob Spener
(1635-1705). See piety + -ism.


pietist (n.)

also Pietist, 1690s; see pietism + -ist. As an adjective from 1705.


pietistic (adj.)

1804, from pietist + -ic. Related: Pietistical.


piety (n.)

early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), mercy, tenderness, pity, from Old French piete piety, faith;
pity, compassion (12c.), from Latin pietatem (nominative pietas) dutiful conduct, sense of duty;
religiousness, piety; loyalty, patriotism; faithfulness to natural ties, in Late Latin gentleness,
kindness, pity; from pius kind (see pious). Meaning piousness attested in English from c.1600. Also
see pity (n.).


piezo-

word-forming element meaning pressure, from comb. form of Greek piezein to press tight, squeeze,
from PIE *pi-sed-yo- to sit upon (cognates: Sanskrit pidayati presses, oppresses), from *pi on,
short for *epi (see epi-) + *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary). First in piezometer (1820); in common
use in word formation from c.1900.


piezoelectric (adj.)

1883, from piezoelectricity, from German piezoelectricit&#228;t (Wilhelm G. Hankel, 1881), from
piezo- + electric. As a noun from 1913.


piffle (v.)

1847, of unknown origin, perhaps an alteration of trifle, by influence of piddle, etc. Or perhaps
imitative of a puff of air, with a diminutive suffix. As a noun by 1890.


pig (n.)

probably from Old English *picg, found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally young pig
(the word for adults was swine). Apparently related to Low German bigge, Dutch big (but the
phonology is difficult -- OED). The meaning oblong piece of metal is first attested 1580s, on the
notion of large mass. Applied to persons, usually in contempt, since 1540s; the derogatory slang
meaning police officer has been in underworld slang since at least 1811.    The pigs frisked my
panney, and nailed my screws; the officers searched my house, and seized my picklock keys.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]     Another Old
English word for pig was fearh, related to furh furrow, from PIE *perk- dig, furrow (source also of
Latin porc-us pig, see pork). This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical
attributes or activities [Lass]. Synonyms grunter, porker are from sailors' and fishermen's
euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of
the Gadarene swine, who drowned. The image of a pig in a poke is attested from 1520s (see poke
(n.3)). Flying pigs as a type of something unreal is from 1610s.


pig (v.)

1670s, to huddle together, from pig (n.). Related: Pigged; pigging. To pig out eat voraciously
attested by 1979.


pig iron (n.)

1660s; see pig (n.) + iron (n.).


Pig Latin (n.)

childish deformed language (there are many different versions), by 1889 (hog Latin in same sense by
1807).    The animals play quite an important part in the naming [of children's languages], as the
hog, dog, fly, goose, pigeon, pig, all give names, with Mr. Hog leading. Among the names the Latins
take the lead, and Hog Latin leads the list, being accredited as naming nearly as many languages as
all the other names combined. Besides Hog Latin, there is Dog Latin, Pig Latin, Goose Latin, and Bum
Latin. Then there is Greekish and Peddlers' French and Pigeon English. ... Very few can give any
reason for the naming of the languages. In fact, no one can fully say where the great majority of
names came from, for in most cases in the naming the following pretty well expresses the difficulty:
It was born before I was. I can't tell how young I was when I first heard of it. [The Secret
Language of Children, in The North Western Monthly, October 1897]


pigeon (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. as a surname), from Old French pigeon young dove (13c.), probably from Vulgar
Latin *pibionem, dissimilation from Late Latin pipionem (nominative pipio) squab, young chirping
bird (3c.), from pipire to peep, chirp, of imitative origin. Meaning one easily duped is from 1590s.
Replaced culver (Old English culufre, from Vulgar Latin *columbra, from Latin columbula) and native
dove.


pigeon-hole (n.)

also pigeonhole, 1570s, a small recess for pigeons to nest in, from pigeon + hole (n.). Meaning a
compartment in a writing desk, etc. is from 1680s, based on resemblance. The verb is from 1840
literally; figurative sense of label mentally is from 1870.    [Y]ou will have an inspector after
you with note-book and ink-horn, and you will be booked and pigeon-holed for further use when
wanted. [Civilisation--The Census, Blackwood's Magazine, Oct. 1854]    Related: Pigeonholed.


pigeon-toed (adj.)

1788, originally of horses; see pigeon.


piggish (adj.)

1792, from pig (n.) + -ish. Until 20c. usually stubborn, selfish; unclean, coarse; association with
greedy eating is more recent. Related: Piggishly; piggishness.


Piggly-Wiggly

chain of self-service grocery stores, started 1916 in Memphis. According to founder's reminiscence
from 1921 arbitrary coinage, simply something different from anything used before [Current Opinion].


piggy (adj.)

resembling a pig, 1841, from pig (n.) + -y (2).


piggy (n.)

a little pig, 1799, from pig (n.) + -y (3). Related: Piggies. Piggy bank attested from 1941 (pig
bank from 1937).


piggyback (adj.)

1823, probably a folk etymology alteration of pick pack (1560s), which perhaps is from pick, a
dialectal variant of pitch (v.1). As a verb from 1952.


pigheaded (adj.)

also pig-headed; 1756, having a head resembling a pig; 1788 as obstinate; see pig (n.) + head (n.).
Usually, but not always, figurative.    A pig-headed man must be one, who, like a driven pig, always
will do exactly the opposite to what other people--in the case of the pig his luckless driver--wish
him to do, that is to say he is an obstinate man. [The Sedberghian, June 1882]


piglet (n.)

1883, from pig (n.) + diminutive suffix -let. Earlier name for baby pig was farrow.


pigment (n.)

late 14c., from Latin pigmentum coloring matter, pigment, paint, figuratively prnament, from stem of
pingere to color, paint (see paint (v.)). Variants of this word could have been known in Old English
(compare 12c. pyhmentum). As a verb from 1900. Related: Pigmented; pigmenting.


pigmentation (n.)

1866, from pigment + -ation. Perhaps modeled on French.


pigmentocracy (n.)

1952, apparently coined in the Economist, from pigment + -cracy.


pigmy

see pygmy.


pigskin (n.)

saddle leather, 1855, from pig (n.) + skin (n.). As slang for football from 1894.


pigsney (n.)

(obsolete), late 14c., endearing form of address to a girl or woman, apparently from Middle English
pigges eye, literally pig's eye, with excrescent -n- from min eye, an eye, etc. See OED for
explanation of why this might have been felt as a compliment. In a pig's eye! as an adverse retort
is recorded from 1872.


pigsty (n.)

1590s, from pig (n.) + sty. Figurative use for miserable, dirty hovel is attested from 1820.


pigtail (n.)

1680s, tobacco in a twisted roll, from pig (n.) + tail (n.). So called from resemblance. Meaning
braid of hair is from 1753, when it was a fashion among soldiers and sailors. Applied variously to
other objects or parts thought to resemble this in appearance.


pika

rabbit-like animal of Siberia and North America, 1827, from Tunguse piika.


pike (n.1)

highway, 1812 shortening of turnpike.


pike (n.2)

weapon with a long shaft and a pointed metal head, 1510s, from Middle French pique a spear; pikeman,
from piquer to pick, puncture, pierce, from Old French pic sharp point or spike, a general
continental term (Spanish pica, Italian picca, Proven&ccedil;al piqua), perhaps ultimately from a
Germanic [Barnhart] or Celtic source (see pike (n.4)). Alternative explanation traces the Old French
word (via Vulgar Latin *piccare to prick, pierce) to Latin picus woodpecker. Formerly the chief
weapon of a large part of the infantry; in the 18th c. superseded by the bayonet [OED]; hence old
expressions such as pass through pikes come through difficulties, run the gauntlet; push of pikes
close-quarters combat. German Pike, Dutch piek, Danish pik, etc. are from French pique.


pike (n.3)

voracious freshwater fish, early 14c., probably short for pike-fish, a special use of pike (n.2) in
reference to the fish's long, pointed jaw, and in part from French brochet pike (fish), from broche
a roasting spit.


pike (n.4)

pick used in digging, Middle English pik, pyk, collateral (long-vowel) form of pic  (source of pick
(n.1)), from Old English piic pointed object, pickaxe, perhaps from a Celtic source (compare Gaelic
pic pickaxe, Irish pice pike, pitchfork). Extended early 13c. to pointed tip of anything. Pike,
pick, and pitch formerly were used indifferently in English. Pike position in diving, gymnastics,
etc., attested from 1928, perhaps on the notion of tapering to a point.


pikeman (n.)

soldier armed with a pike, 16c., from pike (n.2) + man (n.).


piker (n.)

miserly person, 1872, formerly poor migrant to California (1860), earlier pike (1854), perhaps
originally vagrant who wanders the pike (n.1) (which is the notion in Sussex dialectal piker
vagrant, tramp, gypsy, 1838), but Barnhart, OED and others suggest the American English word
ultimately is a reference to people from Pike County, Missouri.


pilaf (n.)

oriental dish of rice boiled with meat, 1610s, from Turkish pilav, from Persian pilaw. Spelling
influenced by Modern Greek pilafi, from the Turkish word.


pilar (adj.)

pertaining to hair, 1858, from Modern Latin pilaris hairy, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


pilaster (n.)

a square column, 1570s, from Middle French pilastre (1540s), from Italian pilastro, from Medieval
Latin pilastrum (mid-14c.), from pila, buttress, pile (from Latin pila, see pillar) + Latin -aster,
suffix expressing incomplete resemblance [Barnhart].


Pilate (n.)

c.1400 as a term of reproach, from the Roman surname, especially that of Pontius, a governor of
Judaea, from Latin Pilatus, literally armed with javelins, from pilum javelin (see pile (n.2)).
Among slang and cant uses of Pontius Pilate mentioned in the 1811 Dictionary of Buckish Slang,
University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence is (Cambridge) a Mr. Shepherd of Trinity College; who
disputing with a brother parson on the comparative rapidity with which they read the liturgy,
offered to give him as far as Pontius Pilate in the Belief.


Pilates

c.1980, physical fitness regimen developed c.1920 by German-born physical fitness teacher Joseph
Pilates (1883-1967).


pilchard (n.)

fish of the herring family, 1540s, earlier pilcher (1520s), of unknown origin. The -d- is excrescent
[OED].


pile (n.1)

mass, heap, early 15c., originally pillar, pier of a bridge, from Middle French pile and directly
from Latin pila stone barrier, pillar, pier (see pillar). Sense development in Latin from pier,
harbor wall of stones, to something heaped up. In English, sense of heap of things is attested from
mid-15c. (the verb in this sense is recorded from mid-14c.). The meaning large building (late 14c.)
is probably the same word.


pile (n.2)

heavy pointed beam, from Old English pil stake, also arrow, from Latin pilum heavy javelin of the
Roman foot soldier, literally pestle (source of Old Norse pila, Old High German pfil, German Pfeil
arrow), of uncertain origin.


pile (n.3)

soft, raised surface upon cloth, mid-14c., downy plumage, from Anglo-French pyle or Middle Dutch
pijl, both from Latin pilus a hair (source of Italian pelo, Old French pel). Phonological evidence
rules out transmission of the English word via Old French cognate peil, poil. Meaning nap upon cloth
is from 1560s.


pile (v.)

to heap up, mid-14c.; see pile (n.1). Related: Piled; piling. Figurative verbal expression pile on
attack vigorously, attack en masse, is from 1894, American English.


pile-driver (n.)

1772 in literal sense, from pile (n.2) + driver. Figurative sense of very strong hit is recorded
from 1858.


pile-up (n.)

multi-vehicle crash, 1929, from verbal phrase pile up, which is from 1849 as accumulate, 1899 as to
wreck in a heap (see pile (v.)).


pileated (adj.)

1728, from Latin pileatus capped, from pileus felt cap without a brim, from Greek pilos. Applied in
natural history to certain birds and sea urchins.


piles (n.)

hemorrhoids, c.1400, from Medieval Latin pili piles, probably from Latin pila ball (see pill (n.));
so called from shape.


pilfer (v.)

1540s, from pilfer (n.) spoils, booty, c.1400, from Old French pelfre booty, spoils (11c.), of
unknown origin, possibly related to pelf. Related: Pilfered; pilfering.


pilferage (n.)

1620s, from pilfer + -age.


pilgrim (n.)

c.1200, pilegrim, from Old French pelerin, peregrin pilgrim, crusader; foreigner, stranger (11c.,
Modern French p&#232;lerin), from Late Latin pelegrinus, dissimilated from Latin peregrinus
foreigner (source of Italian pellegrino, Spanish peregrino), from peregre (adv.) from abroad, from
per- beyond + agri, locative case of ager country (see acre).    Change of first -r- to -l- in most
Romance languages by dissimilation; the -m appears to be a Germanic modification. Pilgrim Fathers
English Puritans who founded Plymouth colony is first found 1799 (they called themselves Pilgrims
from c.1630, in reference to Hebrew xi:13).


pilgrimage (n.)

late 13c., pelrimage; from pilgrim + -age and also from Old French pelrimage, pelerinage pilgrimage,
distant journey, crusade, from peleriner to go on a pilgrimage. Modern spelling from early 14c.


Pilipino

1936, from Tagalog form of obsolete Spanish Pilipino (see Filipino).


pill (n.)

small ball or round mass of medicine, c.1400, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German pille and
Middle French pile, all from Latin pilula pill, literally little ball, diminutive of pila a ball,
playing ball, said to be related to pilus hair if the original notion was hairball. Figurative sense
something disagreeable that must be swallowed is from 1540s; slang meaning boring person is recorded
from 1871. The pill contraceptive pill is from 1957.


pill (v.)

1736, to dose on pills, from pill (n.). From 1882 as to form into pills. Related: Pilled; pilling.


pillage (n.)

late 14c., act of plundering (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) plunder, from
pillier to plunder, loot, ill-treat, possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare to plunder, probably from a
figurative use of Latin pilare to strip of hair, perhaps also meaning to skin (compare figurative
extension of verbs pluck, fleece), from pilus a hair (see pile (n.3)).


pillage (v.)

plunder, despoil, 1590s, from pillage (n.). Related: Pillaged; pillaging. The earlier verb in
English was simply pill (late Old English), which probably is from Latin pilare.


pillar (n.)

c.1200, from Old French piler pillar, column, pier (12c., Modern French pilier) and directly from
Medieval Latin pilare, from Latin pila pillar, stone barrier. Figurative sense of prop or support of
an institution or community is first recorded early 14c. Phrase pillar to post is c.1600, originally
of tennis, exact meaning obscure.


pillbox (n.)

also pill-box, box for holding pills, 1730, from pill (n.) + box (n.). As a small round concrete
machine gun nest, it came into use in World War I. As a type of hat, attested from 1958.


pillbug (n.)

also pill-bug, 1841, from pill (n.) + bug (n.).


piller (n.)

plunderer, early 14c., from obsolete verb pill to plunder, to pillage (see pillage (v.)).


pillion (n.)

kind of saddle, c.1500, of Celtic origin (compare Irish pillin, Gaelic pillin), ultimately from
Latin pellis skin, pelt (see film (n.)).


pillock (n.)

1530s, dialectal variant of Middle English pillicock (see cock (n.1)). Meaning stupid person is
attested by 1967.


pillory (n.)

late 13c. (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 12c.), from Old French pilori pillory (mid-12c.),
related to Medieval Latin pilloria, of uncertain origin, perhaps a diminutive of Latin pila pillar,
stone barrier (see pillar), but OED finds this proposed derivation phonologically unsuitable.


pillory (v.)

c.1600, from pillory (n.). Figurative sense of expose publicly to ridicule or abuse is from 1690s.
Related: Pilloried.


pillow (n.)

Middle English pilwe, from Old English pyle pillow, from West Germanic *pulwi(n) (cognates: Old
Saxon puli, Middle Dutch polu, Dutch peluw, Old High German pfuliwi, German Pf&uuml;hl), an early
borrowing (2c. or 3c.) from Latin pulvinus little cushion, small pillow, of uncertain origin. Modern
spelling is from mid-15c. Pillow fight (n.) attested from 1837; slang pillow talk (n.) first
recorded 1939.


pillow (v.)

1620s, from pillow (n.). Related: Pillowed; pillowing.


pilon (n.)

1892, from Mexican Spanish, from Spanish pil&oacute;n sugar loaf.


pilot (n.)

1510s, one who steers a ship, from Middle French pillote (16c.), from Italian piloto, supposed to be
an alteration of Old Italian pedoto, which usually is said to be from Medieval Greek *pedotes
rudder, helmsman, from Greek pedon steering oar, related to pous (genitive podos) foot (see foot
(n.)). Change of -d- to -l- in Latin (Sabine -l-) parallels that in odor/olfactory; see lachrymose.
Sense extended 1848 to one who controls a balloon, and 1907 to one who flies an airplane. As an
adjective, 1788 as pertaining to a pilot; from 1928 as serving as a prototype. Thus the noun pilot
meaning pilot episode (etc.), attested from 1962. Pilot light is from 1890.


pilot (v.)

1640s, to guide, lead; 1690s, to conduct as a pilot, from pilot (n.) or from French piloter.
Related: Piloted; piloting.


pilot-fish (n.)

1630s, from pilot (n.) + fish (n.). So called because they were thought to lead sharks to prey.


piloted (adj.)

1945, past participle adjective from pilot (v.).


pilsner (n.)

type of pale, hoppy lager beer, 1877, after Pilsen, German town in Bohemia (Czech Plzen) where it
first was brewed. Now designating a type, not an origin; pilsner from Plzen is Pilsner Urquell, from
German Urquell primary source. The place name is from Old Czech plz damp, moist. Related: Pils.


Piltdown

village in Sussex, England, site where a fossil humanoid skull was said to have been found (1912),
proved a fraud in 1953.


Pima

Uto-Aztecan people of Arizona, from Spanish, probably from native pi ma:c (I) don't know, given in
answer to some question long ago and mistaken by the Spaniards as a tribal name. Related: Piman.


pimento (n.)

1680s, pimiento (modern form from 1718), from Spanish pimiento green or red pepper, also pimienta
black pepper, from Late Latin pigmenta, plural of pigmentum vegetable juice, from Latin pigmentum
pigment (see pigment (n.)). So called because it added a dash of color to food or drink.[I]n med.L.
spiced drink, hence spice, pepper (generally), Sp. pimiento, Fr. piment are applied to Cayenne or
Guinea pepper, capsicum; in Eng. the name has passed to allspice or Jamaica pepper. [OED]The piece
of red sweet pepper stuffed in a pitted olive so called from 1918, earlier pimiento (1901), from
Spanish. French piment is from Spanish.


pimp (n.)

c.1600, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle French pimpant alluring in dress, seductive, present
participle of pimper to dress elegantly (16c.), from Old French pimpelorer, pipelorer decorate,
color, beautify. Weekley suggests Middle French pimpreneau, defined in Cotgrave (1611) as a knave,
rascall, varlet, scoundrell, but Liberman is against this.    Judging by such recorded meanings of
pimp as 'helper in mines; servant in logging camps,' this word was originally applied to boys and
servants. [Liberman]    The word also means informer, stool pigeon in Australia and New Zealand and
in South Africa, where by early 1960s it existed in Swahili form impimpsi. Pimpmobile first recorded
1973 (six years before Popemobile).    PIMP. A male procurer, or cock bawd; also a small faggot used
about London for lighting fires, named from introducing the fire to the coals. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]


pimp (v.)

1630s (intransitive) to act as a pimp, from pimp (n.). Related: Pimped; pimping.


pimpernel (n.)

c.1400, from Old French pimprenelle, earlier piprenelle (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
pipinella name of a medicinal plant. This is perhaps from *piperinus pepper-like (so called because
its fruits resemble peppercorns), a derivative of Latin piper pepper (see pepper (n.)); or else it
is a corruption of bipinnella, from bipennis two-winged. The Scarlet Pimpernel was the code name of
the hero in an adventure novel of that name published 1905.


pimple (n.)

late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname), of unknown origin; perhaps related to Old English pipligende
having shingles; also compare Latin papula, papilla (see pap (n.2)). As a verb from c.1600. Related:
Pimples.


pimply (adj.)

1748, from pimple (n.) + -y (2). Related: Pimpliness.


pin (n.)

late Old English pinn peg, bolt, from Proto-Germanic *penn- jutting point or peak (cognates: Old
Saxon pin peg, Old Norse pinni peg, tack, Middle Dutch pin pin, peg, Old High German pfinn, German
Pinne pin, tack) from Latin pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also fin, scoop of a water
wheel; also a pinnacle; a promontory, cape; battlement (as in Luke iv:9 in Vulgate) and so applied
to points of various sorts, from PIE *pet- (see pen (n.1)).    Latin pinna and penna a feather,
plume, in plural a wing, are treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but
confused) Latin words by Tucker and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike
(n.1)) and see the feather/wing sense as secondary.    The modern slender wire pin is first attested
by this name late 14c. Transferred sense of leg is recorded from 1520s and hold the older sense.
Pin-money annual sum allotted to a woman for personal expenses on dress, etc. is attested from
1620s. Pins and needles tingling sensation is from 1810. The sound of a pin dropping as a type of
something all but silent is from 1775.


PIN

acronym for personal identification number, 1981, from the first reference used with redundant
number.


pin (v.)

mid-14c., to affix with a pin, from pin (n.). Figurative use from 1570s. Related: Pinned; pinning.
Sense of to hold someone or something down so he or it cannot escape is attested from 1740. In U.S.,
as a reference to the bestowal of a fraternity pin on a female student as an indication of a
relationship, it is attested by 1938. Phrase pin down define is from 1951.


pin-ball (n.)

as a type of game, 1907, from pin (n.) + ball (n.1). Originally of types of open-air bowling and
basketball variation where the goal was to knock down a pin or pins. Earlier still it meant pin-
cushion. The tabletop pin-ball machine is attested from 1937.


pin-feather (n.)

1775, from pin (n.) + feather (n.).


pin-hole (n.)

1670s, from pin (n.) + hole (n.).


pin-stripe (adj.)

1882, from pin (n.) + stripe (n.). Figurative of executive by 1958.


pin-up (adj.)

1670s, from pin (v.) + up (adv.). From 1940, in reference to pictures of winsome young ladies in
daring undress (Life, May 6, 1940) such as soldiers pinned up on their dugout walls, etc. The thing
itself is older than the name. The noun in this sense is recorded from 1943.


pina colada (n.)

1942, from Spanish pi&ntilde;a colada, literally strained pineapple. First element from Latin pinea
(see pineapple). For second element, see colander.


pinafore (n.)

sleeveless apron worn by children, 1782, from pin (v.) + afore on the front. So called because it
was originally pinned to a dress front.


pinata (n.)

1887, from Mexican Spanish pi&ntilde;ata, in Spanish literally jug, pot, ultimately from Latin pinea
pine cone, from pinus (see pine (n.)).


pinball (n.)

also pin-ball, game played on a sloping surface, 1911, from pin (n.) + ball (n.1). Earlier it meant
a pincushion (1803).


pince-nez (n.)

folding eyeglasses, 1876, French, literally pinch-nose, from pincer to pinch (see pinch (v.)) + nez
nose (see nose (n.)).


pincers (n.)

early 14c., tool for grasping or nipping, from Old French pinceure pincers, tongs, from pincier to
pinch (see pinch). Applied to animal parts from 1650s. Related: Pincer.


pinch (v.)

early 13c., from Old North French *pinchier to pinch, squeeze, nip; steal (Old French pincier,
Modern French pincer), of uncertain origin, possibly from Vulgar Latin *punctiare to pierce, which
might be a blend of Latin punctum point + *piccare to pierce. Meaning to steal in English is from
1650s. Sense of to be stingy is recorded from early 14c. Related: Pinched; pinching.


pinch (n.)

late 15c., critical juncture (as in baseball pinch hitter, attested from 1912), from pinch (v.).
This figurative sense is attested earlier than the literal sense of act of pinching (1590s) or that
of small quantity (as much as can be pinched between a thumb and finger), which is from 1580s. There
is a use of the noun from mid-15c. apparently meaning fold or pleat of fabric.


pincushion (n.)

1630s, from pin (n.) + cushion (n.).


Pindaric (adj.)

1630s, pertaining to or in the style of Pindar, from Latin Pindaricus, from Greek Pindaros, Greek
lyric poet (c.522-443 B.C.E.).


pine (n.)

coniferous tree, Old English pin (in compounds), from Old French pin and directly from Latin pinus
pine, pine-tree, fir-tree, perhaps in reference to the sap or pitch, from PIE *peie- to be fat,
swell (see fat (adj.)). Compare Sanskrit pituh juice, sap, resin, pitudaruh pine tree, Greek pitys
pine tree. Also see pitch (n.1). Pine-top cheap illicit whiskey, first recorded 1858, Southern U.S.
slang. Pine-needle (n.) attested from 1866.


pine (v.)

Old English pinian to torture, torment, afflict, cause to suffer, from *pine pain, torture,
punishment, possibly ultimately from Latin poena punishment, penalty, from Greek poine (see penal).
A Latin word borrowed into Germanic (Middle Dutch pinen, Old High German pinon, German Pein, Old
Norse pina) with Christianity. Intransitive sense of to languish, waste away, the main modern
meaning, is first recorded early 14c. Related: Pined; pining.


pine cone (n.)

1690s, from pine (n.) + cone (n.). An earlier word for it was pine nut (Old English pinhnyte); also
see pineapple.


pine-barren (n.)

1731, American-English, from pine (n.) + barren (n.).


pine-tree (n.)

Old English pintreow; see pine (n.) + tree (n.).


pineal (adj.)

1680s, in reference to the gland in the brain, from French pin&eacute;al, literally like a pine
cone, from Latin pinea pine cone, from pinus pine tree (see pine (n.)).


pineapple (n.)

late 14c., pine cone, from pine (n.) + apple. The reference to the fruit of the tropical plant (from
resemblance of shape) is first recorded 1660s, and pine cone emerged 1690s to replace pineapple in
its original sense except in dialect. For pine cone, Old English also used pinhnyte pine nut.


ping (n.)

1835, imitative of the sound of a bullet striking something sharply. Meaning short, high-pitched
electronic pulse is attested from 1943. As a verb from 1855; in computer sense is from at least
1981. Related: Pinged; pinging.


ping-pong (n.)

1900, as Ping-Pong, trademark for table tennis equipment (Parker Brothers). Both words are imitative
of the sound of the ball hitting a hard surface; from ping + pong (attested from 1823). It had a
phenomenal vogue in U.S. c.1900-1905.


ping-pong (v.)

1901, from ping-pong (n.). In the figurative sense from 1952. Related: Ping-ponged; ping-ponging.


pinguid (adj.)

1630s, from Latin pinguis fat (adj.), juicy, figuratively dull, gross, heavy; comfortable, from stem
of pinguere, from PIE *pei- fat, sap, juice (see pine (n.)).


pinhead (n.)

also pin-head, head of a pin, 1660s, from pin (n.) + head (n.). Meaning person of small intelligence
is from 1896.


pinion (n.1)

wing joint, segment of a bird's wing, mid-15c., from Old French pignon wing-feather, wing, pinion
(c.1400), from Vulgar Latin *pinnionem (nominative *pinnio), augmentative of Latin pinna wing (see
pin (n.)).


pinion (n.2)

small wheel with teeth to gear with a larger one (as in rack and pinion), 1650s, from French pignon
pinion (16c.), literally gable, from Old French pignon pointed gable, summit, from Vulgar Latin
*pinnionem, augmentative of Latin pinna battlement, pinnacle (see pin (n.)).


pinion (v.)

disable by binding the arms, 1550s, older in English than literal sense cut or bind the pinions (of
a bird's wing) to prevent flying (1570s); from pinion (n.1). Related: Pinioned.


pink (n., adj.)

1570s, common name of Dianthus, a garden plant of various colors, of unknown origin. Its use for
pale rose color first recorded 1733 (pink-coloured is recorded from 1680s), from one of the colors
of the flowers. The plant name is perhaps from pink (v.) via notion of perforated petals, or from
Dutch pink small (see pinkie), from the term pinck oogen half-closed eyes, literally small eyes,
which was borrowed into English (1570s) and may have been used as a name for Dianthus, which
sometimes has pale red flowers.    The flower meaning led (by 1590s) to a figurative use for the
flower or finest example of anything (as in Mercutio's Nay, I am the very pinck of curtesie, Rom.
&amp; Jul. II.iv.61). Political noun sense person perceived as left of center but not entirely
radical (i.e. red) is attested by 1927, but the image dates to at least 1837. Pink slip discharge
notice is first recorded 1915. To see pink elephants hallucinate from alcoholism first recorded 1913
in Jack London's John Barleycorn.


pink (v.)

c.1200, pungde pierce, stab, later (early 14c.) make holes in; spur a horse, of uncertain origin;
perhaps from a Romanic stem that also yielded French piquer, Spanish picar (see pike (n.2)). Or
perhaps from Old English pyngan and directly from Latin pungere to prick, pierce (see pungent).
Surviving mainly in pinking shears.


pink-collar (adj.)

in reference to jobs generally held by women, 1977, from pink (adj.), considered a
characteristically feminine color, + collar (n.).


pink-eye (n.)

contagious eye infection, 1882, American English, from pink (adj.) + eye (n.).


Pinkerton (n.)

semi-official detective, 1888, from the detective agency begun in U.S. 1850 by Allan Pinkerton
(1819-1884).


pinkie (n.)

the little finger, 1808, in Scottish, from Dutch pinkje, diminutive of pink little finger, of
uncertain origin.


pinko (n.)

1936, derogatory slang form of pink (n.), used of people whose social or political views have a
tendency toward 'red;'  a metaphor that had existed since at least 1837. As an adjective by 1957.


pinky (adj.)

pinkish, late 18c., from pink (n.) + -y (2).


pinnace (n.)

small, light vessel, 1540s, from Middle French pinace (earlier spinace, 15c., from Old French
espinace, Modern French p&#233;niche; also attested as Anglo-Latin spinachium (mid-14c.)); of
unknown origin. The French word perhaps is from Italian pinaccia or Spanish pinaza, from pino pine
tree; ship (Latin pinus pine tree also had a secondary sense of ship, vessel). But variations in
early forms makes this uncertain.


pinnacle (n.)

c.1300, mountain, peak, promontory, from Old French pinacle top, gable (13c.) and directly from Late
Latin pinnaculum peak, pinnacle, gable, diminutive of Latin pinna peak, point, (see pin (n.1)).
Figurative use is attested from c.1400.


pinnate (adj.)

1727, from Latin pinnatus feathered, winged, from pinna feather, wing (see pin (n.)).


pinniped (n.)

1842, from Modern Latin Pinnipedia, suborder of aquatic carnivorous mammals (seals and walruses),
literally having feet as fins, from Latin pinna in secondary sense fin (see pin (n.)) + pes,
genitive pedis foot (see foot (n.)).


pinochle (n.)

also pinocle, 1864, Peaknuckle, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Swiss dialect Binokel (German),
binocle (French), from French binocle pince-nez (17c.), from Medieval Latin binoculus binoculars
(see binocular). Taken as a synonym for b&eacute;sigue bezique, the card game, and wrongly
identified with besicles spectacles, probably because the game is played with a double deck.
Pinochle was popularized in U.S. late 1800s by German immigrants.


pinocytosis (n.)

from Greek pinein to drink (see imbibe) + -cytosis.


pinot (n.)

type of grape vine used in wine-making, 1912, American English variant spelling of French pineau
(attested in English from 1763), name of a family of wine grapes, from pin pine tree (see pine (n.))
+ diminutive suffix -eau. So called from the shape of the grape clusters. Variants are pinot noir,
black, pinot blanc, white, and pinot gris, gray.


pinpoint (n.)

also pin-point, point of a pin, 1849, from pin (n.) + point (n.). Taken into aeronautics in sense
place identified from the air, hence verb meaning locate precisely (1917), which originally was
aviators' slang. Related: Pinpointed; pinpointing. As an adjective, performed with precisional
accuracy, 1944, originally of aerial bombing.


pinprick (n.)

also pin-prick, 1851, from pin (n.) + prick (n.). Used figuratively of petty irritations from 1885.
Earlier pin's prick (1825).


pinscher (n.)

1926, from German Pinscher, also Pinsch, probably from English pinch, in reference to its clipped
ears.


pint (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French pinte liquid measure, pint (13c.), probably from Vulgar Latin *pincta
(source of Old Proven&ccedil;al, Spanish, Italian pinta), altered from Latin picta painted, fem.
past participle of pingere to paint (see paint (v.)), on notion of a painted mark on a vessel
indicating this measure. Used elliptically for pint of ale (or beer) from 1742. Pint-sized small
(especially in reference to children) is recorded from 1938.


pintail (n.)

type of duck, 1767, from pin (n.1) + tail (n.).


pinto (n.)

1860, a horse marked black and white, from American Spanish pinto, literally painted, spotted, from
Spanish, from Vulgar Latin *pinctus, variant of Latin pictus painted, past participle of pingere to
paint (see paint (v.)). Pinto bean is attested from 1916, so called for its markings.


pinwheel (n.)

also pin-wheel, 1690s, a wheel in the striking train of a clock in which pins are fixed to lift the
hammer, from pin (n.) + wheel (n.). Fireworks sense is from 1869.


pinyin (n.)

system of Romanized spelling for Chinese, 1963, from Chinese pinyin to spell, to combine sounds into
syllables, from pin put together + yin sound, tone. Adopted officially by the People's Republic of
China in 1958. Outside China gradually superseding the 19c. Wade-Giles system (Mao Tse-tung is Wade-
Giles, Mao Zedong is pinyin).


piolet (n.)

1868, from Savoy French piolet climber's ice-axe (19c.), diminutive of piolo axe, perhaps from
Medieval Latin piola plane, scraper.


pion (n.)

1951, from Greek letter pi + -on.


pioneer (n.)

1520s, foot soldier who prepares the way for the army, from Middle French pionnier foot-soldier,
pioneer, from Old French paonier foot-soldier (11c.), from peon (see pawn (n.2)). Figurative sense
of person who goes first or does something first is from c.1600. Related: Pioneers.


pioneer (v.)

1780, from pioneer (n.). Related: Pioneered; pioneering.


pious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin pius dutiful, devout, conscientious, religious; faithful to kindred; inspired
by friendship, prompted by natural affections, perhaps [Klein] related to Latin purus pure, clean
(see pure). Often coupled with fraud (n.) from at least 1630s. Related: Piously; piousness.


pip (n.1)

seed of an apple, 1797, shortened form of pipin seed of a fleshy fruit (early 14c.), from Old French
pepin (13c.), probably from a root *pipp-, expressing smallness (compare Italian pippolo, Spanish
pepita seed, kernel).


pip (n.2)

disease of birds, late 14c., probably from Middle Dutch pippe mucus, from West Germanic *pipit
(cognates: East Frisian pip, Middle High German pfipfiz, German Pips), an early borrowing from
Vulgar Latin *pippita, unexplained alteration of Latin pituita phlegm (see pituitary).


pip (n.3)

spot on a playing card, etc. c.1600, peep, of unknown origin. Because of the original form, it is
not considered as connected to pip (n.1). Related: Pips.


pip-pip

slangy salutation current in Britain c.1907-1923, said by Partridge to be in imitation of bicycle
horn noise.


pipe (v.)

Old English pipian to play on a pipe, from Latin pipare to peep, chirp  (see pipe (n.1)). Compare
Dutch pijpen, German pfeifen. Meaning convey through pipes is first recorded 1887. Related: Piped;
piping. Piping hot is in Chaucer, a reference to hissing of food in a frying pan; to pipe up (early
15c.) originally meant to begin to play (on a musical instrument); sense of to speak out is from
1856. Pipe down be quiet is from 1900; earlier in nautical jargon it meant use a boatswain's whistle
to dismiss the men from duty (1833).


pipe (n1.)

Old English pipe musical wind instrument, also tube to convey water, from Vulgar Latin *pipa a pipe,
tube-shaped musical instrument (source of Italian pipa, French pipe, Old Frisian pipe, German
Pfeife, Danish pibe, Swedish pipa, Dutch pijp), a back-formation from Latin pipare to chirp or peep,
of imitative origin. All tubular senses ultimately derive from small reed, whistle. Meaning device
for smoking first recorded 1590s. Pipe-bomb attested from 1960. Pipe-cleaner recorded from 1863.


pipe (n.2)

type of cask, early 14c., from Old French pipe liquid measure, cask for wine, from a special use of
Vulgar Latin *pipa pipe (see pipe (n.1)).


pipe dream (n.)

1870; the sort of improbable fantasy one has while smoking opium; from pipe (n.1) + dream (n.). Old
English pipdream meant piping.


pipeline (n.)

1859, continuous line of pipes, from pipe (n.1) + line (n.). Figurative sense of channel of
communication is from 1921; surfer slang meaning hollow part of a large wave is attested by 1963.


piper (n.)

Old English pipere, agent noun from pipe (v.). As a kind of fish, from c.1600. Expression pay the
piper recorded from 1680s.


pipes (n.)

voice, 1580s, from pipe (n.1).


pipette (n.)

also pipet, 1818, from French pipette, from Middle French pipette tube, diminutive of Old French
pipe, from Vulgar Latin *pipa (see pipe (n.1)).


pippin (n.)

excellent person or thing, 1897, from coveted varieties of apple that were raised from seed (so
called since early 15c.), from Middle English pipin seed (see pip (n.1)).


pipsqueak (n.)

also pip-squeak, 1910, from the trivial noise a young or weak creature makes.


piquancy (n.)

1660s, from piquant + -cy.


piquant (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French piquant pricking, stimulating, irritating, present participle of piquer to
prick, sting, nettle (see pike (n.2)).


pique (v.)

to excite to anger, 1670s, from French piquer to prick, sting (see pike (n.2)). Softened meaning to
stimulate, excite is from 1690s. Related: Piqued; piquing.


pique (n.)

1530s, fit of ill feeling, from Middle French pique a prick, sting, irritation, noun of action from
piquer (see pike (n.2)).


piquet (n.)

card game, 1640s, from French piquet, picquet (16c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps a diminutive of
pic pick, pickaxe, pique, from phrase faire pic, a term said to be used in the game.


piracy (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin piratia, from Greek peirateia piracy, from peirates (see pirate
(n.)).


piranha (n.)

also pirana, 1869, from Portuguese piranha, from Tupi (Brazil) pira nya, variant of pira'ya,
literally scissors.


pirate (n.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), from Latin pirata sailor, corsair, sea robber (source of Spanish,
Italian pirata, Dutch piraat, German Pirat), literally one who attacks (ships), from Greek peirates
brigand, pirate, literally one who attacks, from peiran to attack, make a hostile attempt on, try,
from peira trial, an attempt, attack, from PIE root *per- try (cognates: Latin peritus experienced,
periculum trial, experiment; attempt on or against; enterprise; see peril). An Old English word for
it was s&aelig;scea&#240;a. Meaning one who takes another's work without permission first recorded
1701; sense of unlicensed radio broadcaster is from 1913.


pirate (v.)

1570s, from pirate (n.). Related: Pirated; pirating.


piratical (adj.)

1570s, from Latin piraticus pertaining to pirates, from Greek peiratikos, from peirates pirate (see
pirate (n.)) + -ical. Related: Piratically (1540s).


pirl (v.)

c.1500 (implied in pirled) to twist, wind (thread, etc.), of unknown origin. Related: Pirling.


pirogi (n.)

1854, from Yiddish, from Russian, plural of pirog pie, perhaps borrowed from the Turkic language of
the Kazan Tatars (compare Turkish borek).


pirogue (n.)

1660s, from French pirogue, probably from Galibi (a Carib language) piragua a dug-out. Compare
Spanish piragua (1530s).


pirouette (n.)

1706, from French pirouette spinning top; pirouette in dancing, from Middle French pirouet spinning
top (15c.), from Gallo-Roman root *pir- peg, plug (source of Italian piruolo peg top) + diminutive
suffix -ette.


pirouette (v.)

1822, from pirouette (n.) and also from French pirouetter. Related: Pirouetted; pirouetting.


pis aller (n.)

last resource, what one would do at the worst, 1670s, French, literally to go worse, from pis worse,
from Latin peius, neuter of peior worse (see pejorative) + aller to go.


Pisa

Italian city, from Etruscan, of uncertain meaning. Related: Pisan.


piscatology (n.)

1867, a hybrid from Latin piscatus, past participle of piscari to fish, from pisces a fish (see fish
(n.)) + -ology.


piscatorial (adj.)

1750, from piscatory + -ial.


piscatory (adj.)

1630s, from Latin piscatorius of fishermen, from piscator fisherman, from piscari to fish, from
pisces a fish (see fish (n.)).


Pisces (n.)

12th sign of the zodiac, late Old English, from Latin pisces, from plural of piscis a fish, cognate
with Gothic fisks, Old English fisc (see fish (n.)). Applied to persons born under this sign from
1924.


piscine (n.)

c.1300, reservoir, bathing pool, from Old French piscine fishpond, from Latin piscina, from piscis a
fish (see fish (n.)). Ecclesiastical sense is from late 15c., from Medieval Latin piscina. As an
adjective from 1799.


piscivorous (adj.)

1660s, from Latin piscis fish (see fish (n.)) + -vorous.


Pisgah

1640s, name of the mountain east of the River Jordan, whence Moses was allowed to view the Promised
Land he could not enter (Deut. iii:27); with figurative extension. From Hebrew, literally cleft.


pish

exclamation of contempt, attested from 1590s.


pismire (n.)

ant, late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname), from pyss urine (said to be in reference to the acrid
smell of an anthill) + mire an ant, probably from Old Norse maurr ant (cognates: Swedish myra,
Danish myre, Middle Dutch miere, Dutch mier, Crimean Gothic miera ant), from PIE base *morwi- (see
Formica (2)). Compare pissant, also early Dutch mierseycke (from seycke urine), Finnish kusiainen
(from kusi urine). He is as angry as a pissemyre,Though &thorn;at he haue al that he kan
desire.[Chaucer]Applied contemptuously to persons from 1560s.


piss (v.)

late 13c., from Old French pissier urinate (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *pissiare, of imitative origin.
To piss away (money, etc.) is from 1948. Related: Pissed; pissing. Pissing while (1550s) once meant
a short time.    He shall not piss my money against the wall; he shall not have my money to spend in
liquor. [Grose, Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd edition, 1796]


piss (n.)

late 14c., from piss (v.). As a pure intensifier (piss-poor, piss-ugly, etc.) it dates from World
War II. Piss and vinegar first attested 1942. Piss-prophet one who diagnosed diseases by inspection
of urine is attested from 1620s. Piss proud erect upon awakening is attested from 1796.


piss off (v.)

(intransitive) go away, 1958, chiefly British; (transitive) annoy, 1968, chiefly U.S.; from piss
(v.) + off. Pissed off angry, fed up is attested by 1946 (Partridge says 1937); said to have been
used in the military in World War II; in common use from 1970s.


piss-pot (n.)

mid-15c., from piss + pot (n.1).


pissant (n.)

1660s, an ant, from first element of pismire (q.v.) + ant. Meaning contemptible, insignificant
person is from 1903.    [B]y sun-down [the gals] come pourin out of the woods like pissants out of
an old log when tother end's afire. [Dick Harlan's Tennessee Frolic, in collection A Quarter Race in
Kentucky, Philadelphia, 1846]


pissed (adj.)

1929, drunk, past participle adjective from piss (v.). From 1946 as angry, from piss off.


pissy (adj.)

1926, from piss + -y (2). Figurative use by 1972.


pistachio (n.)

1590s, from Italian pistacchio, from Latin pistacium pistachio nut, from Greek pistakion pistachio
nut, from pistake pistachio tree, from Persian pistah pistachio. Borrowed earlier (1530s) as
pystace, from Old French form pistace (13c.), which also is from the Italian word.


piste (n.)

also pist, 1727, from French piste, from Latin pista (via) beaten (track), from pistus, past
participle of pinsere to pound, stamp (see pestle).


pistil (n.)

female organ of a flower, 1718, from French pistil, from Modern Latin pistillum a pistil, so called
from resemblance to a pestle, from Latin pistillum pestle (see pestle). Related: Pistillary;
pistillaceous; pistillate; pistilline.


pistle (n.)

letter, Old English pistol, a shortening of epistol, from Latin epistola (see epistle).


pistol (n.)

small hand-held firearm, 1570s, from Middle French pistole short firearm (1566), of uncertain
origin, sometimes said to be from German Pistole, from Czech pis'tala firearm, literally tube, pipe,
from pisteti to whistle, of imitative origin, related to Russian pischal shepherd's pipe.    But
earlier English form pistolet (1550) is said to be from Middle French pistolet a small firearm, also
a small dagger, which may be the literal sense; though some connect this word with Italian
pistolese, in reference to Pistoia, town in Tuscany noted for gunsmithing. Pistol-whip (v.) is first
recorded 1942.


pistole (n.)

former Spanish coin (not called that in Spanish), 1590s, from French pistole, from Italian piastola,
diminutive of piastra plate or leaf of metal (see piaster). Compare earlier pistolet (1550s) foreign
coin, which OED says is from French pistolet short firearm (see pistol) and so called for being
smaller and thinner than other coins.


pistolero (n.)

1937, from Spanish; see pistolier.


pistolier (n.)

also pistoleer, 1570s from obsolete French pistolier, from pistole (see pistol).


piston (n.)

1704, from French piston, from Middle French piston large pestle, from Old Italian pistone a piston,
variant of pestone a pestle, from pestare to pound, from Late Latin pistare, frequentative of Latin
pinsere (past participle pistus) to pound (see pestle). As a verb from 1930.


pit (n.1)

hole, cavity, Old English pytt water hole, well; pit, grave, from Proto-Germanic *puttjaz pool,
puddle (cognates: Old Frisian pet, Old Saxon putti, Old Norse pyttr, Middle Dutch putte, Dutch put,
Old High German pfuzza, German Pf&uuml;tze pool, puddle), early borrowing from Latin puteus well,
pit, shaft. Meaning abode of evil spirits, hell is attested from early 13c. Pit of the stomach
(1650s) is from the slight depression there between the ribs.


pit (v.)

mid-15c., to put into a pit, from pit (n.1); especially for purposes of fighting (of cocks, dogs,
pugilists) from 1760. Figurative sense of to set in rivalry is from 1754. Meaning to make pits in is
from late 15c. Related: Pitted; pitting. Compare Pit-bull as a dog breed attested from 1922, short
for pit-bull terrier (by 1912). This also is the notion behind the meaning the part of a theater on
the floor of the house (1640s).


pit (n.2)

hard seed, 1841, from Dutch pit kernel, seed, marrow, from Middle Dutch pitte, ultimately from West
Germanic *pithan-, source of pith (q.v.).


pit-a-pat (adv.)

also pitter-pat, 1520s; imitative. As a noun from 1580s.


pita (n.)

thick, flat bread, 1951, from Modern Hebrew pita or Modern Greek petta bread, perhaps from Greek
peptos cooked, or somehow connected to pizza (q.v.).


pitch (n.2)

resinous substance, wood tar, late 12c., pich, from Old English pic pitch, from a Germanic borrowing
(Old Saxon and Old Frisian pik, Middle Dutch pik, Dutch pek, Old High German pek, German Pech, Old
Norse bik) of Latin pix (genitive picis) pitch, from PIE root *pi- sap, juice (cognates: Greek
pissa, Lithuanian pikis, Old Church Slavonic piklu pitch; see pine (n.)). Applied to pine resins
from late 14c. Pitch-black is attested from 1590s; pitch-dark from 1680s.


pitch (v.1)

c.1200, to thrust in, fasten, settle, probably from an unrecorded Old English *piccean, related to
prick (v.). The original past tense was pight. Sense of set upright, as in pitch a tent (late 13c.),
is from notion of driving in the pegs. Meaning to incline forward and downward is from 1510s.
Meaning throw (a ball) evolved late 14c. from that of hit the mark. Musical sense is from 1670s. Of
ships, to plunge in the waves, 1620s. To pitch in work vigorously is from 1847, perhaps from farm
labor. Related: Pitched; pitching.


pitch (n.1)

1520s, something that is pitched, from pitch (v.1). Meaning act of throwing is attested from 1833.
Meaning act of plunging headfirst is from 1762; sense of slope, degree, inclination is from 1540s;
musical sense is from 1590s; but the connection of these is obscure. Sales pitch in the modern
commercial advertising sense is from 1943, American English, perhaps from the baseball sense.


pitch (v.2)

to cover with pitch, Old English pician, from the source of pitch (n.2).


pitch-pipe (n.)

1711, from pitch (n.) in the musical sense + pipe (n.1).


pitchblende (n.)

also pitch-blende, 1770, a loan-translation of German Pechblende; see pitch (n.2) + blende.


pitcher (n.1)

earthen jug, c.1200, from Old French pichier (12c.), altered from bichier, from Medieval Latin
bicarium, probably from Greek bikos earthen vessel (see beaker). Pitcher-plant is recorded from
1819; so called for its resemblance.


pitcher (n.2)

one who pitches, 1722, agent noun from pitch (v.1). Originally of one tossing hay into a wagon,
etc.; baseball sense first recorded 1845.


pitchfork (n.)

mid-14c., altered (by influence of pichen to throw, thrust; see pitch (v.1)) from Middle English
pic-forken (c.1200), from pik (see pike (n.4)) + fork (n.). The verb is attested from 1837.


pitchman (n.)

1926, American English, from pitch (n.1) in the sales sense + man (n.).


piteous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French pitous, Old French pitos pious; merciful, compassionate, moved to pity;
pitiful (12c., Modern French piteux), from Medieval Latin pietosus merciful, pitiful, in Vulgar
Latin dutiful, from Latin pietas dutiful conduct, compassion (see piety). Related: Piteously;
piteousness.


pitfall (n.)

c.1300, concealed hole, a type of animal trap, from pit (n.1) + fall (n.). Extended sense of any
hidden danger is first recorded early 15c.


pith (n.)

Old English pi&thorn;a pith of plants, also essential part, from West Germanic *pithan- (cognates:
Middle Dutch pitte, Dutch pit, East Frisian pit), a Low German root of uncertain origin. Figurative
sense was in Old English. Pith helmet (1889, earlier pith hat, 1884) so called because it is made
from the dried pith of the Bengal spongewood.


pith (v.)

to kill by piercing the spinal cord, 1805, from pith (n.). Related: Pithed; pithing.


pithecanthropus (n.)

genus of extinct primates, 1895, from Modern Latin, literally monkey-man, from Greek pithekos ape +
anthropos man (see anthropo-). Coined 1868 by Haeckel as a name for a hypothetical link between apes
and men (attested in English in this sense from 1876); applied by Dr. Eug&egrave;ne Dubois
(1858-1940), physician of the Dutch army in Java, to remains he found there in 1891.


pitheco-

before vowels pithec-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to an ape or monkey, from Greek
pithekos ape.


pithy (adj.)

early 14c., strong, vigorous, from pith (n.) + -y (2). Meaning full of substance or significance is
from 1520s; literal meaning full of pith not attested until 1560s. Related: Pithily; pithiness.


pitiable (adj.)

mid-15c., merciful, compassionate, from Old French piteable compassionate, merciful, pious (13c.;
Modern French pitoyable), from piteer to pity (see pity). Meaning deserving pity is recorded from
late 15c. Related: Pitiably.


pitiful (adj.)

c.1300, merciful, compassionate (implied in pitifully), from pity + -ful. Sense of exciting or
deserving pity is from mid-15c.; that of mean, wretched, contemptible is 1580s. Related:
Pitifulness.


pitiless (adj.)

early 15c., from pity + -less. Related: Pitilessly; pitilessness.


piton (n.)

1898, from French piton hook, peak of a mountain, piton, eyebolt, in Old French nail, hook, from
Vulgar Latin root *pitt- point, peak [Barnhart].


pits (n.)

the worst, by 1953, U.S. slang, said to be a shortened form of armpits.


pittance (n.)

c.1200, pious donation to a religious house or order to provide extra food; the extra food provided,
also a small portion, scanty rations, from Old French pitance pity, mercy, compassion; refreshment,
nourishment; portion of food allowed a monk or poor person by a pious bequest, apparently literally
pity, from piti&eacute; (see pity). Meaning small amount, portion first recorded 1560s.


pituitary (adj.)

1610s, from Latin pituitarius mucous, from pituita clammy moisture, phlegm, mucus, slime, possibly
from PIE root *peie- to be fat, swell (see pine (n.)). Taken as the name for the gland because it
was believed that it channeled mucus to the nose. As a noun by 1899.


pity (n.)

early 13c., from Old French pite, pitet pity, mercy, compassion, care, tenderness; pitiful state,
wretched condition (11c., Modern French piti&eacute;), from Latin pietatem (nominative pietas)
piety, loyalty, duty (see piety). Replaced Old English mildheortness, literally mild-heartness,
itself a loan-translation of Latin misericordia. English pity and piety were not fully distinguished
until 17c. Transferred sense of grounds or cause for pity is from late 14c.


pity (v.)

to feel pity for, late 15c., from Old French pitier and from pity (n.). Related: Pitied; pitying.


Pius

masc. proper name, from Latin pius dutiful, pious (see pious).


pivot (n.)

1610s, from French pivot, from Old French pivot hinge pin, pivot (12c.), also penis, of uncertain
origin. Figurative sense of central point is recorded from 1813.


pivot (v.)

by 1841, from French pivoter and from pivot (n). Related: Pivoted; pivoting.


pivotal (adj.)

1844, in figurative sense, from pivot (n.) + -al (1).


pix (n.)

variant of pics, 1930 (see pic).


pixel (n.)

1969, coined to describe the photographic elements of a television image, from pix + first syllable
of element.


pixelation (n.)

also pixellation, graphics display effect, 1991, from pixel + -ation.


pixie (n.)

c.1630, of obscure origin, perhaps from or related to Swedish dialect pyske small fairy, but West
County origin suggests ultimate source in Cornwall and thus something Celtic. Earliest references
were in pixy-path bewilderment, literally path on which one is led astray by pixies, and pixie-led
lost.


pixilated (adj.)

mildly insane, bewildered, tipsy, 1848, pix-e-lated, from pixie + -lated, as in elated, etc.,
perhaps influenced by or a variant of pixie-led. A New England dialect word popularized 1936 by its
use in movie Mr. Deeds Goes to Town.


pixilation (n.)

creation of the effect of animation in live actors, 1947, from pixilated. Also see pixelation.


pizazz (n.)

also pizzaz; pizzazz, 1937, probably originally college or show-biz slang.Pizazz, to quote the
editor of the Harvard Lampoon, is an indefinable dynamic quality, the je ne sais quoi of function;
as for instance, adding Scotch puts pizazz into a drink. Certain clothes have it, too. [Harper's
Bazaar, March 1937]


pizza (n.)

1935, from Italian pizza, originally cake, tart, pie, of uncertain origin. The 1907 Vocabolario
Etimologico della Lingua Italiana reports it is said to be from dialectal pinza clamp (from Latin
pinsere to pound, stamp). Klein suggests a connection via loan-translation with Medieval Greek pitta
cake, pie, from Greek pitta pitch (cognate with Latin adjective piceus of pitch). See also pita.


pizzeria (n.)

1943, likely in use in American English in restaurant names by 1930, from pizza with ending as in
cafeteria.


pizzicato (n.)

1845, from Italian pizzicato plucked, past participle of pizzicare to pluck (strings), pinch, from
pizzare to prick, to sting, from Old Italian pizzo point, edge, from Vulgar Latin *pits-, probably
of imitative origin. As an adjective from 1880.


pizzle (n.)

penis of a bull used as a flogging instrument, 1520s, from Low German pesel or Flemish pezel,
diminutive of root of Dutch pees sinew, from Old Low German root *pisa.


placable (adj.)

c.1500, pleasing, from Middle French placable forgiving, conciliatory and directly from Latin
placabilis easily appeased or pacified, from placare to appease (see placate). From 1580s as capable
of being pleased. Related: Placably; placability.


placard (n.)

late 15c., formal document authenticated by an affixed seal, from Middle French placquard official
document with a large, flat seal, also plate of armor, from Old French plaquier to lay on, cover up,
plaster over, from Middle Dutch placken to patch (a garment), to plaster, related to Middle High
German placke patch, stain, German Placken spot, patch. Meaning poster first recorded 1550s in
English; this sense is in Middle French from 15c.


placate (v.)

1670s, a back-formation from placation or else from Latin placatus soothed, quiet, gentle, calm,
peaceful, past participle of placare to calm, appease, quiet, soothe, assuage, related to placere to
please (see please). Related: Placated; placating; placatingly.


placation (n.)

1580s, from French placation (16c.), from Latin placationem (nominative placatio) an appeasing,
pacifying, quieting, noun of action from past participle stem of placare (see placate).


placatory (adj.)

1630s, from Latin placatorius pertaining to appeasing, from placat-, past participle stem of placare
to appease (see placate).


place (n.)

c.1200, space, dimensional extent, room, area, from Old French place place, spot (12c.) and directly
from Medieval Latin placea place, spot, from Latin platea courtyard, open space; broad way, avenue,
from Greek plateia (hodos) broad (way), fem. of platys broad (see plaice).    Replaced Old English
stow and stede. From mid-13c. as particular part of space, extent, definite location, spot, site;
from early 14c. as position or place occupied by custom, etc.; position on some social scale; from
late 14c. as inhabited place, town, country, also place on the surface of something, portion of
something, part, also, office, post. Meaning group of houses in a town is from 1580s.    Also from
the same Latin source are Italian piazza, Catalan plassa, Spanish plaza, Middle Dutch plaetse, Dutch
plaats, German Platz, Danish plads, Norwegian plass. Wide application in English covers meanings
that in French require three words: place, lieu, and endroit. Cognate Italian piazza and Spanish
plaza retain more of the etymological sense.    To take place happen is from mid-15c. To know
(one's) place is from c.1600; hence figurative expression put (someone) in his or her place (1855).
Place of worship attested from 1689, originally in official papers and in reference to assemblies of
dissenters from the Church of England. All over the place in disorder is attested from 1923.


place (v.)

mid-15c., to determine the position of; also to put (something somewhere), from place (n.). In the
horse racing sense of to achieve a certain position (usually in the top three finishers; in U.S.,
specifically second place) it is first attested 1924, from earlier meaning to state the position of
(among the first three finishers), 1826. Related: Placed; placing. To take place to happen, be
accomplished (mid-15c., earlier have place, late 14c.), translates French avoir lieu.


place-holder (n.)

also placeholder, 1550s, from place (n.) + holder (n.).


place-kick (n.)

1845, originally in rugby, from place + kick (n.). Related: Place-kicking.


place-mat (n.)

1949, from place (n.) + mat (n.).


place-setting (n.)

1939, from place (n.) + setting (n.).


placebo (n.)

early 13c., name given to the rite of Vespers of the Office of the Dead, so called from the opening
of the first antiphon, I will please the Lord in the land of the living (Psalm cxiv:9), from Latin
placebo I shall please, future indicative of placere to please (see please). Medical sense is first
recorded 1785, a medicine given more to please than to benefit the patient. Placebo effect attested
from 1900.


placement (n.)

1835, from place (v.) + -ment.


placenta (n.)

1670s of plants, 1690s of mammals, from Modern Latin placenta uterina uterine cake (so called 16c.
by Italian anatomist Realdo Colombo), from Latin placenta a cake, flat cake, from Greek plakoenta,
accusative of plakoeis flat, related to plax (genitive plakos) level surface, anything flat, from
PIE *plak- (1) to be flat (cognates: Greek plakoeis flat, Lettish plakt to become flat, Old Norse
flaga layer of earth, Norwegian flag open sea, Old English floh piece of stone, fragment, Old High
German fluoh cliff), extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)). So called
from the shape.


placental (adj.)

1808, from Modern Latin placentalis, from placenta (see placenta).


placid (adj.)

1620s, from French placide (15c.) and directly from Latin placidus pleasing, peaceful, quiet,
gentle, still, calm, from placere to please (see please). Related: Placidly; placidness.


placidity (n.)

1610s, from Latin placiditatem (nominative placiditas), from placidus (see placid).


plagal (adj.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin plagalis, from plaga the plagal mode, probably from plagius, from
Medieval Greek plagius plagal, in classical Greek oblique, from plagos side (see plagio-).


plage (n.)

a region, late 14c., from Old French plage (13c.), from Late Latin plagia a plain, shore, noun use
of adjective (plagia regio), from plaga a region, stretch of country (see pelagic). Astronomical
sense is from 1949.


plagiarise (v.)

alternative (chiefly British) spelling of plagiarize. Related: Plagiarised; plagiarising.


plagiarism (n.)

1620s, from -ism + plagiary (n.) plagiarist, literary thief (1590s), from Latin plagiarius
kidnapper, seducer, plunderer, one who kidnaps the child or slave of another, used by Martial in the
sense of literary thief, from plagiare to kidnap, plagium kidnapping, from plaga snare, hunting net,
perhaps from PIE *plag- (on notion of something extended), from root *plak- (1) to be flat (see
placenta).


plagiarist (n.)

1670s, from plagiary plagiarist (see plagiarism) + -ist. Related: Plagiaristic.


plagiarize (v.)

1716, from plagiary plagiarist (see plagiarism) + -ize. Related: Plagiarized; plagiarizing.


plagio-

before vowels plagi-, word-forming element meaning slanting, oblique, from comb. form of Greek
plagios oblique, slanting, from plagos side, from PIE *plag- flat, spread, from *plak- (1) to be
flat (see placenta).


plagioclase (n.)

triclinic feldspar, 1868, from German, coined 1847 by German mineralogist Johann Friedrich August
Breithaupt (1791-1873) from plagio- + Greek klasis fracture, from stem of klan to break (see
clastic). Related: Plagioclastic.


plague (n.)

late 14c., plage, affliction, calamity, evil, scourge; early 15c., malignant disease, from Old
French plage (14c.), from Late Latin plaga, used in Vulgate for pestilence, from Latin plaga stroke,
wound, probably from root of plangere to strike, lament (by beating the breast), from or cognate
with Greek (Doric) plaga blow, from PIE *plak- (2) to strike, to hit (cognates: Greek plazein to
drive away, plessein to beat, strike; Old English flocan to strike, beat; Gothic flokan to bewail;
German fluchen, Old Frisian floka to curse).    The Latin word also is the source of Old Irish plag
(genitive plaige) plague, pestilence, German Plage, Dutch plaage. Meaning epidemic that causes many
deaths is from 1540s; specifically in reference to bubonic plague from c.1600. Modern spelling
follows French, which had plague from 15c. Weakened sense of anything annoying is from c.1600.


plague (v.)

late 15c., from Middle Dutch plaghen, from plaghe (n.) plague (see plague (n.)). Sense of bother,
annoy it is first recorded 1590s. Related: Plagued; plaguing.


plaguey (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to a plague, from plague (n.) + -y (2). Figurative meaning vexatious, troublesome
is from 1610s. As an adverb (properly it would be plaguily) it is attested from 1580s, often with
deliberate attempt at humor. Johnson also has woundy excessive.


plaice (n.)

type of European edible flatfish, late 13c., from Old French plaise (12c., Modern French plie), from
Late Latin platessa plaice, flatfish, perhaps related to or from Greek platys broad, flat, from PIE
*plat- to spread (cognates: Sanskrit prathati spreads out; Hittite palhi broad; Lithuanian platus
broad; German Fladen flat cake; Old Norse flatr flat; Old English flet floor, dwelling; Old Irish
lethan broad); extended variant form of root *pele- (2) flat; to spread (see plane (n.1)).


plaid (n.)

1510s, from Scottish, from or related to Gaelic plaide blanket, mantle, of unknown origin, perhaps a
contraction of peallaid sheepskin, from peall skin, from Latin pellis (but OED finds this
phonetically improbable). The wearing of it by males forbidden by act of parliament, under penalty
of transportation, 1746-82. As an adjective c.1600, from the noun.


plain (adj.)

c.1300, flat, smooth, from Old French plain flat, smooth, even (12c.), from Latin planus flat, even,
level (see plane (n.1)). Sense of evident is from, c.1300; that of free from obstruction is early
14c.; meaning simple, sincere, ordinary is recorded from late 14c., especially of dress,
unembellished, without decoration.    In reference to the dress and speech of Quakers, it is
recorded from 1824; of Amish and Mennonites, from 1894 (in the Dutch regions of Pennsylvania Plain
with the capital is shorthand adjective for Amish and Old Order Mennonite). Of appearance, as a
euphemism for ill-favored, ugly it dates from 1749. Of envelopes from 1913. As an adverb from early
14c. Plain English is from c.1500. Plain dealer one who deals plainly or speaks candidly is from
1570s, marked Now rare in OED 2nd edition. To be as plain as the nose on (one's) face is from 1690s.


plain (n.)

level country, c.1300 (in reference to Salisbury Plain), from Old French plain open countryside,
from Latin planum level ground, plain, noun use of neuter of planus (adj.) flat, even, level (see
plane (n.1)). Latin planum was used for level ground but much more common was campus.


plain clothes (n.)

ordinary dress (as opposed to military uniform), 1822; of police detectives, it is attested from
1842. Also plainclothes.


plain Jane

unattractive woman, first attested 1912.


plain-song (n.)

also plainsong, plain-song, 1510s, translating Latin cantus planus, French plain chant.


plain-spoken (adj.)

1670s, from plain (adj.) + spoken.


plainly (adv.)

late 14c., from plain (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning simply, frugally is from 1560s.


plainness (n.)

c.1300, flatness, from plain (adj.) + -ness. Meaning clarity is mid-15c.; that of open conduct is
from 1540s; that of absence of ornament is from 1580s.


plains (n.)

of the American Midwest, 1755 (in singular form from 1680s), see plain (n.). Plains Indian attested
from 1844.


plainsman (n.)

1858, from plains + man (n.).


plaint (n.)

expression of sorrow, c.1200, from Old French plainte lament, lamentation (12c.), from Latin
planctus lamentation, wailing, beating of the breast, from past participle stem of plangere to
lament, to strike (see plague (n.)). Connecting notion probably is beating one's breast in grief.


plaintiff (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French pleintif (late 13c.), noun use of Old French plaintif complaining;
wretched, miserable, from plainte (see plaint). Identical with plaintive at first; the form that
receded into legal usage retained the older -iff spelling.


plaintive (adj.)

late 14c., lamenting, from Old French plaintif complaining; wretched, miserable, from plainte (see
plaint). Sense of mournful, sad first recorded 1570s. Related: Plaintively; plaintiveness.


plait (v.)

late 14c., to fold, gather in pleats, also to braid or weave, from Old French pleir to fold, variant
of ploier, ployer to fold, bend, from Latin plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)). Related: Plaited;
plaiting.


plait (n.)

c.1400, a fold, a crease, from Anglo-French pleit, Old French ploit, earlier pleit, fold, manner of
folding, from Latin plicatus, past participle of plicare to lay, fold, twist (see ply (v.1)).
Meaning interlaced strands of hair, ribbon, etc. is from 1520s, perhaps from plait (v.).


plan (n.)

1670s as a technical term in perspective drawing; 1706 as drawing, sketch, or diagram of any object,
from French plan ground plan, map, literally plane surface (mid-16c.), from Latin planum level or
flat surface, noun use of adjective planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). The notion is of a drawing
on a flat surface. Meaning scheme of action, design is first recorded 1706, possibly influenced by
French planter to plant, from Italian planta ground plan.


plan (v.)

1728, make a plan of, from plan (n.). Related: Planned; planning; plans. Planned economy is attested
from 1931. Planned Parenthood (1942) formerly was Birth Control Federation of America.


planar (adj.)

1850, from Latin planaris level, flat, from planum plane (see plane (n.1)).


Planaria (n.)

flat worm-like animal, 1819, from Modern Latin (1776) noun use of fem. of Latin planarius, literally
on level ground (here used to mean flat), from planum, planus flat, level, even, plain (see plane
(n.1)). Related: Planarian.


planchet (n.)

metal disk out of which a coin is made, 1610s, from French planchette, literally a small board,
diminutive of Old French planche (12c.), from Latin planca board, slab, plank (see plank). The
planchette used in automatism and on Ouija boards is a re-borrowing of the French word, 1860.


Planck

in physics, in reference to the work of German physicist Max Planck (1858-1947); such as Planck's
constant, attested in English from 1901.


plane (n.1)

flat surface, c.1600, from Latin planum flat surface, plane, level, plain, noun use of neuter of
adjective planus flat, level, even, plain, clear, from PIE *pla-no- (cognates: Lithuanian plonas
thin; Celtic *lanon plain; perhaps also Greek pelanos sacrificial cake, a mixture offered to the
gods, offering (of meal, honey, and oil) poured or spread), suffixed form of root *pele- (2) to
spread out, broad, flat (cognates: Old Church Slavonic polje flat land, field, Russian polyi open;
Old English and Old High German feld, Middle Dutch veld field). Introduced (perhaps by influence of
French plan in this sense) to differentiate the geometrical senses from plain, which in mid-16c.
English also meant geonetric plane. Figurative sense is attested from 1850. As an adjective from
1660s.


plane (n.2)

1908, short for aeroplane (see airplane).


plane (n.3)

tool for smoothing surfaces, mid-14c., from Old French plane, earlier plaine (14c.), from Late Latin
plana, back-formation from planare make level, from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)).


plane (v.2)

soar, glide on motionless wings, early 15c., from Old French planer to hover (as a bird), to lie
flat, from plan (n.) plane, from Latin planum flat surface (see plane (n.1)), on notion of bird
gliding with flattened wings. Of boats, etc., to skim over the surface of water, it is first found
1913. Related: Planed; planing.


plane (n.4)

tree of the genus Platanus, late 14c., from Old French plane, earlier plasne (14c.), from Latin
platanus, from Greek platanos, earlier platanistos plane tree, a species from Asia Minor, associated
with platys broad (see plaice (n.)), in reference to its leaves. Applied since 1778 in Scotland and
northern England to the sycamore, whose leaves somewhat resemble those of the true plane tree.


plane (v.1)

to make smooth, early 14c., to gloss over, explain away; mid-14c. as to make smooth or even, from
Old French planer to smooth, level off; wipe away, erase (12c.), from Late Latin planare make level,
from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). In early use in English often plain. Related:
Planed; planing.


planet (n.)

late Old English planete, from Old French planete (Modern French plan&egrave;te), from Late Latin
planeta, from Greek planetes, from (asteres) planetai wandering (stars), from planasthai to wander,
of unknown origin, possibly from PIE *pele- (2) flat, to spread on notion of spread out. So called
because they have apparent motion, unlike the fixed stars. Originally including also the moon and
sun; modern scientific sense of world that orbits a star is from 1630s.


planetarium (n.)

1734, orrery, Modern Latin, from Late Latin planeta (see planet) + Latin -arium a place for. Sense
of device for projecting the night sky onto the interior of a dome is attested from 1929.


planetary (adj.)

1590s; see planet + -ary. Probably from Late Latin planetarius pertaining to a planet or planets,
but this is attested only as an astrologer. Planetary nebula, so called for its shape, attested from
1785.


plangent (adj.)

beating with a loud sound, 1822, from Latin plangentem (nominative plangens), present participle of
plangere to strike, beat (see plague (n.)). Related: Plangently.


plani-

word-forming element meaning level, plane, from Latin plani-, from planus flat, level (see plane
(n.1)).


planisphere (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin planisphaerium, from Latin planus (see plane (n.1)) + sphaera (see
sphere (n.)).


plank (n.)

late 13c. (c.1200 as a surname), from Old North French planke, variant of Old French planche plank,
slab, little wooden bridge (12c.), from Late Latin planca broad slab, board, probably from Latin
plancus flat, flat-footed, from PIE *plak- (1) to be flat (see placenta). Technically, timber sawed
to measure 2 to 6 inches thick, 9 inches or more wide, and 8 feet or more long. Political sense of
item of a party platform is U.S. coinage from 1848. To walk the plank, supposedly a pirate
punishment, is first attested 1789 and most early references are to slave-traders disposing of
excess human cargo in crossing the ocean.


planktology (n.)

1892, from German planktologie (1891); see plankton + -logy. The native formation planktonology
(1896) is less common.


plankton (n.)

1891, from German Plankton (1887), coined by German physiologist Viktor Hensen (1835-1924) from
Greek plankton, neuter of planktos wandering, drifting, verbal adjective from plazesthai to wander,
drift, from plazein to drive astray, from PIE root *plak- (2) to strike, hit  (see plague (n.)).
Related: Planktonic.


planner (n.)

1716, one who plans, agent noun from plan (v.). Derogatory variant planster attested from 1945.
Meaning book or device that enables one to plan is from 1971.


planning (n.)

1748, verbal noun from plan (v.).


plano-

alternative form of Latin plani- flat, level, but also used in sciences as a comb. form of Greek
planos wandering (see planet).


plant (n.)

Old English plante young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, from Latin planta sprout, shoot, cutting
(source of Spanish planta, French plante), perhaps from *plantare to drive in with the feet, push
into the ground with the feet, from planta sole of the foot, from nasalized form of PIE *plat- to
spread, flat (see place (n.)).    Broader sense of any vegetable life, vegetation generally is first
recorded 1550s. Most extended usages are from the verb, on the notion of something planted; such as
construction for an industrial process, 1789, at first with reference to the set-up of machinery,
later also the building; also slang meaning a spy (1812). Many of these follow similar developments
in the French form of the word. German Pflanz, Irish cland, Welsh plant are from Latin.


plant (v.)

put in the ground to grow, Old English plantian, from Latin plantare (see plant (n.)). Reinforced by
cognate Old French planter. Without reference to growing, to insert firmly, late 14c. Of colonies
from c.1300. Figuratively, of ideas, etc., from early 15c. Meaning to bury is U.S. slang from U.S.,
1855. Related: Planted; planting.


plantain (n.1)

banana, 1550s, plantan, from Spanish pl&aacute;tano, pl&aacute;ntano, probably from Carib palatana
banana (Arawak pratane), and altered by association with Spanish pl&aacute;tano plane tree, from
Medieval Latin plantanus plane tree, itself altered (by association with Latin planta plant) from
Latin platanus (see plane (n.4)). So called from the shape of its leaves. There is no similarity or
relation between this plant and plantain (n.2).


plantain (n.2)

weed of the genus Plantago, mid-13c., from Anglo-French plaunteyne, Old French plantain, from Latin
plantaginem (nominative plantago), the common weed, from planta sole of the foot (see plant (n.));
so called from its flat leaves.


plantar (adj.)

1706, from Latin plantaris pertaining to the sole of the foot, from planta sole of the foot (see
plant (n.)).


plantation (n.)

mid-15c., action of planting, from Middle French plantation, from Latin plantationem (nominative
plantatio) a planting, noun of action from past participle stem of plantare to plant (see plant).
Historically used for colony, settlement in a new land (1610s); meaning large farm on which tobacco
or cotton is grown is first recorded 1706.


planter (n.)

one who sows seeds, late 14c., agent noun from plant (v.). Mechanical sense by 1850. Meaning
proprietor of a cultivated estate in West Indies or southern colonies of North America is from
1640s, hence planter's punch (1924). Meaning a pot for growing plants recorded by 1959.


plantigrade (adj.)

1831, from French plantigrade walking on the sole of the foot (1795), from Latin planta sole of the
foot (see plant (n.)) + gradus step (see grade (n.)).


planting (n.)

late Old English plantung action of planting, also a thing planted, verbal noun from plant (v.).


planxty (n.)

in Irish music, harp tune of a sportive and animated character [OED], 1790, of unknown origin,
evidently not a native Irish word; some suggest ultimate derivation from Latin plangere to strike,
beat  (see plague (n.)). See also [Katrin Thier, Of Picts and Penguins -- Celtic Languages in the
New Edition of the OED, in The Celtic Languages in Contact, 2007.


plaque (n.)

1848, ornamental plate or tablet, from French plaque metal plate, coin (15c.), perhaps through
Flemish placke small coin, from Middle Dutch placke disk, patch, stain, related to German Placken
spot, patch (compare placard). Meaning deposit on walls of arteries is first attested 1891; that of
bacteria deposits on teeth is 1898.


plaquemines

parish at the mouth of the Mississippi in Louisiana, U.S., from Louisiana French, literally
persimmon (18c.), probably from Miami/Illinois (Algonquian)  piakimina.


plash (v.1)

to splash, 1580s, from plash (n.) and also imitative (compare Dutch plassen, German platschen).
Related: Plashed; plashing.


plash (n.)

small puddle, shallow pool, wet ground, Old English pl&aelig;sc pool of water, puddle, probably
imitative (compare Dutch plass pool). Meaning noise made by splashing is first recorded 1510s.


plash (v.2)

to interlace, late 15c., from Old French plaissier, from Latin plectere to plait (see complex
(adj.)). Related: Plashed; plashing.


plasm (n.)

1610s, mold or matrix, cast; see plasma. Meaning living matter of a cell is from 1864.


plasma (n.)

1712, form, shape (earlier plasm), from Late Latin plasma, from Greek plasma something molded or
created, hence image, figure; counterfeit, forgery; formed style, affectation, from plassein to
mold, originally to spread thin, from PIE *plath-yein, from root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see
plane (n.1)). Sense of liquid part of blood is from 1845; that of ionized gas is 1928.


plasmid (n.)

1952, from plasma + -id.


plasmodium (n.)

1871, Modern Latin, coined 1863 in Germany from plasma + -odium, from Greek -odes like (see -oid).


plasmolysis (n.)

1883, from French plasmolysis (1877), from plasmo- (see plasma) + Greek lysis a loosening (see
-lysis). Related: Plasmolytic; plasmolyze.


plaster (n.)

late Old English plaster medicinal application, from Vulgar Latin plastrum, shortened from Latin
emplastrum a plaster (in the medical as well as the building sense), from Greek emplastron salve,
plaster (used by Galen instead of more usual emplaston), noun use of neuter of emplastos daubed on,
from en- on + plastos molded, from plassein to mold (see plasma). The building construction material
is first recorded in English c.1300, via Old French plastre, from the same source, and in early use
the English word often had the French spelling.


plaster (v.)

to coat with plaster, early 14c., from plaster (n.) and partly Old French plastrier to cover with
plaster (Modern French pl&#226;trer), from plastre (see plaster (n.). Related: Plastered;
plastering. Figurative use from c.1600. Meaning to bomb (a target) heavily is first recorded 1915.
Sports sense of to defeat decisively is from 1919.


plaster of Paris (n.)

mid-15c.; originally it was made from the extensive gypsum deposits of Montmartre in Paris.


plastered (adj.)

coated with plaster, late 14c., past participle adjective from plaster (v.). Slang meaning very
drunk attested by 1912, perhaps from plaster in medical sense of to apply a remedy to; to soothe
(see plaster (n.)).


plastic (n.)

1905, solid substance that can be molded, originally of dental molds, from plastic (adj.). Main
current meaning, synthetic product made from oil derivatives, first recorded 1909, coined by Leo
Baekeland (see bakelite).


plastic (adj.)

1630s, capable of shaping or molding, from Latin plasticus, from Greek plastikos able to be molded,
pertaining to molding, fit for molding, also in reference to the arts, from plastos molded, formed,
verbal adjective from plassein to mold (see plasma). Surgical sense of remedying a deficiency of
structure is first recorded 1839 (in plastic surgery). Meaning made of plastic is from 1909. Picked
up in counterculture slang with meaning false, superficial (1963). Plastic explosive (n.) attested
from 1894.


Plasticine

modeling clay substitute, 1897, from plastic (adj.) + -ine (2).


plasticity

1782, from plastic + -ity.


plastid (n.)

1876, from German plastid, coined by Haeckel from Greek plastos molded, formed (see plaster) + -id.


plastron (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French plastron breastplate, from Italian piastrone, augmentative of  piastra
breastplate, thin metal plate (see piaster). As an animal part, from 1813; as an article of dress,
1876.


plat (n.)

piece of ground, 1510s, from plot (q.v.), assimilated to Middle English adjective plat flat, which
is from Old French plat flat, stretched out (see plateau (n.)). See OED for full explanation.


plat (v.)

to interweave, late 14c., variant of plait (v.). Related: Platted; platting.


plate (n.)

mid-13c., flat sheet of gold or silver, also flat, round coin, from Old French plate thin piece of
metal (late 12c.), from Medieval Latin plata plate, piece of metal, perhaps via Vulgar Latin
*plattus, formed on model of Greek platys flat, broad (see plaice (n.)). The cognate in Spanish
(plata) and Portuguese (prata) has become the usual word for silver, superseding argento via
shortening of *plata d'argento plate of silver, coin. Meaning table utensils (originally of silver
or gold only) is from Middle English. Meaning shallow dish for food, now usually of china or
earthenware, originally of metal or wood, is from mid-15c. Baseball sense is from 1857. Geological
sense is first attested 1904; plate tectonics first recorded 1969. Plate-glass first recorded 1727.


plate (v.)

late 14c., from plate (n.). Related: Plated; plating.


plateau (v.)

1952, from plateau (n.). Related: Plateaued; plateauing.


plateau (n.)

1796, elevated tract of relatively level land, from French plateau table-land, from Old French
platel (12c.) flat piece of metal, wood, etc., diminutive of plat flat surface or thing, noun use of
adjective plat flat, stretched out (12c.), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *plattus, from Greek platys
flat, wide, broad (see plaice). Meaning stage at which no progress is apparent is attested from
1897, originally in psychology of learning. In reference to sexual stimulation from 1960.


platelet (n.)

1895, formed in English from plate + diminutive suffix -let.


platen (n.)

1540s, from Middle French plateine, from Old French platine flat piece, metal plate (13c.), perhaps
altered (by influence of plat flat) from patene, from Latin patena pan.


platform (n.)

1540s, plan of action, scheme, design, from Middle French plateforme, platte fourme, literally flat
form, from Old French plat flat (see plateau (n.)) + forme form (see form (n.)). The literal sense
of raised, level surface in English is first recorded 1550s. Political meaning, statement of party
policies, is from 1803, probably originally an image of a literal platform on which politicians
gather, stand, and make their appeals, perhaps influenced by earlier sense of set of rules governing
church doctrine (first attested 1570s). Railroad station sense is from 1838.


platinum (n.)

metallic element, 1812, Modern Latin, from Spanish platina platinum, diminutive of plata silver,
from Old French plate or Old Proven&ccedil;al plata sheet of metal (see plate (n.)). The metal looks
like silver, and the Spaniards at first thought it an inferior sort of silver, hence the name
platina. It was first obtained from Spanish colonies in Mexico and Colombia, brought to Europe in
1735, and identified as an element 1741. Taken into English as platina (c.1750), it took its modern
form (with element ending -ium) in 1812, at the time the names of elements were being regularized.
As a shade of blond hair, attested from 1931. As a designation for a recording that has sold at
least one million copies, it is attested from 1971.


platitude (n.)

1812, dullness, from French platitude flatness, vapidness (late 17c.), from Old French plat flat
(see plateau (n.)); formed on analogy of latitude, etc. Meaning a flat, dull, or commonplace remark
is recorded from 1815. Related: Platitudinous. Hence platitudinarian (n.), 1855; platitudinize
(1867).


Platonic (adj.)

1530s, of or pertaining to Greek philosopher Plato (429 B.C.E.-c.347 B.C.E.), from Latin Platonicus,
from Greek Platonikos. The name is Greek Platon, properly broad-shouldered (from platys broad; see
plaice (n.)). His original name was Aristocles. The meaning love free of sensual desire (1630s),
which the word usually carries nowadays, is a Renaissance notion; it is based on Plato's writings in
Symposium about the kind of interest Socrates took in young men, which originally had no reference
to women. Related: Platonically.


Platonism (n.)

1560s, from Plato (see Platonic) + -ism.


Platonist (n.)

1540s, from Plato (see Platonic) + -ist.


platoon (n.)

1630s, from French peloton platoon, group of people, from Middle French peloton (15c.), literally
little ball, hence, agglomeration, diminutive of Old French pelote ball (see pellet).


platoon (v.)

in baseball, to alternate (a player) with another in the same position, 1967, from platoon (n.),
which had been used in team sports since 1941.


Plattdeutsch

Low German dialect of northern Germany, 1814, from German, from Dutch platduits, literally flat (or
low) German, from plat flat, plain, clear + duits German (see Dutch). In contrast to the speech of
the upland parts of Germany.


platter (n.)

late 13c., platere, from Anglo-French plater, from Old French plate metal plate (see plate (n.)).


platypus (n.)

Australian duck-mole, 1799, from Modern Latin, from Greek platypous, literally flat-footed, from
platys broad, flat (see plaice (n.)) + pous foot (see foot).Orig. the generic name, but, having
already been given to a genus of beetles, it was in 1800 changed for Ornithorhyncus. [OED]


plaudit (n.)

1620s, short for plaudite an actor's request for applause (1560s), from Latin plaudite! applaud!
second person plural imperative of plaudere to clap, strike, beat; applaud, approve, of unknown
origin (also in applaud, explode). This was the customary appeal for applause that Roman actors made
at the end of a play. In English, the -e went silent then was dropped.


plausibility (n.)

1590s, from plausible + -ity.


plausible (adj.)

1540s, acceptable, agreeable, from Latin plausibilis deserving applause, acceptable, from plaus-,
past participle stem of plaudere to applaud (see plaudit). Meaning having the appearance of truth is
recorded from 1560s. Related: Plausibly.


play (v.)

Old English plegan, plegian move rapidly, occupy or busy oneself, exercise; frolic; make sport of,
mock; perform music, from West Germanic *plegan occupy oneself about  (cognates: Old Saxon plegan
vouch for, take charge of, Old Frisian plega tend to, Middle Dutch pleyen to rejoice, be glad,
German pflegen take care of, cultivate), from PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself, forming words in
Celtic, Germanic, Slavic, and possibly Latin.    Meaning to take part in a game is from c.1200.
Opposed to work (v.) since late 14c. Related: Played; playing. To play up emphasize is from 1909; to
play down minimize is from 1930; to play along cooperate is from 1929. To play with oneself
masturbate is from 1896; play for keeps is from 1861, originally of marbles or other children's
games with tokens. To play second fiddle in the figurative sense is from 1809 (Gil Blas). To play
into the hands (of someone) is from 1705. To play the _______ card is attested from 1886; to play
fair is from mid-15c. To play (something) safe is from 1911; to play favorites is attested from
1902. For play the field see field (n.).


play (n.)

Old English plega (West Saxon), pl&aelig;ga (Anglian) quick motion; recreation, exercise, any brisk
activity (the latter sense preserved in swordplay, etc.), from or related to Old English plegan (see
play (v.)). Meaning dramatic performance is attested by early 14c., perhaps late Old English.
Meaning free or unimpeded movement of mechanisms, etc., is from c.1200. By early Middle English it
could mean variously, a game, a martial sport, activity of children, joke or jesting, revelry,
sexual indulgence. Sporting sense the playing of a game first attested mid-15c.; sense of specific
maneuver or attempt is from 1868. To be in play (of a hit ball, etc.) is from 1788. Play-by-play is
attested from 1927. Play on words is from 1798. Play-money is attested from 1705 as money won in
gambling, by 1920 as pretend money.


play-bill (n.)

also playbill, 1670s, from play (n.) + bill (n.1).


play-day (n.)

c.1600, from play + day.


play-dough (n.)

1959, from play + dough.


play-list (n.)

also playlist, 1975 in the radio station sense, from play (v.) + list (n.).


play-pen (n.)

also playpen, 1931,   from play + pen (n.2).


play-time (n.)

also playtime, 1660s in the recreational sense, from play (n.) + time (n.).


playbook (n.)

also play-book, 1530s, book of stage plays, from play (n.) + book (n.). Meaning Book of football
plays recorded from 1965.


playboy (n.)

1829, wealthy bon vivant, from play (v.) + boy. Fem. equivalent playgirl first recorded 1934. As the
name of a U.S. based magazine for men, from December 1953.


player (n.)

Old English plegere, agent noun from play (v.). Stage sense is from mid-15c. As a pimp's word for
himself (also playa), attested from 1974. Player-piano attested from 1901.


playful (adj.)

mid-13c., from play (v.) + -ful. Related: Playfully; playfulness.


playground (n.)

1780, from play (v.) + ground (n.). Old English had plegstow village sports ground, literally place
for play.


playhouse (n.)

late Old English pleghus; see play (n.) + house (n.).


playmate (n.)

1640s, companion, playfellow, from play (v.) + mate (n.). The sexual sense is from 1954 and the
launch of Playboy magazine.


plaything (n.)

1670s, from play (v.) + thing.


playwright (n.)

1680s, from play (n.) + wright.


plaza (n.)

1830, from Spanish plaza square, place, from Vulgar Latin *plattia, from Latin platea courtyard,
broad street (see place (n.)).


plea (n.)

early 13c., lawsuit, from Anglo-French plai (late 12c.), Old French plait lawsuit, decision, decree
(9c.), from Medieval Latin placitum lawsuit, in classical Latin, opinion, decree, literally that
which pleases, thing which is agreed upon, properly neuter past participle of placere (see please).
Sense development seems to be from something pleasant, to something that pleases both sides, to
something that has been decided. Meaning a pleading, an agreement in a suit is attested from late
14c. Plea-bargaining is first attested 1963. Common pleas (early 13c.) originally were legal
proceedings over which the Crown did not claim exclusive jurisdiction (as distinct from pleas of the
Crown); later actions brought by one subject against another.


plead (v.)

mid-13c., make a plea in court, from Anglo-French pleder, Old French plaidier, plead at court
(11c.), from Medieval Latin placitare, from Late Latin placitum (see plea). Sense of request, beg
first recorded late 14c. Related: Pleaded; pleading; pleadingly.


pleading (n.)

late 13c., the carrying on of a suit at court, verbal noun from plead (v.). Meaning supplication,
intercession is from early 15c.


pleasance (n.)

late 14c., from Old French plaisance pleasure, delight, enjoyment, from plaisant (see pleasant).


pleasant (adj.)

late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname), from Old French plaisant pleasant, pleasing, agreeable (12c.),
present participle of plaisir to please (see please). Pleasantry has the word's modern French sense
of funny, jocular. Related: Pleasantly.


pleasantry (n.)

sprightly humor in conversation, 1650s, from French plaisanterie joke, jest; joking, jesting, from
plaisant (see pleasant). Related: Pleasantries.


please (v.)

early 14c., to be agreeable, from Old French plaisir to please, give pleasure to, satisfy (11c.,
Modern French plaire, the form of which is perhaps due to analogy of faire), from Latin placere to
be acceptable, be liked, be approved, related to placare to soothe, quiet (source of Spanish placer,
Italian piacere), possibly from PIE *plak-e- to be calm, via notion of still water, etc., from root
*plak- (1) to be flat (see placenta).    Meaning to delight in English is from late 14c. Inverted
use for to be pleased is from c.1500, first in Scottish, and paralleling the evolution of synonymous
like (v.). Intransitive sense (do as you please) first recorded c.1500; imperative use (please do
this), first recorded 1620s, was probably a shortening of if it please (you) (late 14c.). Related:
Pleased; pleasing; pleasingly.    Verbs for please supply the stereotype polite word (Please come
in, short for may it please you to ...) in many languages (French, Italian), But more widespread is
the use of the first singular of a verb for 'ask, request'  [Buck, who cites German bitte, Polish
prosz&#281;, etc.]. Spanish favor is short for hace el favor do the favor. Danish has in this sense
v&aelig;r saa god, literally be so good.


pleased (adj.)

satisfied, contented, late 14c., past participle adjective from please (v.).


pleaser (n.)

1520s, agent noun from please.


pleasurable (adj.)

1570s, from pleasure (n.) + -able. Related: Pleasurability; pleasurably. For sense, compare
comfortable.


pleasure (n.)

late 14c., condition of enjoyment, from Old French plesir, also plaisir enjoyment, delight, desire,
will (12c.), from noun use of infinitive plaisir (v.) to please, from Latin placere to please, give
pleasure, be approved (see please (v.)). Ending altered in English 14c. by influence of words in
-ure (measure, etc.). Meaning sensual enjoyment as the chief object of life is attested from 1520s.


pleasure (v.)

1530s, to take pleasure in; 1550s as give pleasure to, from pleasure (n.). Sexual sense by 1610s.
Related: Pleasured; pleasuring.


pleasure-seeker (n.)

from pleasure (n.) + agent noun from seek.


pleat (v.)

1560s, used as the verb version of plait (n.) and probably representing an alternative
pronunciation. Related: Pleated; pleating.


pleat (n.)

a fold, 1580s, variant of plait (n.). With a gap in the printed record 17c.-18c., but probably it
was in continuous oral use.


pleather (n.)

by 1991, from plastic + leather.


pleb (n.)

1856 as a colloquial shortening of plebeian in the ancient Roman sense. West Point sense attested by
1851 (see plebe).


plebe (n.)

also pleb, member of the lowest class at a U.S. military academy, 1833, probably a shortened form of
plebeian one of the lower class, which in Latin also had the short form plebs or plebes.


plebeian (n.)

member of the lowest class, 1530s, from Latin plebius person not of noble rank, from adjective
meaning of the common people (see plebeian (adj.)).


plebeian (adj.)

also plebian, of or characteristic of the lower class, 1560s in a Roman historical sense, from Latin
plebeius belonging to the plebs, earlier plebes, the populace, the common people (as opposed to
patricians, etc.), also commonality; the mass, the multitude; the lower class, from PIE *ple- (see
pleio-). In general (non-historical) use from 1580s.


plebiscite (n.)

direct vote of the people, 1860 (originally in reference to Italian unification), from French
pl&eacute;biscite (1776 in modern sense, originally with reference to Switzerland), from Latin
plebiscitum a decree or resolution of the people, from plebs (genitive plebis) the common people
(see plebeian (adj.)) + scitum decree, noun use of neuter past participle of sciscere to assent,
vote for, approve, inchoative of scire to know (see science). Used earlier (1530s) in a purely Roman
historical context. Related: Plebiscitary.


plectrum (n.)

something used to pluck the strings of a musical instrument, 1620s, from Latin plectrum, from Greek
plektron thing to strike with (pick for a lyre, cock's spur, spear point, etc.), from plek-, root of
plessein to strike (see plague (n.)).


pled

past tense and past participle of plead (v.).


pledge (v.)

c.1400, to promise (something to someone), to give over as security for repayment, also promise
faith to, from pledge (n.) and from Old French plegier, from plege (n.). From mid-15c. as to stand
surety for, be responsible for; late 15c. as to mortgage. Meaning put (someone) under oath is from
1570s; sense of to solemnly promise or guarantee is from 1590s, as is sense to drink a toast.
Related: Pledged; pledging.


pledge (n.)

mid-14c., surety, bail, from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) hostage, security, bail,
probably from Frankish *plegan to guarantee, from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning have
responsibility for (cognates: Old Saxon plegan vouch for, Middle Dutch plien to answer for,
guarantee, Old High German pflegan to care for, be accustomed to, Old English pleon to risk the loss
of, expose to danger; see plight (v.)).    Meaning allegiance vow attested by drinking with another
is from 1630s. Sense of solemn promise first recorded 1814, though this notion is from 16c. in the
verb. Weekley notes the curious contradiction in pledge (v.) to toast with a drink (1540s) and
pledge (n.) the vow to abstain from drinking (1833). Meaning student who has agreed to join a
fraternity or sorority dates from 1901.


Pleiades (n.)

late 14c., the seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, transformed by Zeus into seven stars, from
Latin Pleiades, from Greek Pleiades, perhaps literally constellation of the doves from a shortened
form of peleiades, plural of peleias dove (from PIE root *pel- dark-colored, gray). Or perhaps from
plein to sail, because the season of navigation begins with their heliacal rising.    Old English
had the name from Latin as Pliade. Mentioned by Hesiod (pre-700 B.C.E.), only six now are visible to
most people; on a clear night a good eye can see nine (in 1579, well before the invention of the
telescope, the German astronomer Michael Moestlin (1550-1631) correctly drew 11 Pleiades stars);
telescopes reveal at least 500. Hence French pleiade, used for a meeting or grouping of seven
persons.


plein-air (adj.)

1894, from French phrase en plein air, literally in the open air. The style developed among French
impressionists c.1870.


pleio-

also pleo-, word-forming element meaning more, from comb. form of Greek pleion larger, greater in
quantity, the more part, very many (comp. of polys much), from PIE *ple- (cognates: Latin plere to
fill, plebes, the populace, the common people; Greek plethein be full, pleres full), possibly a
variant of *pele- (1) to fill (see poly-).


pleiotropy (n.)

1921, from German pleiotrop (1910), from Greek pleion greater in quantity, the more part, very many,
(see pleio-) + trope turn, turning (see trope). Related: Pleiotropic; pleiotropism.


Pleistocene (adj.)

pertaining to the glacial period, 1839, coined by Lyell from Greek pleistos most (superlative of
polys much; see poly-) + -cene.


plenary (adj.)

1510s, earlier plenar (mid-13c.), from Old French plenier, from Medieval Latin plenarius entire,
complete, from Latin plenus full, filled, greatly crowded; stout, pregnant; abundant, abounding;
complete, from PIE *pele- (1) to fill (see poly-). Related: Plenarily.


plenipotentiary (adj.)

1640s, from French pl&#233;nipotentiaire and directly from Medieval Latin plenipotentiarius having
full power, from Late Latin plenipotens, from Latin plenus full (see plenary) + potentem powerful
(see potent). As a noun from 1650s.


plenitude (n.)

early 15c., from Old French plenitude and directly from Latin plenitudinem (nominative plenitudo)
abundance, completeness, fullness, from plenus complete, full (see plenary).


plenteous (adj.)

c.1300, plentivous, from Old French plentiveus fertile, rich (early 13c.), from plentif abundant,
from plentee abundance (see plenty). Related: Plentifully; plentifulness.


plentiful (adj.)

late 15c., from plenty + -ful. Related: Plentifully.


plentitude (n.)

1610s, erroneous form of plenitude.


plenty (n.)

mid-13c., as much as one could desire, from Old French plentee, earlier plentet abundance, profusion
(12c., Modern French dialectal plent&eacute;), from Latin plenitatem (nominative plenitas) fullness,
from plenus complete, full (see plenary). Meaning condition of general abundance is from late 14c.
The colloquial adverb meaning very much is first attested 1842. Middle English had parallel
formation plenteth, from the older Old French form of the word.


plenum (n.)

1670s, filled space (opposite of vacuum), from Latin plenum (spatium) full (space), neuter of
adjective plenus complete, full (see plenary). The meaning of a full assembly of legislators is
first recorded 1772.


pleo-

see pleio-.


pleomorphic (adj.)

having more than one form, 1886, from pleo- + -morphe form (see Morpheus). Related: Pleomorphism.


pleonasm (n.)

redundancy in words, 1580s, from Late Latin pleonasmus, from Greek pleonasmos, from pleonazein to be
more than enough, to be superfluous, in grammatical use, to add superfluously, from comb. form of
pleon more (see pleio-).


pleonastic (adj.)

1778, with -ic + Greek pleonastos abundant, from pleonazein (see pleonasm). Related: Pleonastical
(1650s).


plesiosaurus (n.)

1825, from Modern Latin Pleisiosaurus (1821), coined by English paleontologist William Daniel
Conybeare (1787-1857) from Greek plesios near, related to pelas, + -saurus.


plethora (n.)

1540s, a medical word for excess of body fluid, from Late Latin plethora, from Greek plethore
fullness, from plethein be full (see pleio-). Figurative meaning too-muchness, overfullness in any
respect is first recorded 1700. Related: Plethoric.


pleura (n.)

early 15c., medical Latin, from Greek pleura side of the body, rib, also flank of an army, page of a
book, of unknown origin.


pleural (adj.)

1835, from pleura + -al (1). Alternative pleuric is attested from 1825.


pleurisy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French pleurisie (13c., Modern French pleur&#233;sie) and directly from Late
Latin pleurisis pleurisy, alteration of Latin pleuritis pain in the side, from Greek pleuritis, from
pleura side of the body, rib, of unknown origin. Spelling altered in Late Latin on model of Latin
stem plur- more (as in Medieval Latin pluritas multitude), as if in reference to excess of humors.


pleuro-

before vowels pleur-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to the side; pertaining to the pleura,
from comb. form of Greek pleura (see pleura).


plex

in various usages, from Latin plex-, past participle stem of plectere to plait (see complex (adj.)).


Plexiglas (n.)

1935, proprietary name (R&ouml;hm &amp; Haas) for a substance also sold as Perspex and Lucite. Often
written incorrectly as plexiglass.


plexus (n.)

1680s, Modern Latin, literally braid, network, noun use of past participle of Latin plectere to
twine, braid, fold (see complex (adj.)); used of a network, such as solar plexus network of nerves
in the abdomen (see solar). Related: Plexal.


pliable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ploiable flexible, bendable, from plier to bend (see ply (n.)). Related:
Pliably, pliability.


pliant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ploiant bending, supple; compliant, fickle, as a noun, turncoat (13c.),
present participle of ploier to bend (see ply (n.)). Figurative sense of easily influenced is from
c.1400. Related: Pliancy.


plie (n.)

in ballet, 1892, from French pli&eacute;, from plier literally to bend, from Old French ploier (see
ply (n.)).


plier (n.)

one who folds, 1670s, agent noun from ply (v.).


pliers (n.)

pincers, 1560s, plural agent noun from ply (n.). French cognate plieur meant folder.


plight (v.)

to pledge (obsolete except in archaic plight one's troth), from Old English pligtan, plihtan to
endanger, imperil, compromise, verb form of pliht (n.) danger, risk (see plight (n.2)). Related:
Plighted; plighting.


plight (n.1)

condition or state (usually bad), late 12c., danger, harm, strife, from Anglo-French plit, pleit,
Old French pleit, ploit condition (13c.), originally way of folding, from Vulgar Latin *plictum,
from Latin plicitum, neuter past participle of Latin plicare to fold, lay (see ply (v.1)).
Originally in neutral sense (as in modern French en bon plit in good condition), sense of harmful
state (and current spelling) probably is from convergence and confusion with plight (n.2) via notion
of entangling risk, pledge or promise with great risk to the pledger.


plight (n.2)

pledge, mid-13c., pledge, promise, usually involving risk or loss in default, from Old English pliht
danger, risk, peril, damage, from Proto-Germanic *pleg- (cognates: Old Frisian plicht danger,
concern, care, Middle Dutch, Dutch plicht obligation, duty, Old High German pfliht, German Pflicht
obligation, duty (see plight (v.)). Compare Old English plihtere look-out man at the prow of a ship,
plihtlic perilous, dangerous.


Plimsoll (n.)

mark on the hull of a British ship showing how deeply she may be loaded, 1881, from Samuel Plimsoll
(1824-1898), M.P. for Derby and advocate of shipping reforms (which were embodied in the Merchant
Shipping Act of 1876). Sense extended 1907 to rubber-soled canvas shoe (equivalent of American
English sneakers) because the band around the shoes that holds the two parts together reminded
people of a ship's Plimsoll line; sense perhaps reinforced by sound association with sole (which
sometimes influenced the spelling to plimsole). The name is of Huguenot origin.


plink (v.)

1941, imitative. As a noun from 1954. Related: Plinked; plinking.


plinth (n.)

1610s, from French plinthe (16c.) and directly from Latin plinthus, from Greek plinthos brick,
squared stone, cognate with Old English flint (see flint).


plio-

word-forming element, Latinate form of pleio-.


Pliocene (adj.)

1833, from plio- more (Latinized form of pleio-) + -cene.


PLO

initialism (acronym) of Palestinian Liberation Organization, by 1965.


plod (v.)

1560s, of uncertain origin, perhaps imitative of the sound of walking heavily or slowly. Related:
Plodded; plodding.


plodding (adj.)

diligent and dull, 1580s, present participle adjective from plod (v.).


plonk (v.)

1874, imitative. From 1903 as a noun. Related: Plonked; plonking.


plop (v.)

1821, imitative of the sound of a smooth object dropping into water. Related: Plopped; plopping.
Thackary (mid-19c.) used plap (v.). As a noun from 1833.


plosive (n.)

type of consonantal sound, 1899, from explosive. As an adjective from 1909.


plot (v.)

1580s, to lay plans for (usually with evil intent); 1590s in the literal sense of to make a map or
diagram, from plot (n.). Related: Plotted; plotter; plotting.


plot (n.)

Old English plot small piece of ground, of unknown origin. Sense of ground plan, and thus map, chart
is 1550s; that of a secret, plan, scheme is 1580s, probably by accidental similarity to complot,
from Old French complot combined plan, of unknown origin, perhaps a back-formation from compeloter
to roll into a ball, from pelote ball. Meaning set of events in a story is from 1640s. Plot-line
(n.) attested from 1957.


plough

alternative spelling of plow. Related: Ploughed; ploughing.


plover (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French plover, Old French pluvier, earlier plovier (c.1200), from Vulgar Latin
*plovarius, literally belonging to rain, from Latin pluvia rain (water) from pluere to rain, from
PIE root *pleu- to flow (see pluvial). Perhaps so called because the birds' migration arrival
coincides with the start of the rainy season, or from its supposed restlessness when rain
approaches.


plow (n.)

late Old English plog, ploh plow; plowland (a measure of land equal to what a yoke of oxen could
plow in a day), possibly from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse plogr plow, Swedish and
Danish plog), from Proto-Germanic *plogo- (cognates: Old Saxon plog, Old Frisian ploch plow, Middle
Low German ploch, Middle Dutch ploech, Dutch ploeg, Old High German pfluog, German Pflug), a late
word in Germanic, of uncertain origin. Old Church Slavonic plugu, Lithuanian plugas plow are
Germanic loan-words, as probably is Latin plovus, plovum plow, a word said by Pliny to be of
Rhaetian origin.    Replaced Old English sulh, cognate with Latin sulcus furrow (see sulcus). As a
name for the star pattern also known as the Big Dipper or Charles's Wain, it is attested by early
15c., perhaps early 14c. The three handle stars (in the Dipper configuration) generally are seen as
the team of oxen pulling the plow, though sometimes they are the handle.


plow (v.)

late 14c., from plow (n.). Transferred sense from 1580s. Related: Plowed; plowing.


plow-boy (n.)

also plowboy, 1560s, from plow + boy.


plowman (n.)

also plow-man, c.1300, from plow + man (n.).


plowshare (n.)

late 14c., from plow + share (n.2). To beat swords into plowshares is from Isaiah ii:4.


ploy (n.)

1722, anything with which one amuses oneself, Scottish and northern England dialect, possibly a
shortened form of employ or deploy. Popularized in the sense move or gambit made to gain advantage
by British humorist Stephen Potter (1900-1969).


pluck (n.)

c.1400, act of plucking, from pluck (v.). Meaning courage, boldness (1785), originally in pugilism
slang, is a figurative use from earlier meaning heart, viscera (1610s) as that which is plucked from
slaughtered livestock. Perhaps influenced by figurative use of the verb in pluck up (one's courage,
etc.), attested from c.1300.


pluck (v.)

late Old English ploccian, pluccian pull off, cull, from West Germanic *plokken (cognates: Middle
Low German plucken, Middle Dutch plocken, Dutch plukken, Flemish plokken, German pfl&#252;cken),
perhaps from Vulgar Latin *piluccare (source of Old French peluchier, late 12c.; Italian piluccare),
a frequentative, ultimately from Latin pilare pull out hair, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)). But
despite the similarities, OED finds difficulties with this and cites gaps in historical evidence.
Related: Plucked; plucking.  To pluck a rose, an expression said to be used by women for going to
the necessary house, which in the country usually stands in the garden. [F. Grose, Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]This euphemistic use is attested from 1610s. To pluck up
summon up is from c.1300.


plucky (adj.)

1831, from pluck (n.) + -y (2). Related: Pluckily; pluckiness.


plug (v.)

close tightly (a hole), fill, 1620s, from plug (n.) or from Dutch pluggen. Meaning work
energetically at is c.1865. Sense of popularize by repetition is from 1906. Slang sense put a bullet
into is recorded from 1870. Related: Plugged; plugging.


plug (n.)

1620s, originally a seamen's term, probably from Dutch plug, Middle Dutch plugge bung, stopper,
related to Norwegian plugg, Danish pl&oslash;g, North Frisian plaak, Middle Low German pluck, German
Pflock; ultimate origin uncertain. Irish and Gaelic words are from English. Sense of wad or stick of
tobacco is attested from 1728, based on resemblance. Electrical sense is from 1883, based on being
inserted; meaning sparking device in an internal combustion engine is from 1886. Meaning
advertisement first recorded 1902, American English, perhaps from verb sense work energetically at
(c.1865).


plug-in (adj.)

1922, from plug (v.) + in (adv.).


plug-ugly (n.)

ruffian, 1856, originally in Baltimore, Maryland, from plug (n.), American English slang name for
the stovepipe hats then popular among young men, + ugly.


plugger (n.)

1867, agent noun from plug (v.).


plum (n.)

Old English plume plum, plum tree, from an early Germanic borrowing (Middle Dutch prume, Dutch
pruim, Old High German pfluma, pfruma, German Pflaume) from Vulgar Latin *pruna, from Latin prunum
plum, from Greek prounon, later form of proumnon, of unknown origin, perhaps from an Asiatic
language (Phrygian?). Also see prune (n.). Change of pr- to pl- is peculiar to Germanic. The vowel
shortened in early modern English. Meaning something desirable is first recorded 1780, probably in
reference to the sugar-rich bits of a plum pudding, etc.


plumage (n.)

late 14c., feathers, from Old French plumage plumage, appearance (14c.), from plume (see plume
(n.)).


plumassier (n.)

dealer in ornamental feathers, from French plumassier, from Middle French plumasse plume of feather,
from plume (see plume).


plumb (n.)

lead hung on a string to show the vertical line, early 14c., from Old French *plombe, plomee
sounding lead, and directly from Late Latin *plumba, originally plural of Latin plumbum lead (the
metal), lead ball; pipe; pencil, a word of unknown origin, related to Greek molybdos lead (dialectal
bolimos) and perhaps from an extinct Mediterranean language, perhaps Iberian.


plumb (v.)

early 15c., to sink (like lead), from plumb (n.). Meaning take soundings with a plumb is first
recorded 1560s; figurative sense of to get to the bottom of is from 1590s. Related: Plumbed;
plumbing.


plumb (adj.)

perpendicular, vertical, mid-15c., from plumb (n.). The notion of exact measurement led to extended
sense of completely, downright (1748), sometimes spelled plump, plum, or plunk.


plumb-bob (n.)

1835, from plumb (n.) + bob (n.1).


plumbago (n.)

graphite, 1784, from Latin plumbago a type of lead ore, black lead, from plumbum lead (see plumb
(n.)); it renders Greek molybdaina, which was used of yellow lead oxide and also of a type of plant
(leadwort). Attested in English in the yellow oxide sense from 1610s; as a type of plant from 1747.
Related: Plumbaginous.


plumber (n.)

late 14c. (from c.1100 as a surname), a worker in any sort of lead (roofs, gutters, pipes), from Old
French plomier lead-smelter (Modern French plombier) and directly from Latin plumbarius worker in
lead, noun use of adjective meaning pertaining to lead, from plumbum lead (see plumb (n.)). Meaning
focused 19c. on workman who installs pipes and fittings as lead water pipes became the principal
concern of the trade. In U.S. Nixon administration (1969-74), the name of a special unit for
investigation of leaks of government secrets.


plumbic (adj.)

combined with lead, 1799, from Latin plumbum  (see plumb (n.)) + -ic.


plumbing (n.)

mid-15c., the weighting of a fishing line, verbal noun from plumb (v.). Specific meaning water and
drainage pipes is recorded by 1875, American English.    THE apparatus by which the water from a
reservoir is carried about over a building and delivered at points convenient for use, is called by
the general name of plumbing. The word plumbing means lead-work; and it is used to signify this
water apparatus of a house because the pipes of which it largely consists are usually made of lead.
[Edward Abbott, Long Look House: A Book for Boys and Girls, Boston, 1877]    Alternative plumbery
also is mid-15c. Slang meaning a person's reproductive organs attested by 1975.


plumbo-

word-forming element meaning lead (the metal), from comb. form of Latin plumbum lead (see plumb
(n.)).


plumbous (adj.)

1680s, leaden; 1854 in chemistry sense, containing lead (especially in a low valence), from Latin
plumbosus full of lead, from plumbum (see plumb (n.)).


plume (n.)

late 14c., a feather (especially a large and conspicuous one), from Old French plume soft feather,
down; feather bed, and directly from Latin pluma a feather, down; the first beard, from PIE root
*pleus- to pluck; a feather, fleece (source of Old English fleos fleece). Meaning a long streamer of
smoke, etc. is first attested 1878.


plume (v.)

late 14c., to pluck, strip, from plume (n.). From mid-15c. as to adorn with plumes. Meaning to dress
the feathers is from 1702. Related: Plumed; pluming.


plumed (adj.)

adorned with plumes, 1520s, past participle adjective from plume (v.).


plummet (n.)

late 14c., ball of lead, plumb of a bob-line, from Old French plomet graphite, lead; plummet,
sounding lead, diminutive of plom sounding lead (see plumb (n.)).


plummet (v.)

1620s, to fathom, take soundings, from plummet (n.). Meaning to fall rapidly first recorded 1933,
perhaps originally among aviators. Related: Plummeted; plummeting.


plump (adj.)

late 15c., blunt, dull (in manners), from Dutch plomp blunt, thick, massive, stumpy, probably
related to plompen fall or drop heavily (see plump (v.)). Meaning fleshy, of rounded form is from
1540s in English. Danish and Swedish plump rude, coarse, clumsy are from the Low German word and
represent a different sense development.


plump (v.1)

c.1300, to fall or strike with a full impact, common Low German word, from or related to Middle
Dutch and Dutch plompen, East Frisian plumpen, Middle Low German plumpen, probably more or less
imitative of something hard striking something soft. Hence plump (n.) a firm blow, in pugilism
usually one to the stomach.    To plump; to strike, or shoot. I'll give you a plump in the bread
basket, or the victualling office; I'll give you a blow in the stomach. [Grose, Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   <hr />   Or, even if any of them should suspect me, I know how to
bring myself off. It is but pretending to be affronted, stripping directly, challenging him to
fight, and before he can be on his guard, hitting him a plump in the bread-basket, that shall make
him throw up his accounts; and I'll engage he will have but very little stomach to accuse me after.
[The Reverie: or A Flight to the Paradise of Fools, London, 1763]


plump (v.2)

to become plump, 1530s, from plump (adj.). Meaning to plump (something) up, to cause to swell is
from 1530s. Related: Plumped; plumping.


plumpness (n.)

1540s, from plump (adj.) + -ness.


plunder (n.)

goods taken by force; act of plundering, 1640s, from plunder (v.).


plunder (v.)

1630s, from German pl&#252;ndern, from Middle High German plunderen to plunder, originally to take
away household furniture, from plunder (n.) household goods, clothes, also lumber, baggage (14c.;
compare Modern German Plunder lumber, trash), which is related to Middle Dutch plunder household
goods; Frisian and Dutch plunje clothes. A word acquired by English via the Thirty Years War and
applied in native use after the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642. Related: Plundered;
plundering. Plunderbund was a U.S. colloquial word from 1914 referring to a corrupt alliance of
corporate and financial interests, with German Bund alliance, league.


plunge (v.)

late 14c., to put or thrust violently into, also intransitive, from Old French plongier plunge, sink
into; plunge into, dive in (mid-12c., Modern French plonger), from Vulgar Latin *plumbicare to heave
the lead, from Latin plumbum lead (see plumb (n.)). Original notion perhaps is of a sounding lead or
a fishing net weighted with lead. Related: Plunged; plunging. Plunging neckline attested from 1949.


plunge (n.)

c.1400, deep pool, from plunge (v.). From late 15c. as a sudden pitch forward; meaning act of
plunging is from 1711. Figurative use in take the plunge commit oneself is from 1845, from earlier
noun sense of point of being in trouble or danger (1530s).


plunger (n.)

1610s, one who plunges, agent noun from plunge (v.). As a mechanism, 1777.


plunk (v.)

1805, to pluck a stringed instrument; 1808 in sense of drop down abruptly; 1888 as to hit, wound,
shoot. Probably of imitative origin in all cases. Related: Plunked; plunking.


pluperfect (adj.)

1520s, shortened from Latin (tempus praeteritum) plus (quam) perfectum (past tense) more (than)
perfect. Translates Greek khronos hypersyntelikos. See plus and perfect.


plural (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French plurel more than one (12c., Modern French pluriel), from Latin pluralis
of or belonging to more than one, from plus (genitive pluris) more (see plus). The noun meaning a
plural number is from late 14c.


pluralism (n.)

1818, as a term in church administration, from plural + -ism. Attested from 1882 as a term in
philosophy for a theory which recognizes more than one ultimate principle. In political science,
attested from 1919 (in Harold J. Laski) in sense theory which opposes monolithic state power.
General sense of toleration of diversity within a society or state is from 1933. Related: Pluralist
(1620s, in the church sense); pluralistic.


plurality (n.)

late 14c., state of being plural, from Old French pluralite (14c.), from Late Latin pluralitatem
(nominative pluralitas), from Latin pluralis (see plural). Meaning fact of there being many,
multitude is from mid-15c. Church sense of holding of two or more offices concurrently is from mid-
14c. Meaning greater number, more than half is from 1570s but is etymologically improper, perhaps
modeled on majority. U.S. sense of excess of votes over rival candidate(s), especially when none has
an absolute majority, is from 1828.


pluri-

word-forming element meaning more than one, several, many, from Latin pluri-, from stem of plus
(genitive pluris); see plus.


pluripotential (adj.)

1925, from pluri- + potential. Related: Pluripotent; pluripotency.


plus (n.)

1570s, the oral rendering of the arithmetical sign +, from Latin plus more, in greater number, more
often (comparative of multus much), altered (by influence of minus) from *pleos, from PIE *pele- (1)
to fill (see poly-).    As a preposition, between two numbers to indicate addition, from 1660s.
[Barnhart writes that this sense did not exist in Latin and probably originated in commercial
language of the Middle Ages.] Placed after a whole number to indicate and a little more, it is
attested from 1902. As a conjunction, and, it is American English colloquial, attested from 1968. As
a noun meaning an advantage from 1791. Plus fours (1921) were four inches longer in the leg than
standard knickerbockers, to produce an overhang, originally a style associated with golfers. The
plus sign itself has been well-known since at least late 15c. and is perhaps an abbreviation of
Latin et (see et cetera).


plus ca change

1903, French, plus &ccedil;a change, plus c'est la m&ecirc;me chose (1849), literally the more it
changes, the more it stays the same.


plush (adj.)

swank, luxurious, 1927, from plush (n.). Plushy in this sense is recorded from 1923. Related:
Plushly; plushness.


plush (n.)

soft fabric, 1590s, from Middle French pluche shag, plush, contraction of peluche hairy fabric, from
Old French peluchier to pull, to tug, to pluck (the final process in weaving plush), from Vulgar
Latin *piluccare remove hair (see pluck (v.)). Related: Plushy; plushness.


plutarchy (n.)

plutocracy, 1640s, from Greek ploutos wealth (see Pluto) + -archy.


Pluto (n.)

Roman god of the underworld, brother of Zeus and Neptune, from Latin Pluto, Pluton, from Greek
Plouton god of wealth, literally wealth, riches, probably originally overflowing, from PIE *pleu- to
flow (see pluvial). The planet (since downgraded) was discovered 1930 by C.W. Tombaugh; Minerva also
was suggested as a name for it. The cartoon dog first appeared in Walt Disney's Moose Hunt, released
April 1931.


plutocracy (n.)

1650s, from Greek ploutokratia rule or power of the wealthy or of wealth, from ploutos wealth (see
Pluto) + -kratia rule (see -cracy). Synonym plutarchy is slightly older (1640s). Pluto-democracy
plutocracy masquerading as democracy is from 1895.


plutocrat (n.)

person who rules by his wealth, 1838, back-formation from plutocracy. Related: Plutocratic (1843);
plutocratical (1833).


plutogogue (n.)

spokesman for plutocrats, 1894, from Greek ploutos wealth + ending from demagogue.


plutolatry (n.)

worship of wealth, 1889, from Greek ploutos wealth (see Pluto) + -latry. Related: Plutolater.


plutomania (n.)

1650s, mad pursuit of wealth, from Greek ploutos wealth (see Pluto) + mania. As imaginary possession
of wealth from 1894. Related: Plutomaniac.


Plutonian (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to the god Pluto, from Latin Plutonius, from Greek Ploutonius, from Plouton
pertaining to Pluto (see Pluto). Geological sense is from 1828 (see plutonic). Planetary sense by
1952.


plutonic (adj.)

pertaining to or involving intense heat deep in the earth's crust, 1796, coined by Irish scientist
Richard Kirwin (1733-1812) from comb. form of Pluto (as god of the underworld) + -ic. Especially in
reference to early 19c. geological theory (championed by Hutton) that attributed most of the earth's
features to action of internal heat, a theory which triumphed over its rival, neptunism, which
attributed them to water. Related: Plutonism; Plutonist.


plutonium (n.)

transuranic element, 1942, from Pluto, the planet, + element ending -ium. Discovered at University
of California, Berkeley, in 1941, the element named on suggestion of Seaborg and Wahl because it
follows neptunium in the periodic table as Pluto follows Neptune in the Solar System. The name
plutonium earlier had been proposed for barium and was sometimes used in this sense early 19c.


plutonomic (adj.)

of or pertaining to the science or study of wealth or riches, 1853, from comb. form of Greek ploutos
wealth (see Pluto) + ending from economic. Fell from currency 1870s, revived 1990s. Related:
Plutonomics (1991); plutonomist (1869).


pluvial (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to rain, from French pluvial (12c.), from Latin pluvialis pertaining to rain,
rainy, rain-bringing, from (aqua) pluvia rain (water), from fem. of pluvius rainy, from plovere to
rain, from PIE root *pleu- to flow, to swim (cognates: Sanskrit plavate navigates, swims; Greek
plynein to wash, plein to navigate, ploein to float, swim, plotos floating, navigable; Armenian
luanam I wash; Old English flowan to flow; Old Church Slavonic plovo to flow, navigate; Lithuanian
pilu, pilti to pour out, plauju, plauti to swim, rinse).


ply (v.1)

work with, use, late 14c., shortened form of applien join to, apply (see apply). The core of this is
Latin plicare to lay, fold, twist, from PIE root *plek- to plait, twist (cognates: Greek plekein to
plait, twine, plektos twisted; Latin plectere (past participle plexus) to plait, braid, intertwine;
Old Church Slavonic plesti to braid, plait, twist; Gothic flahta braid; Old English fleax cloth made
with flax, linen).    Sense of travel regularly is first 1803, perhaps from earlier sense steer a
course (1550s). Related: Plied; plies; plying.


ply (n.)

a layer, a fold 1530s, from Middle French pli a fold (13c.), alteration of Old French ploi fold,
pleat, layer (12c.), verbal noun from ployer (later pleier) to bend, to fold, from Latin plicare to
fold, lay see ply (v.1)). This is the ply in plywood.


ply (v.2)

to bend, late 14c., plien, from Old French plier, earlier pleier to fold, bend, from Latin plicare
to lay, fold, twist (see ply (v.1)). Related: Plied; plies; plying.


Plymouth

city in Devon, England, named for its location at the mouth of the Plym River; the river is in turn
named for Plympton, literally plum-tree farm. Earlier Plymouth was Sutton Prior. The town in
Massachusetts, U.S., was named 1620 by immigrants on the Mayflower, which had sailed from Plymouth,
England, and landed at what became known as Plymouth Rock.


plywood (n.)

1907, from ply (n.) + wood (n.). So called because the layers are arranged so that the grain of one
runs at right angles to that of the next.


pn-

consonant sound in some English words derived from Greek. The p- typically is silent in English but
pronounced in French, German, Spanish, etc.


pneuma (n.)

used in English in various sense, from Greek pneuma a blowing, a wind, blast; breeze; influence;
breathed air, breath; odor, scent; spirit of a person; inspiration, a spirit, ghost, from pnein to
blow, to breathe, from PIE root *pneu- to breathe, of imitative origin (compare Greek pnoe breath,
pnoia breathing; Old English fnora sneezing, fn&aelig;ran to snort).


pneumatic (adj.)

1650s, from Latin pneumaticus of the wind, belonging to the air, from Greek pneumatikos of wind or
air (which is attested mainly as of spirit, spiritual), from pneuma (genitive pneumatos) the wind,
also breath (see pneuma). Earlier was pneumatical (c.1600).


pneumatics (n.)

1650s, from pneumatic. Also see -ics.


pneumato-

before vowels pneumat-, word-forming element meaning wind, air, spirit, presence of air, from comb.
form of Greek pneuma (genitive pneumatos); see pneuma.


pneumo-

before vowels pneum-, word-forming element meaning lung, from comb. form of Greek pneumon (see
pneumonia).


pneumonia (n.)

c.1600, from Modern Latin, from Greek pneumonia inflammation of the lungs, from pneumon lung,
altered (perhaps by influence of pnein to breathe) from pleumon lung, literally floater, probably
cognate with Latin pulmo (see pulmonary), from PIE *pleu- to flow, to swim (see pluvial). Alteration
in Greek perhaps by influence of pnein to breathe.


pneumonic (adj.)

pertaining to the lungs, 1670s, from Latin pneumonicus, from Greek pneumonikos of the lungs, from
pneumon (see pneumonia).


pneumono-

before vowels pneumon-, word-forming element meaning lung, from comb. form of Greek pneumon
(genitive pneumonos lung (see pneumonia).


pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis (n.)

1962, A facetious word alleged to mean 'a lung disease caused by the inhalation of very fine silica
dust' but occurring chiefly as an instance of a very long word [OED]. Said in an early reference to
have been invented by seventh grade students in Norfolk, Virginia.


pneumothorax (n.)

1821, from French pneumothorax (1803), coined by French physician Jean Marc Gaspard Itard
(1774-1838) from Greek pneumon (see pneumonia) + thorax.


Po

large river in northern Italy, from Latin Padus, a name of Celtic origin.


po-face (adj.)

expressionless, impassive, 1934, American English, of unknown origin.


poach (v.1)

steal game, 1520s, to push, poke, from Middle French pocher to thrust, poke, from Old French pochier
poke out, gouge, prod, jab, from a Germanic source (compare Middle High German puchen to pound,
beat, knock, German pochen, Middle Dutch boken to beat) related to poke (v.). Sense of trespass for
the sake of stealing is first attested 1610s, perhaps via notion of thrusting oneself onto another's
property, or perhaps from French pocher to pocket (see poach (v.2)). Related: Poached; poaching.


poach (v.2)

cook in liquid, early 15c., from Old French poch&eacute;, past participle of pochier (12c.),
literally put into a pocket (as the white of an egg forms a pocket for the yolk), from poche bag,
pocket, from Frankish *pokka bag, from Proto-Germanic *puk- (see poke (n.)). Related: Poached;
poaching.


poached (adj.)

of eggs, mid-15c., past participle adjective from poach (v.2).


poacher (n.)

1660s, one who poaches game, agent noun from poach (v.1). Attested from 1846 as vessel for poaching
eggs, from poach (v.2).


Pocahontas

(c.1595-1617), daughter of Algonquian leader Powhatan, the name is said to be Algonquian
Pokachantesu she is playful.


pock (n.)

Old English pocc pustule, blister, ulcer, from Proto-Germanic *puh(h)- to swell up, blow up
(cognates: Middle Dutch pocke, Dutch pok, East Frisian pok, Low German poche, dialectal German
Pfoche), from PIE root *beu- to swell, to blow (see bull (n.2)). Middle French pocque is from
Germanic. The plural form, Middle English pokkes, is the source of pox, which since early 14c. has
been used in the sense disease characterized by pocks.


pock (v.)

to disfigure with pits or pocks, 1841. Related: Pocked; pocking.


pock-mark (n.)

also pockmark, 1670s, from pock (n.) + mark (n.). As a verb from 1756. Related: Pockmarked; pock-
marked.


pocket (v.)

1580s, to place in a pocket (often with implications of dishonesty), from pocket (n.). From the
earliest use often figurative. Meaning to form pockets is from c.1600. Related: Pocketed; pocketing.


pocket (n.)

mid-14c., pokete, bag, pouch, small sack, from Anglo-French pokete (13c.), diminutive of Old North
French poque bag (Old French pouche), from a Germanic source akin to Frankish *pokka bag, from
Proto-Germanic *puk- (see poke (n.)).    Meaning small bag worn on the person, especially one sewn
into a garment is from early 15c. Sense in billiards is from 1754. Mining sense is attested from
1850; military sense of area held by troops surrounded by the enemy is from 1918; the general sense
of small area different than its surroundings (1926) apparently was extended from the military use.
Figuratively, one's money (conceived as being kept in a pocket) is from 1717. Pope Pokett (late
15c.) was figurative of the greedy and corrupt Church.


pocket (adj.)

1610s, of or pertaining to or meant for a pocket, from pocket (n.). Pocket-knife is first recorded
1727; pocket-money is attested from 1630s. Often merely implying a small-sized version of something
(for example of of warships, from 1930; also compare Pocket Venus beautiful, small woman, attested
from 1808). Pocket veto attested from 1842, American English.    The pocket veto can operate only in
the case of bills sent to the President within ten days of Congressional adjournment. If he retain
such a bill (figuratively, in his pocket) neither giving it his sanction by signing it, nor
withholding his sanction in returning it to Congress, the bill is defeated. The President is not
bound to give reasons for defeating a bill by a pocket veto which he has not had at least ten days
to consider. In a regular veto he is bound to give such reasons. [James Albert Woodburn, The
American Republic and its Government, Putnam's, 1903]


pocketbook (n.)

also pocket-book, 1610s, originally a small book meant to be carried in one's pocket, from pocket
(n.) + book (n.). Meaning a booklike leather folder for papers, bills, etc. is from 1722. Meaning a
woman's purse is from 1816.


pocketful (n.)

1610s, from pocket (n.) + -ful.


poco

in musical directions, a little, slightly, 1724, from Italian poco, from Latin paucus few, little
(see paucity).


Pocono

mountain range and region in eastern Pennsylvania, from Delaware (Algonquian), perhaps Pocohanne
stream between mountains.


pod (n.1)

seed of beans, 1680s, of uncertain origin; found earlier in podware seed of legumes, seed grain
(mid-15c.), which had a parallel form codware husked or seeded plants (late 14c.), related to cod
husk of seeded plants, which was in Old English. In reference to pregnancy from 1890; in reference
to a round belly from 1825. Meaning detachable body of an aircraft is from 1950. Pod people (1956)
is from movie Invasion of the Body Snatchers, based on novel by Jack Finney.


pod (n.2)

herd of whales or seals, 1827, American English, of unknown origin.


podcast

2004, noun and verb, from pod-, from iPod, brand of portable media player, + second element
abstracted from broadcast. Related: Podcasting.


podgy (adj.)

1846, later collateral form of pudgy (q.v.).


podiatry (n.)

1914, formed from Greek pod-, stem of pous foot (see foot (n.)) + iatreia healing, from iatros
physician (see -iatric). An attempt to supplant chiropody (see chiropodist) and distance the
practice from the popular impression of unskilled corn-cutters. The National Association of
Chiropodists changed its name to American Podiatry Association in 1958. Related: Podiatric;
podiatrist.


podium (n.)

1743, raised platform around an ancient arena, also projecting base of a pedestal, from Latin podium
raised platform, from Greek podion foot of a vase, diminutive of pous (genitive podos) foot (see
foot (n.)). Meaning raised platform at the front of a hall or stage is from 1947.


Podunk

legendary small town, 1846, originally the name of a small group of Indians who lived around the
Podunk River in Connecticut; the tribe name is in colonial records from 1656 (as Potunck), from
southern New England Algonquian (Mohegan or Massachusetts) Potunk, probably from pautaunke, from
pot- to sink + locative suffix -unk, thus a boggy place. Its popularity as the name of a typical (if
mythical) U.S. small town dates from a series of witty Letters from Podunk which ran in the Buffalo
Daily National Pilot newspaper beginning Jan. 5, 1846.


poem (n.)

1540s (replacing poesy in this sense), from Middle French po&egrave;me (14c.), from Latin poema
composition in verse, poetry, from Greek poema fiction, poetical work, literally thing made or
created, early variant of poiema, from poein, poiein, to make or compose (see poet). Spelling pome,
representing an ignorant pronunciation, is attested from 1856.


poesy (n.)

late 14c., poetry; poetic language and ideas; literature; a poem, a passage of poetry, from Old
French poesie (mid-14c.), from Vulgar Latin poesia (source of Proven&ccedil;al, Spanish, Portuguese,
Italian  poesia), from Latin poesis poetry, a poem, from Greek poesis composition, poetry, literally
a making, fabrication, variant of poiesis, from poein, poiein to make or compose (see poet). Meaning
the art of poetry is late 15c.


poet (n.)

early 14c., a poet, a singer (c.1200 as a surname), from Old French poete (12c., Modern French
po&#232;te) and directly from Latin poeta a poet, from Greek poetes maker, author, poet, variant of
poietes, from poein, poiein to make, create, compose, from PIE *kwoiwo- making, from root *kwei- to
pile up, build, make (cognates: Sanskrit cinoti heaping up, piling up, Old Church Slavonic &#269;inu
act, deed, order).    Replaced Old English scop (which survives in scoff). Used in 14c., as in
classical languages, for all sorts of writers or composers of works of literature. Po&egrave;te
maudit, a poet insufficiently appreciated by his contemporaries, literally cursed poet, attested by
1930, from French (1884, Verlaine). For poet laureate see laureate.


poetaster (n.)

1590s, from Middle French poetastre (1550s), from Latin poeta (see poet) + -aster, diminutive
(pejorative) suffix. Old Norse had skaldfifl poetaster.


poetess (n.)

1520s, from poet + -ess. Earlier fem. form was poetresse (early 15c.). Old Norse had skaldkona
poetess.


poetic (adj.)

1520s, from poet + -ic, or else from or influenced by Middle French poetique (c.1400), from Latin
poeticus, from Greek poietikos pertaining to poetry, literally creative, productive, from poietos
made, verbal adjective of poiein to make (see poet). Related: Poetics (1727). Poetic justice ideal
justice as portrayed in plays and stories is from 1670s. Poetic license attested by 1733.    Earlier
adjective was poetical (late 14c.); also obsolete poetly (mid-15c.). Related: Poetically (early
15c.).


poetry (n.)

late 14c., poetry; a poem; ancient literature; poetical works, fables, or tales, from Old French
poetrie (13c.), and perhaps directly from Medieval Latin poetria (c.650), from Latin poeta (see
poet). In classical Latin, poetria meant poetess.    ... I decided not to tell lies in verse. Not to
feign any emotion that I did not feel; not to pretend to believe in optimism or pessimism, or
unreversible progress; not to say anything because it was popular, or generally accepted, or
fashionable in intellectual circles, unless I myself believed it; and not to believe easily.
[Robinson Jeffers (1887-1962), forward to Selected Poems]    Figurative use from 1660s. Old English
had metergeweorc verse, metercr&#230;ft art of versification. Modern English lacks a true verb form
in this group of words, though poeticize (1804), poetize (1580s, from French po&eacute;tiser), and
poetrize (c.1600) have been tried. Poetry in motion (1826) perhaps is from poetry of motion (1813)
dance (also poetry of the foot, 1660s).


pog (n.)

disc used in playing a game said to have originated in Hawaii and popular in U.S. during the mid-
1990s; said to be from the name of a brand of juice, the bottle caps from it being used to play the
game originally.


pogo (n.)

1921, originally a registered trademark (Germany, 1919), of unknown origin, perhaps formed from
elements of the names of the designers.    Hopping Stilts Are the New French Playthings. ... For
France and especially Paris has taken to the pogo stick, a stick equipped with two rests for the
feet. Inside of the stick is a strong spring so that the pogoer may take a series of jumps without
straining his powers. The doctors claim that the jarring produced by the successive jumps do not
serve to injure the spine, as one might at first suppose. This jumping habit is spreading through
France and England and the eastern part of the United States. [Illustrated World, Sept., 1921]
The fad periodically returned in U.S., but with fading intensity. As a leaping style of punk dance,
attested from 1977. The newspaper comic strip by Walt Kelly debuted in 1948 and ran daily through
1975.


pogo stick (n.)

1921; see pogo.


pogon-

word-forming element from comb. form of Greek pogon the beard. Used in Pogonophile; pogonophobia.


pogrom (n.)

1882, from Yiddish pogrom, from Russian pogromu devastation, destruction, from po- by, through,
behind, after (cognate with Latin post-; see post-) + gromu thunder, roar, from PIE imitative root
*ghrem- (see grim).


poh

contemptuous exclamation, attested from 1670s.


poi (n.)

1823, from Hawaiian poi food made from taro root.


poignance (n.)

1769; see poignant + -ance.


poignancy (n.)

1680s, sharpness, keenness, from poignant + -cy.


poignant (adj.)

late 14c., painful to physical or mental feeling (of sauce, spice, wine as well as things that
affect the feelings), from Old French poignant sharp, pointed (13c.), present participle of poindre
to prick, sting, from Latin pungere to prick (see pungent). Related: Poignantly.    The word
disguises a linguistics trick-play, a double reverse. Latin pungere is from the same root as Latin
pugnus fist, and represents a metathesis of -n- and -g- that later was reversed in French.


poilu (n.)

French private soldier, 1914, from French poilu, literally hairy, from poil hair, not of the head,
but of beards, animal coats, etc., from Latin pilus (see pile (n.3)). In 19c. French the adjective
had a secondary sense of strong, brave, courageous (Balzac).


poindexter (n.)

nerdy intellectual, by 1986, U.S. teenager slang, from the character Poindexter, introduced 1959 in
the made-for-TV cartoon version of Felix the Cat.


poinsettia (n.)

from the genus name (1836), Modern Latin, in recognition of Joel R. Poinsett (1779-1851), U.S.
ambassador to Mexico, who is said to have brought the plant to the attention of botanists.


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


point (v.)

late 14c., indicate with the finger; c.1400, wound by stabbing; make pauses in reading a text; seal
or fill openings or joints or between tiles, partly from Old French pointoier to prick, stab, jab,
mark, and also from point (n.).    Mid-15c. as to stitch, mend. From late 15c. as stitch, mend; also
furnish (a garment) with tags or laces for fastening; from late 15c. as aim (something). Related:
Pointed; pointing. To point up emphasize is from 1934; to point out is from 1570s.


point man (n.)

one who leads a military patrol in formation in a jungle, etc., 1944, from point (n.) in military
sense of small leading party of an advance guard (1580s) + man (n.).


point of view (n.)

position from which a thing is viewed, 1727, translating French point de vue, a loan-translation of
Latin punctum visus. Figurative use is from 1760. The Latin phrase was translated into German as
Gesichtspunkt.


point-blank (n.)

1570s, said to be from point (v.) + blank (n.), here meaning the white center of a target. The
notion would be of standing close enough to aim (point) at the blank without allowance for curve,
windage, or gravity. But early references make no mention of a white target, and the phrase is
possibly from a simplification of the French phrase de pointe en blanc, used in French gunnery in
reference to firing a piece on the level into open space to test how far it will carry. In that case
the blank represents empty space or perhaps the zero point of elevation. The whole phrase might be a
French loan-translation from Italian. From 1590s as an adjective in English.


pointe (n.)

in dance, 1830, from French pointe (see point (n.)).


pointed (adj.)

c.1300, having a sharp end or ends, from point (n.). Meaning having the quality of penetrating the
feelings or mind is from 1660s. Related: Pointedly; pointedness.


pointer (n.)

mid-14c., a tiler (early 13c. as a surname), agent noun from point (v.). From c.1500 as maker of
needlepoint lace. From 1570s as thing that points; meaning dog that stands rigid in the presence of
game, facing the quarry is recorded from 1717. Meaning item of advice first recorded 1883.


pointillism (n.)

1901, from French pointillisme, from pointiller to cover with pointilles, small dots, plural
diminutive of point (see point (n.)). Pointillist is attested from 1891, from French pointilliste.


pointing (n.)

the filling up of exterior faces of joints in brickwork, late 15c., verbal noun from point (v.).
Meaning action of indicating with the finger, etc. is from 1550s.


pointless (adj.)

early 14c., blunt, from point (n.) + -less. Meaning of no effect, to no purpose is from 1726.
Related: Pointlessly; pointlessness.


pointy (adj.)

1640s, from point (n.) + -y (2). Insult pointy-head for one deemed overly intellectual, attested by
1971, was popularized, if not coined, by U.S. politician George Wallace in his 1972 presidential
run.


poise (n.)

early 15c., weight, quality of being heavy, later significance, importance (mid-15c.), from Old
French pois weight, balance, consideration (12c., Modern French poids), from Medieval Latin pesum
weight, from Latin pensum something weighted or weighed, (source of Proven&ccedil;al and Catalan
pes, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian peso), noun use of neuter past participle of pendere to weigh (see
pendant).    The sense of steadiness, composure first recorded 1640s, from notion of being equally
weighted on either side (1550s). Meaning balance is from 1711; meaning way in which the body is
carried is from 1770.


poise (v.)

late 14c., to have a certain weight, from stressed form of Old French peser to weigh, be heavy;
weigh down, be a burden; worry, be a concern, from Vulgar Latin *pesare, from Latin pensare to weigh
carefully, weigh out, counter-balance, frequentative of pendere (past participle pensus) to weigh
(see pendant). For form evolution from Latin to French, see OED. Meaning to place in equilibrium is
from 1630s (compare equipoise). Passive sense of to be ready (to do something) is from 1932.
Related: Poised; poising. In 15c. a poiser was an official who weighed goods.


poison (n.)

c.1200, a deadly potion or substance, also figuratively, from Old French poison, puison (12c.,
Modern French poison) a drink, especially a medical drink, later a (magic) potion, poisonous drink
(14c.), from Latin potionem (nominative potio) a drinking, a drink, also poisonous drink (Cicero),
from potare to drink (see potion).    For form evolution from Latin to French, compare raison from
rationem. The Latin word also is the source of Old Spanish pozon, Italian pozione, Spanish pocion.
The more usual Indo-European word for this is represented in English by virus. The Old English word
was ator (see attercop) or lybb. Slang sense of alcoholic drink first attested 1805, American
English.    For sense evolution, compare Old French enerber, enherber to kill with poisonous plants.
In many Germanic languages poison is named by a word equivalent to English gift (such as Old High
German gift, German Gift, Danish and Swedish gift; Dutch gift, vergift). This shift might have been
partly euphemistic, partly by influence of Greek dosis a portion prescribed, literally a giving,
used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medicine (see dose (n.)).
Figuratively from late 15c.; of persons by 1910. As an adjective from 1520s; with plant names from
18c. Poison ivy first recorded 1784; poison oak is from 1743. Poison gas first recorded 1915.
Poison-pen (letter) popularized 1913 by a notorious criminal case in Pennsylvania, U.S.; the phrase
dates to 1898.


poison (v.)

to give poison to; kill with poison, c.1300, from Old French poisonner to give to drink, and
directly from poison (n.). Figuratively from late 14c. Related: Poisoned; poisoning.


poisoner (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from poison (v.). OED notes that in Australia and New Zealand it was used for
A cook, esp. for large numbers.


poisonous (adj.)

1570s, from poison (n.) + -ous. Failed 16c. rivals were poisonsome, poisonful, poisony. Earlier
poisoned was used (late 15c.). Related: Poisonously; poisonousness.


Poitevin (adj.)

1640s, of Poitou, the region in France.


poke (v.)

to push, prod, thrust, especially with something pointed, c.1300, puken to poke, nudge, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from or related to Middle Dutch poken to poke (Dutch beuken), or Middle Low German
poken to stick with a knife (compare German pochen to knock, rap), both from Proto-Germanic root
*puk-, perhaps imitative. Related: Poked; poking. To poke fun tease first attested 1840; to poke
around search is from 1809. To poke along advance lazily; walk at a leisurely pace is from 1833.


poke (n.1)

small sack, early 13c., probably from Old North French poque (12c., Old French poche) purse, poke,
purse-net, probably from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *puk- (cognates: Old English pohha,
pocca bag, pocket, Middle Dutch poke, Old Norse poki bag, pouch, pocket, dialectal German Pfoch),
from PIE root *beu-, an imitative root associated with words for to swell (see bull (n.2)).


poke (n.2)

pokeweed; a weed used in medicine and dyeing, colonial American, from native words, possibly a
confusion of similar-sounding Native American plant names; from 1630s in English as tobacco plant,
short for uppowoc (1580s), from Algonquian (Virginia) *uppowoc. Later (1708) the word is used in the
sense pokeweed, as a shortened form of puccoon, from Algonquian (Virginia) *puccoon, name of a plant
used for dyeing. Native roots for smoke and stain have been proposed as the origin or origins.


poke (n.3)

an act of poking, 1796, originally pugilistic slang, from poke (v.). Also (1809) the name of a
device, like a yoke with a pole, attached to domestic animals such as pigs and sheep to keep them
from escaping enclosures. Hence slowpoke, and compare pokey. Slang sense act of sexual intercourse
is attested from 1902.


Pokemon (n.)

video and trading card franchise, released in Japan in 1996, said to be from a contracted
Romanization of Japanese Poketto Monsuta pocket monsters, both elements ultimately from European
languages. Apparently it is a collective word with no distinctive plural form.


poker (n.1)

the iron bar with which men stir the fire [Johnson], 1530s, agent noun from poke (v.).


poker (n.2)

card game, 1834, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from the first element of German
Pochspiel, name of a card game similar to poker, from pochen to brag as a bluff, literally to knock,
rap (see poke (v.)). A popular alternative theory traces the word to French poque, also said to have
been a card game resembling poker. [B]ut without documentation these explanations are mere
speculation [Barnhart]. The earlier version of the game in English was called brag. Slang poker face
(n.) deadpan is from 1874.    A good player is cautious or bold by turns, according to his estimate
of the capacities of his adversaries, and to the impression he wants to make on them. 7. It follows
that the possession of a good poker face is an advantage. No one who has any pretensions to good
play will betray the value of his hand by gesture, change of countenance, or any other symptom.
[Cavendish, Round Games at Cards, dated 1875]   <hr />   To any one not very well up in these games,
some parts of the book are at first sight rather puzzling. It follows, we read in one passage, that
the possession of a good poker face (the italics are the author's) is an advantage. If this had been
said by a Liverpool rough of his wife, the meaning would have been clear to every one. Cavendish,
however, does not seem to be writing especially for Lancashire. [review of above, Saturday Review,
Dec. 26, 1874]


pokey (n.)

jail, 1919, of uncertain origin; Barnhart says perhaps altered from pogie poorhouse (1891), which
itself is of unknown origin.


poky (adj.)

also pokey, 1828, confined, pinched, shabby, later (1856) slow, dull; from varied senses of poke
(v.) + -y (2). Also see poke (n.3). Related: Pokily; pokiness.


pol (n.)

1942, American English colloquial shortening of politician.


Polack (n.)

Polish person, 1570s, from Polish Polak (male) Polish person, related to Polanie Poles, Polska
Poland, polski Polish (see Pole). In North American usage, Polish immigrant, person of Polish
descent (1879) and in that context considered offensive in English. As an adjective from c.1600.


Poland (n.)

1560s, from Pole + land (n.). Related: Polander.


polar (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French polaire (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin polaris of or pertaining to
the poles, from Latin polus an end of an axis (see pole (n.2)). Meaning directly opposite in
character or tendency is attested from 1832. Polar bear first recorded 1781.


Polaris (n.)

1769, short for stella polaris, Modern Latin, literally the pole star (see polar). The ancient
Greeks called it Phoenice, the Phoenician (star), because the Phoenicians used it for navigation,
though due to precession of the equinoxes it was not then the pole star. Also see pole (n.2). The
Old English word for it was Scip-steorra ship-star, reflecting its importance in navigation. As the
name of a U.S. Navy long-range submarine-launched guided nuclear missile, it dates from 1957.


polarisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of polarization. For spelling, see -ize.


polarity (n.)

1640s, originally of magnets, from polar + -ity.


polarization (n.)

1812, from polarize + -ation, and in part from French polarisation, noun of action from polariser.
Figuratively from 1871; of social and political groups, accentuation of differences, from 1945.


polarize (v.)

1811, in optics, from French polariser, coined by French physicist &Eacute;tienne-Louis Malus
(1775-1812) as a term in optics, from Modern Latin polaris polar (see polar). Transferred sense of
to accentuate a division in a group or system is first recorded 1949 in Arthur Koestler. Related:
Polarized; polarizing.


Polaroid (n.)

material which in thin sheets produces a high degree of plane polarization of light passing through
it, 1936, proprietary name (Sheet Polarizer Co., Union City, N.J.). As a type of camera producing
prints rapidly, it is attested from 1961.


polder (n.)

c.1600, from Dutch polder, from Middle Dutch polre, related to East Frisian poller, polder, of
unknown origin.


pole (n.1)

stake, late Old English pal stake, pole, post, a general Germanic borrowing (Old Frisian and Old
Saxon pal stake, Middle Dutch pael, Dutch paal, Old High German pfal, Old Norse pall) from Latin
palus stake (see pale (n.)).    Racing sense of inside fence surrounding a course is from 1851; pole
position in auto racing attested from 1904.  A ten-foot pole as a metaphoric measure of something
one would not touch something (or someone) else with is by 1839, American English. The ten-foot pole
was a common tool used to set stakes for fences, etc., and the phrase Can't touch de bottom with a
ten foot pole is in the popular old minstrel show song Camptown Races.    I saw her eat.  No very
unnatural occurrence I should think.  But she ate an onion!  Right my boy, right, never marry a
woman who would touch an onion with a ten foot pole.  [The Collegian, University of Virginia, 1839]


pole (n.2)

ends of Earth's axis, late 14c., from Old French pole or directly from Latin polus end of an axis;
also the sky, the heavens (a sense sometimes used in English from 16c.), from Greek polos pivot,
axis of a sphere, the sky, from PIE *kwol- turn round, from root *kwel- (1) wheel; turn, roll around
(see cycle (n.)).


Pole (n.)

inhabitant or native of Poland, 1650s, from German Pole, singular of Polen, from Polish Polanie
Poles, literally field-dwellers, from pole field, related to Old Church Slavonic polje field, from
PIE root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)).


pole (v.)

to furnish with poles, 1570s, from pole (n.1). Meaning to push with a pole is from 1753. Related:
Poled; poling.


pole-star (n.)

the North Star (see Polaris), 1550s, from pole (n.2) + star (n.).


pole-vault (n.)

1877, from pole (n.1) + vault (n.2). As a verb from 1892 (implied in pole-vaulting). Related: Pole-
vaulted.


poleax (n.)

kind of axe used as a weapon or by butchers, c.1300, pollax, from pol head (see poll (n.)) + ax
(n.). From notion of beheading or head-splitting, or perhaps from the shape of the ax. Spelling
altered 17c. by confusion with pole (n.1)).


polecat (n.)

early 14c., from cat (n.); the first element is perhaps Anglo-French pol, from Old French poule
fowl, hen (see pullet (n.)); so called because it preys on poultry [Klein]. The other alternative is
that the first element is from Old French pulent stinking, for obvious reasons. Originally the
European Putorius foetidus; also applied to related U.S. skunks since 1680s.


polemarch (n.)

commander of the army in Greek history, 1570s, from Greek polemarkhos one who begins or leads a war,
from polemos war + arkhos leader, chief, ruler (see archon).


polemic (n.)

1630s, controversial argument or discussion, from French pol&#233;mique (16c./17c.), noun use of
adjective meaning disputatious, controversial (see polemic (adj.)).


polemic (adj.)

1640s, from French pol&#233;mique (from Middle French polemique) disputatious, controversial, or
directly from Greek polemikos of war, warlike, belligerent; skilled in war, fit for service; like an
enemy, stirring up hostility, from polemos war, of unknown origin. Related: Polemical (1630s).


polemicist (n.)

1859, American English formation parallel to polemist (1825), from Greek polemistes a warrior, from
polemizein to wage war, to make war.


polemicize (v.)

1953, from polemic + -ize. Related: Polemicized; polemicizing. Earlier was polemize (1828), from
Greek polemizein to make war, to wage war.


polemology (n.)

the study of war, 1870, from Greek polemos war, of unknown origin, + connective -o- + -logy.


polenta (n.)

Old English polente, from Latin pollenta, polenta, literally peeled barley, related to pollen fine
flour, from Proto-Indo-European *pel- (1) flour; dust (see pollen). Later reborrowed from Italian
polenta, from the Latin word.


police (n.)

c.1530, at first essentially the same word as policy (n.1); from Middle French police (late 15c.),
from Latin politia civil administration, from Greek polis city (see polis).    Until mid-19c. used
in England for civil administration; application to administration of public order (1716) is from
French (late 17c.), and originally in English referred to France or other foreign nations. The first
force so-named in England was the Marine Police, set up 1798 to protect merchandise at the Port of
London. Police state state regulated by means of national police first recorded 1865, with reference
to Austria. Police action in the international sense of military intervention short of war,
ostensibly to correct lawlessness is from 1933. Police officer is attested from 1800. Police station
is from 1817.


police (v.)

to keep order in, 1580s, from Middle French policer, from police (see police (n.)). Meaning to keep
order by means of police is from 1837. Related: Policed; policing.


policeman (n.)

1790, from police (n.) + man (n.).


Polichinelle (n.)

Punch, French (17c.), from Neapolitan Polecenella (see Punch).


policlinic (n.)

1827, originally, clinic held in a private house (instead of a hospital), from German Poliklinik,
from Greek polis city (see polis) + Klinik, from French clinique (see clinic).


policy (n.1)

way of management, late 14c., policie, study or practice of government; good government; from Old
French policie (14c.) political organization, civil administration, from Late Latin politia the
state, civil administration, from Greek politeia state, administration, government, citizenship,
from polites citizen, from polis city, state (see polis). Meaning plan of action, way of management
first recorded c.1400.


policy (n.2)

written insurance agreement, 1560s, from Middle French police contract, bill of lading (late 14c.),
from Italian polizza written evidence of a transaction, from Old Italian poliza, from Medieval Latin
apodissa receipt for money, from Greek apodexis proof, declaration, from apo- off + deiknynia to
show, cognate with Latin dicere to tell (see diction).


polio (n.)

1911, abbreviation of poliomyelitis.


poliomyelitis (n.)

1874, also polio-myelitis, coined by German physician Adolph Kussmaul (1822-1902) from Greek polios
grey (see fallow (adj.)) + myelos marrow + -itis inflammation. So called because the gray matter in
the spinal cord is inflamed, which causes paralysis. The earlier name was infantile paralysis
(1843).    In many respects, also, this affection resembles the acute spinal paralysis of infancy,
which, from the researches of Charcot, Joffroy, and others, have been shown pathologically to be an
acute myelitis of the anterior cornua. Hence, for these forms of paralysis, Professor Kussmaul
suggests the name of 'poliomyelitis anterior.' [London Medical Record, Dec. 9, 1874]


polis (n.)

ancient Greek city-state, 1894, from Greek polis city, one's city; the state, citizens, from PIE
*pele- citadel, enclosed space, often on high ground (cognates: Sanskrit pur, puram city, citadel,
Lithuanian pilis fortress).


polish (v.)

early 14c., polischen make smooth, from Old French poliss-, present participle stem of polir (12c.)
to polish, decorate, see to one's appearance, from Latin polire to polish, make smooth; decorate,
embellish; figuratively refine, improve, said to be from Proto-Indo-European *pel- to thrust,
strike, drive (via the notion of fulling cloth). The sense of free from coarseness, to refine first
recorded in English mid-14c. Related: Polished; polishing.  Slang polish off finish is 1837, from
notion of applying a coat of polish being the final step in a piece of work.


polish (n.)

1590s, absence of coarseness, from polish (v.). From 1704 as act of polishing; 1819 as substance
used in polishing.


Polish (adj.)

1670s, from Pole + -ish. Related: Polishness. Polish-American attested from 1898.


polished (adj.)

late 14c., made smooth; early 15c., elegant; past participle adjective from polish (v.).


Politburo (n.)

highest policy-making committee of the U.S.S.R., 1927, from Russian politbyuro, contracted from
politicheskoe byuro political bureau.


polite (adj.)

late 14c., polished, burnished (mid-13c. as a surname), from Latin politus refined, elegant,
accomplished, literally polished, past participle of polire to polish, to make smooth (see polish
(v.)). Used literally at first in English; sense of elegant, cultured is first recorded c.1500, that
of behaving courteously is 1748 (implied in politely). Related: Politeness.


politesse (n.)

civility, 1717, from French politesse (17c.), from Italian politezza, properly the quality of being
polite, from polito polite, from Latin politus (see polite).


politic (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to public affairs, from Middle French politique political (14c.) and directly
from Latin politicus of citizens or the state, civil, civic, from Greek politikos of citizens,
pertaining to the state and its administration; pertaining to public life, from polites citizen,
from polis city (see polis). Replaced in most adjectival senses by political. From mid-15c. as
prudent, judicious.


politic (v.)

also politick, to engage in political activity, 1917, a back-formation from politics. Related:
Politicked; politicking (for the -k- see picnic).


political (adj.)

1550s, pertaining to a polity, civil affairs, or government; from Latin politicus of citizens or the
state (see politic (adj.)) + -al (1). Meaning taking sides in party politics (usually pejorative) is
from 1749. Political prisoner first recorded 1860; political science is from 1779 (first attested in
Hume). Political animal translates Greek politikon zoon (Aristotle, Politics, I.ii.9) an animal
intended to live in a city; a social animal.


politically (adv.)

1580s, in a politic manner; 1630s in a political manner, from politic or political + -ly (2).


politically correct (adj.)

first attested in prevailing current sense 1970; abbreviation P.C. is from 1986.    [T]here is no
doubt that political correctness refers to the political movement and phenomenon, which began in the
USA, with the aim to enforce a set of ideologies and views on gender, race and other minorities.
Political correctness refers to language and ideas that may cause offence to some identity groups
like women and aims at giving preferential treatment to members of those social groups in schools
and universities. [Thuy Nguyen, Political Correctness in the English Language,2007]


politicaster (n.)

a petty, feeble, or contemptible politician [OED], 1640s, from Italian or Spanish politicastro, noun
use of adjective meaning political, from Latin politicus (see political).


politician (n.)

1580s, person skilled in politics, from politics + -ian. It quickly took on overtones, not typically
good ones. Johnson defines it as A man of artifice; one of deep contrivance.


politicization (n.)

1918, noun of action from politicize.


politicize (v.)

1758, take up politics, from politics + -ize. Meaning to render political is from 1846. Related:
Politicized; politicizing. Earlier was politize (late 16c.), but this was rare.


politicking (n.)

1928, from present participle of politic (v.). For the -k-, see picnic.


politico (n.)

politician, political agent, usually in a derogatory sense, 1620s, from Italian or Spanish politico,
noun use of adjective meaning political, from Latin politicus (see politic (adj.)).


politico-

word-forming element meaning political and, from Latinized comb. form of Greek politikos (see
political).


politics (n.)

1520s, science of government, from politic (adj.), modeled on Aristotle's ta politika affairs of
state, the name of his book on governing and governments, which was in English mid-15c. as
Polettiques. Also see -ics.Politicks is the science of good sense, applied to public affairs, and,
as those are forever changing, what is wisdom to-day would be folly and perhaps, ruin to-morrow.
Politicks is not a science so properly as a business. It cannot have fixed principles, from which a
wise man would never swerve, unless the inconstancy of men's view of interest and the capriciousness
of the tempers could be fixed. [Fisher Ames (1758-1808)]Meaning a person's political allegiances or
opinions is from 1769.


polity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French politie (early 15c.) or directly from Late Latin polita organized
government (see policy (n.1)).


polka (n.)

1844, from French polka, German Polka, probably from Czech polka, the dance, literally Polish woman
(Polish Polka), fem. of Polak a Pole. The word might also be an alteration of Czech pulka half, for
the half-steps of Bohemian peasant dances. Or it could be a merger of the two. The dance was in
vogue first in Prague, 1835; it reached London by the spring of 1842.   Vous n'en &#234;tes encore
qu'au galop, vieil arri&#233;r&#233;, et nous en sommes &#224; la polka! Oui, c'est la polka que
nous avons dans&#233;e &#224; ce fameux bal Valenlino. Vous demandez ce que c'est que la polka,
homme de l ann&#233;e derni&#232;re! La contredanse a v&#233;cu; le galop, rococo; la valse &#224;
deux temps, dans le troisi&#232;me dessous; il n'y a plus que la polka, la sublime, l'enivrante
polka, dont les salons raffolent, que les femmes de la haute, les banqui&#233;res les plus cossues
et les comtesses les plus choenosophoses &#233;tudient jour et nuit. [La France Dramatique, Paris,
1841]    As a verb by 1846 (polk also was tried).


polka dot (n.)

1874, from polka (n.) + dot (n.). Named for the dance, for no reason except its popularity, which
led to many contemporary products and fashions taking the name. Related: Polka-dotted (1873).


poll (n.)

head, early 14c., polle hair of the head; piece of fur from the head of an animal, also head, from
Middle Low German or Middle Dutch pol head, top. Sense extended early 14c. to person, individual.
Meaning collection of votes is first recorded 1620s, from notion of counting heads; meaning survey
of public opinion is first recorded 1902. Poll tax, literally head tax, is from 1690s. Literal use
in English tends toward the part of the head where the hair grows.


poll (v.1)

to take the votes of, 1620s, from poll (n.). Related: Polled; polling. A deed poll deed executed by
one party only, is from earlier verbal meaning cut the hair of, because the deed was cut straight
rather than indented (see indent).


poll (v.2)

to cut, trim, late 14c., to cut short the hair (of an animal or person), from poll (n.). Of trees or
plants from 1570s. Related: Polled; polling.


Poll

fem. proper name, short for Polly. Noted from 1620s as a parrot's name.


pollack (n.)

sea fish, c.1600, pollock, alteration of Scottish podlok, of unknown origin, perhaps from poll (n.)
head. Possibly the alteration is by influence of Pollack Polish person.


pollard (n.)

1540s, de-horned animal, from poll (v.2) + -ard. In reference to polled trees, from 1610s.


pollen (n.)

1760 as a botanical term for the fertilizing element of flowers (from Linn&aelig;us, 1751), earlier
fine flour (1520s), from Latin pollen mill dust; fine flour, related to polenta peeled barley, and
pulvis (genitive pulveris) dust, from PIE root *pel- (1) dust; flour (cognates: Greek poltos pap,
porridge, Sanskrit p&#225;lalam ground seeds, Lithuanian pelenai, Old Church Slavonic popelu,
Russian p&#233;pel&#365; ashes).


pollinate (v.)

1873, back formation from pollination, or else from pollin-, stem of Latin pollen (see pollen) +
-ate (2). Related: Pollinated; pollinating.


pollination (n.)

1872, from older French pollination, noun of action formed 1812 from pollin-, stem of Latin pollen
(see pollen). Replaced in Modern French by pollinisation .


polliwog (n.)

tadpole, mid-15c., polwygle, probably from pol head (see poll (n.)) + wiglen to wiggle (see wiggle
(v.)). Modern spelling is 1830s, replacing earlier polwigge.


pollster (n.)

1939, from poll (n.) + -ster.


pollutant (n.)

1888, from pollute + -ant. Related: Pollutants.


pollute (v.)

late 14c., to defile, a back formation from pollution, or else from Latin pollutus, past participle
of polluere to defile, pollute, contaminate. Related: Polluted; polluting. Meaning make physically
foul is from 1540s; specific sense contaminate the environment emerged from late 19c.


polluted (adj.)

c.1400, rendered impure or unclean, past participle adjective from pollute (v.). Meaning drunk is
from 1912, American English slang; ecological sense is from 1888.


polluter (n.)

1540s, one who renders unclean or impure, agent noun from   pollute (v.). Ecological sense from
1958.


pollution (n.)

mid-14c., discharge of semen other than during sex, later, desecration, defilement (late 14c.), from
Late Latin pollutionem (nominative pollutio) defilement, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin polluere to soil, defile, contaminate, from por- before + -luere smear, from PIE root *leu-
dirt; make dirty (cognates: Latin lutum mud, mire, clay, lues filth; Greek lyma filth, dirt,
disgrace, lymax rubbish, refuse; Old Irish loth mud, dirt; Lithuanian lutynas pool, puddle). Sense
of contamination of the environment first recorded c.1860, but not common until c.1955.


Pollux

twin brother of Castor, name of the beta star of Gemini, 1520s, from Latin, from Greek Polydeukes,
literally very sweet, from polys much (see poly-) + deukes sweet (see glucose). The contraction of
the name in Latin is perhaps via Etruscan [Klein].


Polly

fem. proper name, a rhyming collateral form of Molly, pet form of Mary.


Pollyanna (n.)

one who finds cause for gladness in the most difficult situations, 1921, a reference to Pollyanna
Whittier, child heroine of U.S. novelist Eleanor Hodgman Porter's Pollyanna (1913) and Pollyanna
Grows Up (1915), who was noted for keeping her chin up during disasters.


polo (n.)

1872, Anglo-Indian polo, from Balti (Tibetan language of the Indus valley) polo ball, related to
Tibetan pulu ball. An ancient game in south Asia, first played in England at Aldershot, 1871. Water
polo is from 1876 (in early versions players sometimes paddled about on barrels or in canoes). Polo
shirt (1892) originally was a kind worn by polo players.


polonaise (n.)

1773, woman's overdress (from fancied resemblance to Polish costume); 1797, stately dance, from
French (danse) polonaise a Polish (dance), fem. of polonais (adj.) Polish, from Pologne Poland, from
Medieval Latin Polonia Poland (see Poland). In the culinary sense, applied to dishes supposed to be
cooked in Polish style, attested from 1889.


polonium (n.)

radioactive element, 1898, discovered by Marie Curie (nee Sk&#322;odowska), 1867-1934, and her
husband, and named for her native country, Poland (Modern Latin Polonia). With element-name ending
-ium.


poltergeist (n.)

1838, from German Poltergeist, literally noisy ghost, from poltern make noise, rattle (from PIE root
*bhel- (4) to sound, ring, roar; source of bellow, bell) + Geist ghost (see ghost). In the native
idiom of Northern England, such phenomenon likely would be credited to a boggart.


poltroon (n.)

A coward; a nidgit; a scoundrel [Johnson, who spells it poltron], 1520s, from Middle French poultron
rascal, coward (16c., Modern French poltron), from Italian poltrone lazy fellow, coward, apparently
from *poltro couch, bed (compare Milanese polter, Venetian poltrona couch), perhaps from a Germanic
source (compare Old High German polstar pillow; see bolster (n.)). Also see -oon.


poly-

word-forming element meaning many, much, multi-, one or more, from Greek poly-, combining form of
polys much (plural polloi); cognate with Latin plus, from PIE root *pele- (1) to fill, with
derivatives referring to multitudinousness or abundance (cognates: Sanskrit purvi much, prayah
mostly; Avestan perena-, Old Persian paru much; Greek plethos people, multitude, great number, polys
much, plenty, ploutos wealth; Lithuanian pilus full, abundant; Old Church Slavonic plunu; Gothic
filu much, Old Norse fj&ouml;l-, Old English fela, feola much, many; Old English folgian; Old Irish
lan, Welsh llawn full; Old Irish il, Welsh elu much); probably related to root *pele- (2) to spread.
Properly used in compounds only with words of Greek origin. In chemical names, usually indicating a
compound with a large number of atoms or molecules of the same kind (such as polymer).


polyamorous (adj.)

by 1972, from poly- + amorous. Related: Polyamory.


polyandria (n.)

1751 in botany; 1809 of human relationships, from poly- many andr-, stem of aner man, husband (see
anthropo-) + -ia condition of. Late Greek polyandria meant populousness.


polyandrous (adj.)

1764, in botany, having numerous stamens, from poly- + stem of aner man, husband (see anthropo-).
From 1854 of humans, having more than one husband. Greek polyandros meant numerous (of persons),
populous (of places); polyanor meant of many husbands.


polyandry (n.)

1767, nativized form of polyandria. Related: Polyandrist.


polycentric (adj.)

1826, from poly- + centric.


polychrome (adj.)

having many colors, 1816, from French polychrome, from Latinized form of Greek polykhromos many-
colored (see poly- + chrome). As a noun from 1800. Related: Polychromic; polychromatic;
polychromate.


polyclinic (n.)

place for treatment of various diseases, 1890, from poly- many + clinic.


polydactyl (n.)

1894, from French polydactyle (adj.) having more fingers and toes than is usual, from Greek
polydaktylos; see poly- + dactyl. As an adjective from 1874. Related: Polydactyly; polydactylism
(1868).


polydipsia (n.)

excessive thirst, 1650s, from Greek polydipsios very thirsty, from poly- (see poly-) + dipsa thirst
+ -ia condition of.


Polydorus

Priam's youngest son (Homer), from Latin Polydorus, from Greek Polydoros one who has received many
gifts, noun use of adjective meaning richly endowed, from polys much, many (see poly-) + doron gift
(see date (n.1)).


polyester (n.)

1929, formed from polymer + ester. Polyester fiber was discovered 1941.


polyethylene (n.)

polymer of ethylene, 1862, from French poly&eacute;thyl&egrave;ne; see poly- + ethylene. Related:
Polyethylenic (1860).


polygamous (adj.)

1610s, from polygamy + -ous, or else from Late Greek polygamos often married. Related: Polygamously.


polygamy (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin polygamia, from Late Greek polygamia polygamy, from polygamos often married,
from polys many + gamos marriage (see gamete). Not etymologically restricted to marriage of one man
and multiple women (technically polygyny), but often used as if it were. Related: Polygamist.


polygenesis (n.)

plurality of origins, 1858, from poly- + genesis. Related: Polygenetic (1851).


polygenic (adj.)

1823, from poly- + -genic. Used in chemistry from 1873 for forming two or more compounds (with
hydrogen or another univalent element). Related: Polygenetic.


polygenous (adj.)

composed of many kinds, 1797; see poly- + genus.


polyglot (adj.)

1650s, from Greek polyglottos speaking many languages, literally many-tongued, from polys many (see
poly-) + glotta, Attic variant of glossa language, literally tongue (see gloss (n.2)). As a noun
from 1640s.


polygon (n.)

1570s, from Latin polygonum, from Greek polygonon, noun use of neuter of adjective polygonos many-
angled, from polys many (see poly-) + -gonos angled, from gonia angle (see knee (n.)). Related:
Polygonal.


polygraph (n.)

1794, mechanical device for making multiple copies of something written or drawn, from Greek
polygraphos writing much, from polys much (see poly-) + graphos writing, from graphein to write (see
-graphy).    Meaning instrument for recording several pulsations of the body at the same time is
1871; first used as a lie detector 1921. Related: Polygraphy (1590s); polygraphic (1771).


polygyny (n.)

1780, condition of having many wives, from poly- many (see poly-) + Greek gyne woman, wife (see
queen). Related: Polygynous.


polyhedral (adj.)

1741, from polyhedron + -al (1).


polyhedron (n.)

1560s, from Latinized form of Greek polyedron, neuter of adjective polyedros having many bases or
sides, from polys many (see poly-) + hedra seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE
root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


polyhistor (n.)

very learned person, 1580s, from Greek polyhistor very learned, from poly much, many (see poly-) +
histor knowing, learned (see history).


polymath (n.)

1620s, from Greek polymathes having learned much, knowing much, from polys much (see poly-) + root
of manthanein to learn (see mathematic).


polymer (n.)

a substance built from a large number of simple molecules of the same kind, 1855, probably from
German Polymere (Berzelius, 1830), from Greek polymeres having many parts, from polys many (see
poly-) + meros part (see merit (n.)).


polymerase (n.)

1866, coined by Berzelius (1830) from Greek polymeres having many parts (see polymer).


polymeric (adj.)

1829, from polymer + -ic.


polymerization (n.)

1866, from polymer + -ization.


polymerize (v.)

1851, from polymer + -ize. Related: Polymerized; polymerizing.


polymorph (n.)

organism of several forms, 1828, from Greek polymorphos of many forms (see polymorphous).


polymorphism (n.)

1839, from polymorph + -ism.


polymorphous (adj.)

1785, from Greek polymorphos multiform, of many forms, manifold, from poly- many (see poly-) +
morphe shape, form (see Morpheus). Related: Polymorphic; polymorphously; polymorphousness.


Polynesia (n.)

1758, Latinization of French polyn&eacute;sie, coined 1756 by French writer Charles de Brosses
(1709-1777) in Histoire des navigations aux terres australes, contenant ce que l'on sait des moeurs
et des productions des contr&#233;es d&#233;couvertes jusqu'&#224; ce jour (and first in English in
a review of it), coined from Greek polys many (see poly-) + nesos island (see Chersonese). Related:
Polynesian.


polynomial

1670s (n.), 1704 (adj.), irregularly formed from poly- + stem of binomial.


polyp (n.)

c.1400, nasal tumor, from Middle French polype and directly from Latin polypus cuttlefish, also
nasal tumor, from Greek (Doric, Aeolic) polypos octopus, cuttlefish, from polys many (see poly-) +
pous foot (see foot (n.)). Etymological sense revived 1742 as a name for hydras and sea anemones
(earlier polypus, early 16c.). The Latin word is the source of French poulpe octopus.


polypeptide (n.)

peptide built from a large number of amino acids, 1903, from German polypeptid; see poly- + peptide.


polyphagia (n.)

1690s, eating to excess, medical Latin, from Greek polyphagia excess in eating, from polyphagos
eating to excess, from polys much (see poly-) + phagein to eat (see -phagous). Attested from 1890 in
sense feeding on various kinds of food. Nativized as polyphagy. Related: Polyphagic; polyphagous.


Polyphemus

name of a Cyclops (Odyssey, IX), also used as the name for a one-eyed animal; the name is literally
many-voiced or else much-spoken-of (see poly- + fame (n.)).


polyphonic (adj.)

1782, formed in English from Greek polyphonos (see polyphony).


polyphony (n.)

1828, multiplicity of sounds, from Greek polyphonia variety of sounds, from polyphonos having many
sounds or voices, from polys many (see poly-) + phone voice, sound (see fame (n.)). The meaning
counterpoint (1864) is perhaps a back-formation from the adjective.


polyploidy (n.)

1922, from German polyploidie (1910), from polyploid, from Greek poly- (see poly-) + -ploid, from
comb. form of ploos fold (see fold (v.)) + -oid.


polyrhythm (n.)

1911, probably a back formation from polyrhythmic.


polyrhythmic (adj.)

1883, from poly- + rhythmic.


polysemous (adj.)

1884, from Medieval Latin polysemus, from Greek polysemos of many sides (see polysemy).


polysemy (n.)

1900, from French polys&eacute;mie (1897), from Medieval Latin polysemus, from Greek polysemos of
many senses, from poly- (see poly-) + sema sign (see semantic). Related: Polysemic.


polystyrene (n.)

1922, so called because it is a polymer of styrene.


polysyllabic (adj.)

1650s (implied in polysyllabical), from Medieval Latin polysyllabicus, from Greek polysyllabikos;
see poly- + syllabic.


polysyllable (n.)

1560s; see poly- + syllable.  As a rule, a word of more than three syllables.


polysynthesis (n.)

1837, from poly- + synthesis.


polytechnic (adj.)

1805, pertaining to instruction in many (technical) subjects, from French &Eacute;cole
Polytechnique, engineering school founded 1794 (as &Eacute;cole des Travaux publics) in Paris; from
Greek polytekhnos skilled in many arts, from polys many (see poly-) + tekhne art (see techno-). As a
noun (short for polytechnic institution) from 1836.


polytheism (n.)

1610s, from French polyth&eacute;isme (16c.), formed from Greek polytheia polytheism, polytheos of
many gods, from polys many (see poly-) + theos god (see theo-).


polytheist (n.)

1610s; see polytheism + -ist.


polyunsaturated (adj.)

1921, from poly- + unsaturated.


polyurethane (n.)

1944, from polymer + urethane.


polyvalent (adj.)

1881, from poly- + -valent, from Latin valentem, present participle of valere be worth (see
valiant). Coined by German chemist Emil Erlenmeyer (1825-1909), who also designed the flask that
bears his name.


polyvinyl (n.)

1930, polymer of vinyl chloride. In chemistry, vinyl was used from 1863 as the name of a univalent
radical derived from ethylene, from Latin vinum wine (see wine (n.)), because ethyl alcohol is the
ordinary alcohol present in wine.


pom-pom (n.)

Maxim automatic gun, 1899, of imitative origin, soldiers' slang from the Boer War. For the
ornamental tuft, see pompom.


pomace (n.)

1570s, crushed pulp of apples, from Old French pomaz, plural of pome cider; apple, from Latin pomum
fruit; apple (see Pomona).


pomaceous (adj.)

1706, from Vulgar Latin *poma apple, originally plural of Latin pomus fruit, later apple (see
Pomona) + -aceous.


pomade (n.)

1560s, from Middle French pommade an ointment (16c.), from Italian pomata, from pomo apple, from
Latin pomum fruit; apple (see Pomona). So called because the original ointment recipe contained
mashed apples.


pome (n.)

late 14c., of types of apples or apple-shaped objects, from Old French pome apple (12c., Modern
French pomme), from Late Latin or Vulgar Latin *poma apple, originally plural of Latin pomus fruit,
later apple (see Pomona).


pomegranate (n.)

c.1300, poumgarnet (a metathesized form), from Old French pome grenate (Modern French grenade) and
directly from Medieval Latin pomum granatum, literally apple with many seeds, from pome apple; fruit
(see Pomona) + grenate having grains, from Latin granata, fem. of granatus, from granum grain (see
grain). The classical Latin name was malum granatum seeded apple. Italian form is granata, Spanish
is granada. The -gra- spelling restored in English early 15c.


pomelo (n.)

1858, of uncertain origin; apparently related to Latin pomum fruit; apple (see Pomona).


Pomerania (n.)

region and former province of Prussia on the Baltic coast of modern Poland (German Pommern, Polish
Pomorze), Medieval Latin, from Pomerani, name of a Slavic tribe there, from Polish po morze by the
sea.


Pomeranian (n.)

type of dog, 1760, from Pomerania, former province of Prussia on the south coast of the Baltic Sea.


pommel (n.)

mid-13c., ornamental knob; c.1300, knob at the end of a sword hilt, from Old French pomel (12c.,
Modern French pommeau), rounded knob, diminutive of pom hilt of a sword, from Late Latin pomellum,
diminutive of Latin pomum apple (see Pomona), the connecting notion being roundness. Sense of front
peak of a saddle first recorded mid-15c. In Middle English poetry it also sometimes meant a woman's
breast. The gymnast's pommel horse is attested from 1908.


pommes frites (n.)

fried potatoes, 1872, French, from pomme potato (see pome).


Pomona (n.)

Roman goddess of fruit, from Latin pomum apple; fruit, of uncertain origin. Possibly from *po-emo-
'taken off, picked';  *po-omo- or *pe-omo- are also conceivable [de Vaan]. Or perhaps borrowed from
a lost Mediterranean language.


pomp (n.)

c.1300, from Old French pompe pomp, magnificence (13c.) and directly from Latin pompa procession,
pomp, from Greek pompe solemn procession, display, literally a sending, from pempein to send. In
Church Latin, used in deprecatory sense for worldly display, vain show.


pompadour (n.)

1887 as a men's hairstyle; 1899 as a woman's style with the hair swept up over the forehead, in
recognition of Jeanne-Antionette Poisson, Marquise de Pompadour (1721-1764), mistress of Louis XV
from 1745-50, who wore her hair in an upswept style. Used in her lifetime in reference to various
fashions, accessories, colors, furniture, etc. The estate of Pompadour is in the Limousin region.


pompano (n.)

ocean fish, 1778, from American Spanish pampano, a name given to various types of fish, from
Spanish, originally vine, tendril, from Latin pampinus tendril or leaf of a vine.


Pompeii

Roman town buried by volcanic eruption 79 C.E., excavated beginning in 1755; the name is from Oscan
pompe five, in reference to its five districts. Related: Pompeian.


pompier (n.)

fireman's scaling ladder, French, literally fireman, from pompe pump (see pump (n.)).


pompom (n.)

ornamental round tuft (originally on a hat, etc.), 1748, alteration of pompon ornamental tuft; tuft-
like flower head, from French pompon (1725), of unknown origin; perhaps related to Old French pompe
pomp.


pomposity (n.)

early 15c., pomp, solemnity, from Medieval Latin pompositas, from Late Latin pomposus stately,
pompous (see pompous). The sense of ostentatious display is from 1610s; earlier in French
pomposit&eacute;.


pompous (adj.)

late 14c., characterized by exaggerated self-importance, from Old French pompos (14c., Modern French
pompeux) and directly from Late Latin pomposus stately, pompous, from Latin pompa pomp (see pomp).
More literal (but less common) meaning characterized by pomp is attested from early 15c. Related:
Pompously.


pon (prep.)

also 'pon, 1550s, shortened form of upon.


ponce (n.)

slang term, chiefly British, 1872, originally a pimp, a man supported by women (pouncey in same
sense is attested from 1861), of unknown origin, perhaps from French pensionnaire boarder, lodger,
person living without working. Meaning male homosexual first attested 1932 in Auden [OED]. Also as a
verb. Related: Poncey.


poncho (n.)

type of blanket-like South American cloak, 1717, from American Spanish poncho, from Araucanian
(Chile) pontho woolen fabric, perhaps influenced by Spanish poncho (adj.), variant of pocho
discolored, faded.


pond (n.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. in compounds), artificially banked body of water, variant of pound enclosed place
(see pound (n.2)). Applied locally to natural pools and small lakes from late 15c. Jocular reference
to the Atlantic Ocean dates from 1640s. Pond scum (Spirogyra) is from 1864 (also called frog-spittle
and brook-silk. As figurative for someone extremely repulsive, from 1984.


ponder (v.)

early 14c., to estimate the worth of, to appraise, from Old French ponderer to weigh, poise (14c.,
Modern French pond&eacute;rer) and directly from Latin ponderare ponder, consider, reflect,
literally to weigh, from pondus (genitive ponderis) weigh (see pound (n.1)). Meaning to weigh a
matter mentally is attested from late 14c. Related: Pondered; pondering; ponderation.


ponderance (n.)

weight, importance, 1798, from ponder + -ance.


ponderosa (n.)

type of pine in western U.S., 1878, from scientific name Pinus ponderosa (1836), literally heavy
pine, from Latin ponderosus (see ponderous).


ponderous (adj.)

c.1400, thick; early 15c., heavy, weighty, clumsy, from Latin ponderosus of great weight; full of
meaning, from pondus (genitive ponderis) weight (see pound (n.1)). Meaning tedious is first recorded
1704. Related: Ponderously; ponderousness.


pone (n.)

1630s, American Indian bread, earlier appone, ponap (1610s), from Powhatan (Algonquian) apan
something baked, from apen she bakes. Later used in Southern U.S. for any type of cornbread.


pong (n.)

by late 1960s as an abbreviation of ping-pong. The electronic arcade game (with capital P-) was
released 1972.


Pongo (n.)

ape genus, 1620s, from Kongo mpongi.


poniard (n.)

1580s, from Middle French poinard (early 16c.), from Old French poignal dagger, literally anything
grasped with the fist, from poing fist, from Latin pungus fist, from PIE root *peuk- (see
pugnacious). Probably altered in French by association with poindre to stab. Compare Latin pugnus
fist, pugio dagger. As a verb from c.1600.


pons (n.)

bridge, in various Latin expressions, from Latin pons bridge, connecting gallery, walkway, earlier
probably way, passage, from PIE *pent- to go, tread (see find (v.)). Especially pons asinorum bridge
of asses, nickname for the fifth proposition of the first book of Euclid, which beginners and slow
wits find difficulty in getting over: if two sides of a triangle are equal, the angles opposite
these sides also are equal.


Pontiac

Ottawa tribal leader (c.1720-1769), his name is given in native (Algonquian) form as bwandiag. The
city in Michigan, U.S., settled in 1818, was named for him as he is said to be buried nearby. The
automobile brand was begun in 1926, discontinued 2010.


Pontic (adj.)

1550s; see Pontus + -ic.


pontifex (n.)

member of the supreme college of priests in ancient Rome, 1570s, from Latin pontifex high priest,
chief of the priests, probably from pont-, stem of pons bridge (see pons) + -fex, -ficis, root of
facere make (see factitious). If so, the word originally meant bridge-maker, or path-maker.
Weekley points out that, bridge-building has always been regarded as a pious work of divine
inspiration. Or the term may be metaphoric of bridging the earthly world and the realm of the gods.
Other suggestions trace it to Oscan-Umbrian puntis propitiary offering, or to a lost Etruscan word,
in either case altered by folk etymology to resemble the Latin for bridge-maker. In Old English,
pontifex is glossed in the Durham Ritual (Old Northumbrian dialect) as brycgwyrcende bridge-maker.


pontiff (n.)

c.1600, high priest, from French pontif (early 16c.), from Latin pontifex, title of a Roman high
priest (see pontifex). Used for bishop in Church Latin, but not recorded in that sense in English
until 1670s, specifically the bishop of Rome, the pope. Pontifical, however, is used with this sense
from mid-15c.


pontifical (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French pontifical and directly from Latin pontificalis of or pertaining to
the high priest, from pontifex (see pontifex). Hence pontificalia trappings of a bishop.


pontificate (v.)

1818, to act as a pontiff, from Medieval Latin pontificatus, past participle of pontificare to be a
pontifex, from Latin pontifex  (see pontiff). Meaning to assume pompous and dignified airs, issue
dogmatic decrees is from 1825. Meaning to say (something) in a pontifical way is from 1922. Related:
Pontificated; pontificating.


pontificate (n.)

1580s, from Latin pontificatus office of a pontiff, from pontifex (see pontifex).


pontification (n.)

1520s, office of a bishop, noun of action from past participle stem of Medieval Latin pontificare
(see pontificate (v.)). Meaning something pontificated is from 1925.


pontoon (n.)

flat-bottomed boat (especially one to support a temporary bridge), 1670s, from French pontoon, from
Old French ponton (14c.) bridge, drawbridge, boat-bridge; flat-bottomed boat, from Latin pontonem
(nominative ponto) flat-bottomed boat, from pons bridge (see pons). Pontoon bridge is first recorded
1778.


Pontus

ancient district of Anatolia, from Greek pontos sea (see pons).


pony (n.)

1650s, powny, from Scottish, apparently from obsolete French poulenet little foal (mid-15c.),
diminutive of Old French poulain foal, from Late Latin pullanus young of an animal, from Latin
pullus young of a horse, fowl, etc. (see foal (n.)) [Skeat's suggestion, still accepted].    German,
sensibly, indicates this animal by attaching a diminutive suffix to its word for horse, which might
yield Modern English *horslet. Modern French poney is a 19c. borrowing from English. Meaning crib of
a text as a cheating aid (1827) and small liquor glass (1849) both are from notion of smallness (the
former also something one rides). As the name of a popular dance, it dates from 1963. The U.S. Pony
Express began 1860 (and operated about 18 months before being superseded by the transcontinental
telegraph). The figurative one-trick pony is 1897, American English, in reference to circus acts.


pony (v.)

1824, in pony up to pay, of uncertain origin. OED says from pony (n.), but not exactly how. In other
sources said to be from slang use of Latin legem pone to mean money (first recorded 16c.), because
this was the title of the Psalm for March 25, a Quarter Day and the first payday of the year (the
Psalm's first line is Legem pone michi domine viam iustificacionum Teach me, O Lord, the ways of thy
statutes).


ponytail (n.)

long hair style, originally of girls, 1950, from pony (n.) + tail (n.).


Ponzi scheme

investment scam by which early investors are paid off from the contributions of later ones, 1957, in
reference to Charles Ponzi (1882-1949), who perpetrated such a scam in U.S., 1919-20.


poo (n.)

also pooh, baby-talk for excrement, 1950s (see poop (n.2)).


pooch (n.)

dog, 1924, American English, of unknown origin.


poodle (n.)

1808, from German Pudel, shortened form of Pudelhund water dog, from Low German Pudel puddle
(compare pudeln to splash; see puddle (n.)) + German Hund hound (see hound (n.)). Probably so called
because the dog was used to hunt water fowl. Figurative sense of lackey (chiefly British) is
attested from 1907. Poodle-faker, British army slang for ingratiating male, is from 1902, likely
euphemistic.


poof (n.2)

effeminate man, male homosexual, c.1850, perhaps a corruption of puff. The Australian extended form
poofter is attested from 1910.


poof (n.1)

sound of a puff of breath or air, 1824, imitative.


pooh

1590s, a 'vocal gesture' expressing the action of puffing anything away [OED], first attested in
Hamlet Act I, Scene III, where Polonius addresses Ophelia with, Affection! pooh! you speak like a
green girl, / Unsifted in such perilous circumstance. / Do you believe his tenders, as you call
them? But the vocal gesture is perhaps ancient.


pooh-bah (n.)

leader who maintains excessive bureaucratic control, 1888, from Pooh-Bah, the name of the Lord High
Everything Else character in Gilbert and Sullivan's The Mikado (1885).


pooh-pooh (v.)

to dismiss lightly and contemptuously, 1827, a slang reduplication of dismissive expression pooh.
Among the many 19th century theories of the origin of language was the Pooh-pooh theory (1860),
which held that language grew from natural expressions of surprise, joy, pain, or grief.


pool (n.1)

small body of water, Old English pol small body of water; deep, still place in a river, from West
Germanic *pol- (cognates: Old Frisian and Middle Low German pol, Dutch poel, Old High German pfuol,
German Pfuhl). As a short form of swimming pool it is recorded from 1901. Pool party is from 1965.


pool (n.2)

game similar to billiards, 1848, originally (1690s) a card game played for collective stakes (a
pool), from French poule stakes, booty, plunder, literally hen, from Old French poille hen, young
fowl (see foal (n.)).    Perhaps the original notion is from jeu de la poule, supposedly a game in
which people threw things at a chicken and the player who hit it, won it, which speaks volumes about
life in the Middle Ages. The notion behind the word, then, is playing for money. The connection of
hen and stakes is also present in Spanish polla and Walloon paie.    Meaning collective stakes in
betting first recorded 1869; sense of common reservoir of resources is from 1917. Meaning group of
persons who share duties or skills is from 1928. From 1933 as short for football pool in wagering.
Pool shark is from 1898. The phrase dirty pool underhanded or unsportsmanlike conduct, especially in
politics (1951), seems to belong here now, but the phrase dirty pool of politics, with an image of
pool (n.1) is recorded from 1871 and was in use early 20c.


pool (v.1)

to make a common interest, put things into a pool, 1871, from pool (n.2). Related: Pooled; pooling.


pool (v.2)

of liquid, to form a pool or pools, 1620s, from pool (n.1).


poontang (n.)

sex with a woman; woman regarded as a sex object; female genitalia, c.1910, of uncertain origin,
probably via New Orleans Creole, from French putain prostitute, from Old French pute whore (cognate
with Spanish and Proven&ccedil;al puta), probably from fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus girl (source of
Old Italian putta girl), from Latin putus (originally pure, bright, splendid).    But also possibly
from or influenced by Old French put, from Latin putidus stinking on notion of the foulness of
harlotry [Buck], or for more literal reasons (among the 16c.-17c. slang terms for whore in English
were polecat, which might also be a pun, and fling-stink). Shortened form poon is recorded from
1969.


poop (n.1)

stern deck of a ship, c.1400, from Middle French poupe stern of a ship (14c.), from Old
Proven&ccedil;al or Italian poppa, from Latin puppis poop, stern, of uncertain origin. Poop deck
attested by 1779.


poop (n.2)

excrement, 1744, a children's euphemism, probably of imitative origin. The verb in this sense is
from 1903. The same word in the sense to break wind softly is attested from 1721; earlier to make a
short blast on a horn (late 14c.). Meaning stupid or dull person is from 1915. Pooper-scooper
attested from 1970.


poop (n.3)

up-to-date information, 1941, in poop sheet, U.S. Army slang, of unknown origin, perhaps from poop
(n.2).


poop (v.)

become tired, 1931, of unknown origin (see pooped). Related: Pooping.


pooped (adj.)

tired, 1931, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative of the sound of heavy breathing from exhaustion
(compare poop (n.2)). But poop, poop out were used in 1920s in aviation, of an engine, to die. Also
there is a verb poop, of ships, to be overwhelmed by a wave from behind, often with catastrophic
consequences (see poop (n.1)); hence in figurative nautical use, to be overcome and defeated
(attested in 1920s).    It is an easy thing to run; the difficulty is to know when to stop. There is
always the possibility of being pooped, which simply means being overtaken by a mountain of water
and crushed into the depths out of harm's way for good and all. [Ralph Stock, The Cruise of the
Dream Ship, 1921]


poor (adj.)

c.1200, lacking money or resources, destitute; needy, indigent; small, scanty, from Old French povre
poor, wretched, dispossessed; inadequate; weak, thin (Modern French pauvre), from Latin pauper poor,
not wealthy, from pre-Latin *pau-paros producing little; getting little, a compound from the roots
of paucus little (see paucity) and parare to produce, bring forth (see pare).    Replaced Old
English earm. Figuratively from early 14c. Meaning of inferior quality is from c.1300. Of inhabited
places from c.1300; of soil, etc., from late 14c. The poor boy sandwich, made of simple but filling
ingredients, was invented and named in New Orleans in 1921. To poor mouth deny one's advantages is
from 1965 (to make a poor mouth whine is Scottish dialect from 1822). Slang poor man's ________ the
cheaper alternative to _______, is from 1854.


poor (n.)

poor persons collectively, mid-12c., from poor (adj.). The Latin adjective pauper poor also was used
in a noun sense a poor man.


poorhouse (n.)

1781, from poor (n.) + house (n.).


poorly (adv.)

early 13c., inadequately, badly, insufficiently, from poor (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning in ill health
is from 1750.


poorness (n.)

late 13c., from poor (adj.) + -ness.


pop (n.1)

a hit with an explosive sound, c.1400, of imitative origin.  Meaning flavored carbonated beverage is
from 1812.A new manufactory of a nectar, between soda-water and ginger-beer, and called pop, because
'pop goes the cork' when it is drawn. [Southey, letter, 1812]  Sense of ice cream on a stick is from
1923 (see popsicle). Meaning the (brief) time of a 'pop' is from 1530s. Pop goes the weasel, a
country dance, was popular 1850s in school yards, with organ grinders, at court balls, etc.


pop (adj.)

having popular appeal, 1926, of individual songs from many genres; 1954 as a noun, as genre of its
own; abbreviation of popular; earlier as a shortened form of popular concert (1862), and often in
the plural form pops. Pop art first recorded 1957, said to have been in use conversationally among
Independent group of artists from late 1954. Pop culture attested from 1959, short for popular
culture (attested by 1846).


pop (n.2)

father, 1838, chiefly American English, shortened from papa (1680s), from French papa, from Old
French, a children's word, similar to Latin pappa. Form poppa is recorded from 1897.


pop (v.)

cause to make a short, quick sound, mid-15c.; intransitive sense make a short, quick sound is from
1570s; imitative. Of eyes, to protrude (as if about to burst), from 1670s. Sense of to appear or put
suddenly (often with up, off, in, etc.) is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of to hit a ball
high in the air is from 1867. To pop the question is from 1725, specific sense of propose marriage
is from 1826. Related: Popped; popping.


pop-eyed (adj.)

having bulging eyes, 1820; see pop (v.) + eye (n.).


pop-gun (n.)

type of child's toy, 1620s, from pop (n.1) + gun (n.).


pop-up (n.)

from 1906 as a type of baseball hit; from pop (v.) + up (adv.). As an adjective from 1934 (of a
children's book, later toasters, etc.).


popcorn (n.)

1819, from pop (v.) + corn (n.1).


pope (n.)

Old English papa (9c.), from Church Latin papa bishop, pope (in classical Latin, tutor), from Greek
papas patriarch, bishop, originally father. Applied to bishops of Asia Minor and taken as a title by
the Bishop of Alexandria c.250. In Western Church, applied especially to the Bishop of Rome since
the time of Leo the Great (440-461) and claimed exclusively by them from 1073 (usually in English
with a capital P-). Popemobile, his car, is from 1979. Papal, papacy, later acquisitions in English,
preserve the original vowel.


popery (n.)

1530s, a hostile coinage of the Reformation, from pope + -ery.


popinjay (n.)

late 13c., a parrot, from Old French papegai (12c.), from Spanish papagayo, from Arabic babagha',
Persian babgha parrot, possibly formed in an African or other non-Indo-European language and
imitative of its cry. Ending probably assimilated in Western European languages to jay words (Old
French jai, etc.).    Used of people in a complimentary sense (in allusion to beauty and rarity)
from early 14c.; meaning vain, talkative person is first recorded 1520s. Obsolete figurative sense
of a target to shoot at is explained by Cotgrave's 2nd sense definition: also a woodden parrot (set
up on the top of a steeple, high tree, or pole) whereat there is, in many parts of France, a
generall shooting once euerie yeare; and an exemption, for all that yeare, from La Taille, obtained
by him that strikes downe all or part of the bird.


popish (adj.)

1520s, from pope + -ish.


poplar (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French popler, from Old French poplier (13c., Modern French peulplier), from
Latin populus poplar (with a long o; not the same word that produced popular), of unknown origin,
possibly from a PIE tree-name root *p(y)el- (cognates: Greek pelea elm). Italian pioppo, Spanish
chopo, German pappel, Old Church Slavonic topoli all are from Latin.


poplin (n.)

type of corded fabric, 1710, from French papeline cloth of fine silk and worsted (1660s), probably
from Proven&ccedil;al papalino, fem. of papalin of or belonging to the pope, from Medieval Latin
papalis papal (see papal). The reference is to Avignon, papal residence during the schism 1309-1408
(and regarded as a papal town until 1791), which also was a center of silk manufacture. Influenced
in English by Poperinghe, town in Flanders where the fabric was made (but from 18c. the primary
source was Ireland).


popliteal (adj.)

1786, with -al (1) + Modern Latin popliteus (n.), 1704, short for popliteus (musculus), from poples
ham (of the leg), which is of unknown origin.


popover (n.)

also pop-over, light cake, 1859, from pop (v.) + over (adv.).


poppet (n.)

small human figure used in witchcraft and sorcery, c.1300, early form of puppet (n.). Meaning small
or dainty person is recorded from late 14c.; later a term of endearment but also in other cases one
of contempt.


poppy (n.)

late Old English popig, pop&aelig;g, from West Germanic *papua-, probably from Vulgar Latin
*papavum, from Latin papaver poppy, perhaps a reduplicated form of imitative root *pap- to swell.
Associated with battlefields and war dead at least since Waterloo (1815). Poppy-seed is from early
15c.; in 17c. it also was a small unit of length (less than one-twelfth of an inch).


poppycock (n.)

1865, American English, probably from Dutch dialect pappekak, from Middle Dutch pappe soft food (see
pap) + kak dung, from Latin cacare to excrete (see caca).


popsicle (n.)

1923, trademark name registered by Frank Epperson of Oakland, Calif., presumably from (lolly)pop +
(ic)icle.


popster (n.)

pop-culture enthusiast, 1963, from pop (adj.)+ -ster.


populace (n.)

1570s, from Middle French populace (16c.), from Italian popolaccio riffraff, rabble, from popolo
people (from Latin populus people; see people (n.)) + pejorative suffix -accio.


popular (adj.)

early 15c., public, from Middle French populier (Modern French populaire) and directly from Latin
popularis belonging to the people, general, common; devoted to or accepted by the people;
democratic, from populus people (see people (n.)).    Meaning suited to ordinary people is from
1570s in English; hence, of prices, low, affordable to average persons (1859). Meaning well-liked,
admired by the people is attested from c.1600. Of art, entertainment, etc., favored by people
generally from 1819 (popular song). Related: Popularly. Popular Front coalition of Communists,
Socialists, and radicals is from 1936, first in a French context.


popularity (n.)

fact or condition of being beloved by the people, c.1600, from French popularit&#233; (15c.), from
popular + -ity. Classical Latin popularitas meant fellow-citizenship. Popularity contest is from
1880.


popularization (n.)

1797, noun of action from popularize.


popularize (v.)

to make a complex topic intelligible to the people, 1833, from popular + -ize. Earlier to cater to
popular taste (1590s); to make popular (1797). Related: Popularized; popularizing.


populate (v.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin populatus, past participle of populare inhabit, to people, from Latin
populus inhabitants, people, nation (see people (n.)). Related: Populated; populating.


population (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin populationem (nominative populatio) a people; a multitude, as if from Latin
populus a people (see people (n.)). Population explosion is first attested 1953.


populism (n.)

1893; see populist + -ism. Originally in reference to the political theories of the U.S. Populist
Party (also People's Party).


populist

1892 (n.) adherent of populism; 1893 (adj.), American English, from Latin populus people (see people
(n.)) + -ist. Originally in reference to the U.S. Populist Party organized February 1892 to promote
certain issues important to farmers and workers. The term outlasted the party, and by 1920s came to
mean representing the views of the masses in a general way.


populous (adj.)

early 15c., from post-classical Latin populosus full of people, populous, from populus people (see
people (n.)). Related: Populousness.


porcelain (n.)

1530s, from Middle French porcelaine and directly from Italian porcellana porcelain (13c.),
literally cowrie shell, the chinaware so called from resemblance of its lustrous transparency to the
shiny surface of the shells. The shell's name in Italian is from porcella young sow, fem. of Latin
porcellus young pig, diminutive of porculus piglet, diminutive of porcus pig (see pork (n.)).
According to an old theory, the connection of the shell and the pig is a perceived resemblance of
the shell opening to the exposed outer genitalia of pigs.   <b>porcelain</b> is china &amp; china is
p.; there is no recondite difference between the two things, which indeed are not two, but one;
&amp; the difference between the two words is merely that china is the homely term, while porcelain
is exotic &amp; literary. [Fowler]


porch (n.)

c.1300, covered entrance, from Old French porche porch, vestibule, from Latin porticus covered
gallery, covered walk between columns, arcade, portico, porch, from porta gate, entrance, door (see
port (n.2)). The Latin word was borrowed directly into Old English as portic.


porcine (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to swine; swinish, from Old French porcin or directly from Latin porcinus of
a hog, from porcus hog, pig (see pork (n.)).


porcupine (n.)

c.1400, porke despyne, from Old French porc-espin (early 13c., Modern French porc-&eacute;pic),
literally spiny pig, from Latin porcus hog + spina thorn, spine (see spine). The word had many forms
in Middle English and early Modern English, including portepyn, porkpen, porkenpick, porpoynt, and
Shakespeare's porpentine (in Hamlet).


pore (v.)

gaze intently, early 13c., of unknown origin, with no obvious corresponding word in Old French.
Perhaps from Old English *purian, suggested by spyrian to investigate, examine, and spor a trace,
vestige. Related: Pored; poring.


pore (n.)

minute opening, late 14c., from Old French pore (14c.) and directly from Latin porus a pore, from
Greek poros a pore, literally passage, way, from PIE *por- going, passage, from root *per- to lead,
pass over (see port (n.1)).


porgy (n.)

name given to various sea fishes, 1725, probably from pargo sea bream (1550s), from Spanish or
Portuguese pargo, from Latin phagrum (nom. phager), from Greek phagros sea bream.


Porifera (n.)

1843, Modern Latin, literally bearing pores, neuter plural of porifer, from Latin porus pore,
opening (see pore (n.)) + -fer bearing (see infer). Related: Poriferal; poriferous.


pork (n.)

c.1300 (early 13c. in surname Porkuiller), flesh of a pig as food, from Old French porc pig, swine,
boar, and directly from Latin porcus pig, tame swine, from PIE *porko- young swine (cognates:
Umbrian purka; Old Church Slavonic prase young pig; Lithuanian parsas pig; and Old English fearh,
Middle Dutch varken, both from Proto-Germanic *farhaz).   Pork barrel in the literal sense is from
1801, American English; meaning state's financial resources (available for distribution) is attested
from 1907 (in full, national pork barrel); it was noted as an expression of U.S. President President
William Howard Taft:    Now there is a proposition that we issue $500,000,000 or $1,000,000,000 of
bonds for a waterway, and then that we just apportion part to the Mississippi and part to the
Atlantic, a part to the Missouri and a part to the Ohio. I am opposed to it. I am opposed to it
because it not only smells of the pork barrel, but it will be the pork barrel itself. Let every
project stand on its bottom. [The Outlook, Nov. 6, 1909, quoting Taft]    The magazine article that
includes the quote opens with:    We doubt whether any one knows how or when, or from what
application of what story, the phrase the National pork barrel has come into use. If not a very
elegant simile, it is at least an expressive one, and suggests a graphic picture of Congressmen
eager for local advantage going, one after another, to the National pork barrel to take away their
slices for home consumption.   Pork in this sense is attested from 1862 (compare figurative use of
bacon). Pork chop is attested from 1858. Pork pie is from 1732; pork-pie hat (1855) originally
described a woman's style popular c.1855-65, so called for its shape.


porker (n.)

1650s, young hog fattened for food, from pork (n.). Meaning fat person is from 1892.


porky (adj.)

1852, from pork (n.) + -y (2). Related: Porkiness.


porn (n.)

1962, abbreviation of pornography. Porno (adj.) is attested from 1952.


porno (adj.)

1952 (Norman Mailer), short for pornographic.


pornographer (n.)

1850, from pornography + -er (1).


pornographic (adj.)

1853, from pornography + -ic.


pornography (n.)

1843, ancient obscene painting, especially in temples of Bacchus, from French pornographie, from
Greek pornographos (one) depicting prostitutes, from porne prostitute, originally bought, purchased
(with an original notion, probably of female slave sold for prostitution), related to pernanai to
sell, from PIE root *per- (5) to traffic in, to sell (see price (n.)) + graphein to write (see
-graphy). A brothel in ancient Greek was a porneion.    Pornography, or obscene painting, which in
the time of the Romans was practiced with the grossest license, prevailed especially at no
particular period in Greece, but was apparently tolerated to a considerable extent at all times.
Parrhasius, Aristides, Pausanias, Nicophanes, Chaerephanes, Arellius, and a few other [pornographoi]
are mentioned as having made themselves notorious for this species of license. [Charles Anthon,
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, New York, 1843]    In reference to modern works by 1859
(originally French novels), later as a charge against native literature; sense of obscene pictures
in modern times is from 1906. Also sometimes used late 19c. for description of prostitutes as a
matter of public hygiene. The Medical Archives in 1873 proposed porniatria for the lengthy and
really meaningless expression 'social evil hospital' ....     I shall not today attempt further to
define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description [hard-
core pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I
see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that. [U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter
Stewart, concurring opinion, Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964]    In ancient contexts, often paired with
rhypography, genre painting of low, sordid, or unsuitable subjects. Pornocracy (1860) is the
dominating influence of harlots, used specifically of the government of Rome during the first half
of the 10th century by Theodora and her daughters. Pornotopia (1966) was coined to describe the
ideal erotic-world of pornographic movies.


porosity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French porosit&eacute;, from Medieval Latin porositas, from porus (see pore
(n.)).


porous (adj.)

late 14c., full of pores, from Old French poros (14c., Modern French poreux), from Medieval Latin
porosus; or directly from Latin porus an opening (see pore (n.)). Figurative use from 1640s.


porphyria (n.)

metabolic disorder, 1923, from porphyrin (1910), the name of the type of chemical which, in
imbalance, causes it, from German porphyrin, chemical name, from Greek porphyros purple (see purple)
+ -in (2). Some of the compounds are purple.


porphyrite (n.)

1796 as a modern mineral name, from porphyry + -ite (2). Related: Porphyritic.


porphyry (n.)

type of ornamental stone, late 14c., porfurie, from Old French porfire, from Italian porfiro and in
some cases directly from Latin porphyrites, a purple semi-precious stone quarried near the Red Sea
in Egypt, from Greek porphyrites (lithos) the purple (stone), from porphyra (n.) purple, purple dye
(see purple). Spelling Latinized mid-15c. Now used generally for a type of igneous rock without
regard to color. Porphyrios was an ancient proper name.


porpoise (n.)

early 14c., porpas, from Old French porpais (12c.) porpoise, literally pork fish, from porc pork
(see pork (n.)) + peis fish, from Latin piscis fish (see fish (n.)).    The Old French word probably
is a loan-translation of a Germanic word meaning literally sea-hog, mere-swine, such as Old Norse
mar-svin, Old High German meri-swin, Middle Dutch mereswijn porpoise (the last of which also was
borrowed directly into French and became Modern French marsouin).    Classical Latin had a similar
name, porculus marinus (in Pliny), and the notion behind the name likely is a fancied resemblance of
the snout to that of a pig.


porridge (n.)

1530s, porage soup of meat and vegetables, alteration of pottage, perhaps from influence of Middle
English porray, porreie leek broth, from Old French poree leek soup, from Vulgar Latin *porrata,
from Latin porrum leek. Spelling with -idge attested from c.1600. Association with oatmeal is 1640s,
first in Scottish.


porringer (n.)

late 15c., alteration of potynger, potager small dish for stew, from Middle English potage (see
pottage) by the same course of changes that produced porridge; and with intrusive -n- by 1530s
(compare passenger).


port (n.1)

harbor, Old English port harbor, haven, reinforced by Old French port harbor, port; mountain pass;
Old English and Old French words both from Latin portus port, harbor, originally entrance, passage,
figuratively place of refuge, assylum, from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (cognates: Sanskrit parayati carries over; Greek poros journey, passage, way,
peirein to pierce, run through; Latin porta gate, door, portare passage, peritus experienced;
Avestan peretush passage, ford, bridge; Armenian hordan go forward; Welsh rhyd ford; Old Church
Slavonic pariti to fly; Old English faran to go, journey, Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r inlet, estuary).
Meaning left side of a ship (looking forward from the stern) is attested from 1540s, from notion of
the side facing the harbor (when a ship is docked). It replaced larboard in common usage to avoid
confusion with starboard; officially so by Admiralty order of 1844 and U.S. Navy Department notice
of 1846. Figurative sense place of refuge is attested from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm
first recorded 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a ship.


port (n.2)

gateway, Old English port portal, door, gate, entrance, from Old French porte gate, entrance, from
Latin porta city gate, gate; door, entrance, from PIE root *per- (see port (n.1)). Specific meaning
porthole, opening in the side of a ship is attested from c.1300.


port (n.3)

bearing, mien, c.1300, from Old French port, from porter to carry, from Latin portare (see port
(n.1)).


port (n.4)

type of sweet dark-red wine, 1690s, shortened from Oporto, city in northwest Portugal from which the
wine originally was shipped to England; from O Porto the port; (see port (n.1)).


port (v.)

to carry, from Middle French porter, from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related: Ported;
porting.


port-wine (n.)

1700, from port (n.4) + wine (n.).


portable (adj.)

early 15c., from French portable that can be carried, from Late Latin portabilis that can be
carried, from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related: Portability.


portage (n.)

early 15c., action of carrying, said to be from Old French portage, Medieval Latin portaticum,
though the meaning of these was tax paid on entering a town, from Latin portare to carry (see port
(n.1)). Sense of carrying of boats from one navigable water to another is from 1690s, reinforced in
Canadian French.


portal (n.)

late 14c., gate, gateway, from Old French portal gate (Modern French portail) and directly from
Medieval Latin portale city gate, porch, from neuter of portalis (adj.) of a gate, from Latin porta
gate (see port (n.1)).


portcullis (n.)

also port-cullis, c.1300, from Old French porte coleice sliding gate (c.1200, Modern French porte
&#224; coulisse), from porte gate (see port (n.2)) + coleice sliding, flowing, fem. of coleis, from
Latin colatus, past participle of colare to filter, strain (see colander).


Porte (n.)

Ottoman court at Constantinople, c.1600, from French, in full, la Sublime Porte, literally the high
gate, translation of Arabic al-Bab al-'Ali, lofty gate, official name of the central office of the
Ottoman government (compare Vatican for the Papacy, White House for the United States). Compare also
mikado. Supposedly a reference to the ancient custom of holding royal audience in the doorway of a
king's palace or tent.


porte-cochere (n.)

gateway for carriages, 1690s, from French porte-coch&#232;re, from porte gate (see port (n.2)) +
coch&egrave;re, fem. adjective from coche coach (see coach (n.)).


portend (v.)

early 15c., from Latin portendere foretell, reveal; point out, indicate, originally to stretch
forward, from por- (variant of pro-; see pro-) forth, forward + tendere to stretch, extend (see
tenet). Related: Portended; portending.


portent (n.)

1560s, from Middle French portente, from Latin portentum a sign, token, omen; monster, monstrosity,
noun use of neuter of portentus, past participle of portendre (see portend).


portentous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin portentosus monstrous, marvelous, threatening, from portentem portent (see
portend). Related: Portentously.


porter (n.1)

person who carries, late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French portour, Old French porteor
porter, bearer; reporter (12c.), from Late Latin portatorem (nominative portator) carrier, one who
carries, from past participle stem of Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)).


porter (n.2)

doorkeeper, janitor, mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French portour, Old French
portier gatekeeper (12c.), from Late Latin portarius gatekeeper, from Latin porta gate (see port
(n.2)).


porter (n.3)

type of dark beer, 1734, short for porter's ale (1721), from porter (n.1), because the beer was made
for or preferred by porters and other laborers, being cheap and strong.


porterhouse (n.)

also porter-house, restaurant or chophouse where porter is served, 1754, from porter (n.3) + house
(n.). Porterhouse steak (1841) is said to be from a particular establishment in New York City.


portfolio (n.)

1722, porto folio; 1719 as port folio, from Italian portafoglio a case for carrying loose papers,
from porta, imperative of portare to carry (see port (n.1)) + foglio sheet, leaf, from Latin folium
(see folio). Meaning official documents of a state department is from 1835. A minister without
portfolio is one not in charge of a particular department. Meaning collection of securities held is
from 1930; portfolio investment is from 1955.


porthole (n.)

also port-hole, 1590s, from port (n.2) + hole (n.).


portico (n.)

c.1600, from Italian portico, from Latin porticus colonnade, arcade, covered walk, porch, from porta
gate (see port (n.1)). Especially of the Painted Porch in Athens.


portiere (n.)

door curtain, 1843, from French porti&egrave;re, from Medieval Latin portaria, fem. singular of
Latin portarius belonging to a door or gate (see porter (n.2)).


portion (n.)

early 14c., allotted part, share, from Old French porcion part, portion (12c., Modern French
portion) and directly from Latin portionem (nominative portio) share, part, accusative of the noun
in the phrase pro portione according to the relation (of parts to each other) (see proportion). From
late 14c. in general sense of section into which something is divided.


portion (v.)

to divide in portions, early 14c., from Old French porcioner share out, divide in portions, from
porcion (see portion (n.)). Related: Portioned; portioning.


Portland

in Portland cement, 1720, named by its inventor, English mason Joseph Aspdin, from resemblance of
the color to the stone of Portland peninsula on the coast of Dorsetshire. The place name is
literally land surrounding a harbor, Old English Portlanda. Portland, Maine, U.S.A., took its name
1786, for the place in England. Portland, Oregon, was said to have been named for the city in Maine,
which won the honor by a coin toss over Boston.


portly (adj.)

early 15c., stately, dignified, from port (n.3) bearing, carriage + -ly (1). Meaning stout is first
recorded 1590s.


portmanteau (n.)

1580s, traveling case or bag for clothes and other necessaries, from Middle French portemanteau
traveling bag, originally court official who carried a prince's mantle (1540s), from porte,
imperative of porter to carry (see porter (n.1)) + manteau cloak (see mantle (n.)).   Portmanteau
word word blending the sound of two different words (1882), coined by Lewis Carroll (Charles L.
Dodgson, 1832-1898) for the sort of words he invented for Jabberwocky, on notion of two meanings
packed up into one word. As a noun in this sense from 1872.


portobello

type of mushroom, by 1986, no agreed-upon theory accounts for the name, which seems to be a
marketing coinage. London's Portobello Road (one suggested source of the mushroom name) originally
was the lane to Porto Bello House, named for the Panamanian place captured by the British under
Vernon in 1739.


portrait (n.)

1560s, a figure, drawn or painted, a back formation from portraiture or directly from Middle French
portrait, from Old French portret (13c.), noun use of past participle of portraire to paint, depict
(see portray). Especially of the head and face of a person.


portraiture (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French portraiture portrait, image, portrayal, resemblance (12c.), from portrait
(see portrait).


portray (v.)

mid-13c., to draw, paint (something), from Anglo-French purtraire, Old French portraire to draw, to
paint, portray (12c.), literally trace, draw forth, from por- forth (from Latin pro-; see pro-) +
traire trace, draw, from Latin trahere to drag, draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning depict in words,
describe is from late 14c. Related: Portrayed; portraying.


portrayal (n.)

1834, from portray + -al (2). The idea formerly was expressed by portray (n.), 1610s.


portsider (n.)

left-handed person, 1913, American English baseball slang, from port (n.1) in the nautical sense +
side (n.).


Portugal

late 14c., Portyngale, from Medieval Latin Portus Cale (Roman name of modern Oporto), the port of
Gaya. Alfonso, Count of Portucale, became the first king of Portugal.


Portuguese (n.)

1610s, the language, or a resident, of Portugal; 1660s as an adjective, from Portuguese Portuguez
(see Portugal + -ese). The ending was vulgarly mistaken for a plural in English, and false singular
Portugee (1830) was formed (compare Chinee from Chinese). For Portuguese man-of-war, see man-of-war.


posable (adj.)

1972 of questions; 1975 of action figures; from pose (v.1 and 2) + -able.


posada (n.)

inn, 1763, from Spanish posada home, lodging, from posar to repose, rest, lodge, from Latin pausare
(see pause (v.)).


pose (v.1)

late 14c., suggest, propose, suppose, assume, from Old French poser put, place, propose, a term in
debating, from Late Latin pausare to halt, rest, pause (source also of Italian posare, Spanish
posar; see pause (v.)). The Old French verb (in common with cognates in Spanish, Italian,
Portuguese) acquired the sense of Latin ponere to put, place, by confusion of the similar stems.
Meaning put in a certain position is from early 15c. Sense of assume a certain attitude is from
1840; the transitive sense (as an artist's model, etc.) is from 1859. Related: Posed; posing.


pose (v.2)

to puzzle, confuse, perplex, 1590s, earlier question, interrogate (1520s), probably from Middle
French poser suppose, assume, from Old French poser to put, place, set (see pose (v.1)). Also in
some cases a shortening of English appose examine closely, and oppose. Related: Posed; posing.


pose (n.)

act of posing the body, 1818, from pose (v.1), in a sense developed in the French cognate.
Figuratively from 1884.


Poseidon (n.)

Greek god of the sea and earthquakes, Greek Poseidon (Doric Poteidan), of uncertain origin.


poser (n.)

one who practices an affected attitude, 1881, agent noun from pose (v.1); revived in teen-ager slang
by 1983. Meaning question that puzzles is from 1793 from pose (v.2); earlier it meant one who asks
testing questions (1580s).


poseur (n.)

one who practices affected attitudes, 1866, from French poseur, from verb poser affect an attitude
or pose, from Old French poser to put, place, set (see pose (v.1)). The word is English poser in
French garb, and thus could itself be considered an affectation.


posh (adj.)

by 1914 (1903 as push), of uncertain origin; no evidence for the common derivation from an acronym
of port outward, starboard home, supposedly the shipboard accommodations of wealthy British
traveling to India on the P &amp; O Lines (to keep their cabins out of the sun); as per OED, see
objections outlined in G. Chowdharay-Best, Mariner's Mirror, Jan. 1971; also <b>see here</b>. More
likely from slang posh a dandy (1890), from thieves' slang meaning money (1830), originally coin of
small value, halfpenny, possibly from Romany posh half [Barnhart].    The cavalryman, far more than
the infantryman, makes a point of wearing posh clothing on every possible occasion -- posh being a
term used to designate superior clothing, or articles of attire other than those issued by and
strictly conforming to the regulations. [E. Charles Vivian, The British Army From Within, London,
1914]


posit (v.)

to assert, 1690s, from Latin positus placed, situated, standing, planted, past participle of ponere
put, place (see position). Related: Posited; positing.


position (n.)

late 14c., as a term in logic and philosophy, from Old French posicion position, supposition (Modern
French position), from Latin positionem (nominative positio) act or fact of placing, situation,
position, affirmation, noun of state from past participle stem of ponere put, place, from PIE
*po-s(i)nere, from *apo- off, away (see apo-) + *sinere to leave, let (see site).    Meaning proper
place occupied by a person or thing is from 1540s. Meaning manner in which some physical thing is
arranged or posed first recorded 1703; specifically in reference to dance steps, 1778, sexual
intercourse, 1883. Meaning official station, employment is from 1890.


position (v.)

1670s, to assume a position (intransitive), from position (n.). Transitive sense of to put in a
particular position is recorded from 1817. Related: Positioned; positioning.


positional (adj.)

1570s, from position (n.) + -al (1).


positive (adj.)

early 14c., originally a legal term meaning formally laid down, from Old French positif (13c.) and
directly from Latin positivus settled by agreement, positive (opposed to naturalis natural), from
positus, past participle of ponere put, place (see position (n.)).    Sense of absolute is from mid-
15c. Meaning in philosophy of dealing only with facts is from 1590s. Sense broadened to expressed
without qualification (1590s), then confident in opinion (1660s); mathematical use is from 1704; in
electricity, 1755. Psychological sense of concentrating on what is constructive and good is recorded
from 1916.


positive (n.)

1520s, from positive (adj.).


positively (adv.)

mid-15c., in a definite way, from positive (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning absolutely is from 1777.


positivism (n.)

1847, the philosophy of Auguste Comte (1798-1857), who published Philosophie positive in 1830; see
positive (adj.) in the just the facts sense + -ism. Related: Positivist; Positivistic.


positivity (n.)

1650s, from positive (adj.) + -ity.


positron (n.)

1933, coined from posi(tive) (elec)tron.


posse (n.)

1640s (in Anglo-Latin from early 14c.), shortening of posse comitatus the force of the county
(1620s, in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Medieval Latin posse body of men, power, from Latin
posse have power, be able (see potent) + comitatus of the county, genitive of Late Latin word for
court palace (see comitatus). Modern slang meaning small gang is probably from Western movies.


possess (v.)

late 14c., to hold, occupy, reside in (without regard to ownership), a back formation from
possession and in part from Old French possesser to have and hold, take, be in possession of (mid-
13c.), from Latin possess-, past participle stem of possidere to have and hold, possess, be master
of, own, from posse to be able, from potis able, powerful (see potent) + esse to be (see be).
Meaning to hold as property is recorded from c.1500. Demonic sense is recorded from 1530s (implied
in possessed). Related: Possessed; possessing.


possessed (adj.)

controlled by an indwelling demon, 1530s, past participle adjective from possess (v.).


possession (n.)

mid-14c., act or fact of possessing, a taking possession, occupation, also thing possessed, that
which is possessed, from Old French possession fact of having and holding; what is possessed; also
demonic possession, and directly from Latin possessionem (nominative possessio), noun of action from
past participle stem of possidere to possess (see possess). Legal property sense is earliest;
demonic sense first recorded 1580s. Phrase possession is nine (or eleven) points of the law is out
of a supposed 10 (or 12). With eleven from 1640s; with nine from 1690s.


possessive (adj.)

mid-15c. (grammatical, also as a noun); 1550s in general use, from Middle French possessif (15c.)
relating to possession, possessive, and directly from Latin possessivus, from possess-, past
participle stem of possidere to possess (see possess). Related: Possessively; possessiveness.


posset (n.)

spiced drink of hot milk and liquor, mid-15c., of unknown origin.


possibility (n.)

late 14c., condition of being possible, from Old French possibilit&eacute; (13c.) and directly from
Latin possibilitatem (nom. possibilitas) possibility, from possibilis (see possible (adj.)). Meaning
a possible thing or substance is from c.1400. Related: Possibilities.


possible (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French possible and directly from Latin possibilis that can be done, from posse
be able (see potent).


possible (n.)

1640s, from possible (adj.).


possibly (adv.)

c.1400, from possible (adj.) + -ly (2).


POSSLQ

1979, acronym from person of opposite sex sharing living quarters; it never was an official
category.


possum (n.)

1610s, shortened form of opossum. Phrase play possum is first recorded 1822.


post (adv.)

1540s, with post horses, hence, rapidly; especially in the phrase to ride post go rapidly, from post
(n.3).


post (n.1)

a timber set upright, from Old English post pillar, doorpost, and Old French post post, upright
beam, both from Latin postis door, post, doorpost, perhaps from por- forth (see pro-) + stare to
stand (see stet). Similar compound in Sanskrit prstham back, roof, peak, Avestan parshti back, Greek
pastas porch in front of a house, colonnade, Middle High German virst ridepole, Lithuanian pirstas,
Old Church Slavonic pristu finger (PIE *por-st-i-).


post (n.2)

place when on duty, 1590s, from Middle French poste place where one is stationed, also, station for
post horses (16c.), from Italian posto post, station, from Vulgar Latin *postum, from Latin positum,
neuter past participle of ponere to place, to put (see position (n.)). Earliest sense in English was
military; meaning job, position is attested 1690s.


post (n.3)

mail system, c.1500, riders and horses posted at intervals, from post (n.2) on notion of riders and
horses posted at intervals along a route to speed mail in relays, probably formed on model of Middle
French poste in this sense (late 15c.). Meaning system for carrying mail is from 1660s.


post (v.4)

to put up bail money, 1781, from one of the nouns post, but which one is uncertain. Related: Posted;
posting.


post (v.1)

to affix (a paper, etc.) to a post (in a public place), hence, to make known, 1630s, from post
(n.1). Related: Posted; posting.


post (v.2)

in bookkeeping, to transfer from a day book to a formal account, 1620s, from post (n.2) via a
figurative sense of carrying by post horses. Related: Posted; posting.


post (v.3)

to send through the postal system, 1837, from post (n.3). Earlier, to travel with relays of horses
(1530s). Related: Posted; posting.


post (v.5)

to station at a post, from post (n.2). Related: Posted; posting.


post factum

Latin, literally after the fact.


post hoc

Latin, after this. Especially in post hoc, ergo propter hoc, logical fallacy, literally after this,
therefore because of this.


post meridiem

after noon, 1640s, Latin, from post after (see post-) + accusative of meridies  (see meridian).


post office (n.)

1650s, public department in charge of letter-carrying, from post (n.3) + office. Meaning building
where postal business is carried on is from 1650s. In slang or euphemistic sense of a sexual game it
refers to an actual parlor game first attested early 1850s in which pretend letters were paid for by
kisses.


post restante

direction on mail that it be held at that post office until called for, French, literally remaining
post.


post-

word-forming element meaning after, from Latin post behind, after, afterward, from *pos-ti
(cognates: Arcadian pos, Doric poti toward, to, near, close by; Old Church Slavonic po behind,
after, pozdu late; Lithuanian pas at, by), from PIE *apo- (cognates: Greek apo from, Latin ab away
from see apo-).


post-bellum (adj.)

also postbellum, used in U.S. South from 1874 in reference to American Civil War; see post- +
bellicose.


post-classical (adj.)

1845, from post- + classical.


post-glacial (adj.)

1855, from post- + glacial.


post-graduate (adj.)

also postgraduate, 1858, originally American English, from post- + graduate (adj.). As a noun,
attested from 1890. Abbreviation post-grad is recorded from 1950.


post-hole (n.)

1703, from post (n.1) + hole (n.).


post-impressionism (n.)

1910, from post- + impressionism.


Post-it (n.)

1975, proprietary name.


post-millennial (adj.)

also postmillennial, 1831, from post- after + millennial; chiefly in reference to the Protestant
doctrine that the second coming of Christ will occur after, not at, the Christian millennium.


post-modern (adj.)

also post-modern, post modern, by 1919, in frequent use from 1949, from post- + modern.    But it
has been only during the later decades of the modern era -- during that time interval that might
fairly be called the post-modern era -- that this mechanistic conception of things has begun
seriously to affect the current system of knowledge and belief; and it has not hitherto seriously
taken effect except in technology and in the material sciences. [Thorstein Veblen, The Vested
Interests and the Common Man, 1919]   <hr />   So much for the misapplied theory which has helped
set the artist's nerves a-quiver and incited him to the extremes of post modern art, literary and
other. [Wilson Follett, Literature and Bad Nerves, Harper's, June 1921]    Of architecture from
1940s; specific sense in the arts emerged 1960s (see postmodernism).


post-mortem (adj.)

also postmortem, 1734 (adverb), from Latin post mortem, from post after (see post-) + mortem,
accusative of mors death (see mortal (adj.)). From 1835 as an adjective. As a noun, shortening of
post-mortem examination, it is recorded from 1850.


post-operative (adj.)

also postoperative, occurring after a surgical operation, 1869, from post- + operative. Short form
post-op is attested from 1971.


post-partum (adj.)

also postpartum, 1837, occurring after birth, from Latin post partum after birth, from post after
(see post-) + accusative of partus a bearing, a bringing forth, from partus, past participle of
parere to bring forth (see pare). Phrase Post-partum depression first attested 1929.


postage (n.)

1580s, sending of mail by post; 1650s as cost of sending something by mail, from post (n.3) + -age.
Postage stamp is attested from 1840; they were recorded as being collected in albums by 1862.


postal (adj.)

pertaining to the mail system, 1843, on model of French postale (1836), from post (n.3). Noun
meaning state of irrational and violent anger (usually in phrase going postal) attested by 1997, in
reference to a cluster of news-making workplace shootings in U.S. by what were commonly described as
disgruntled postal workers (the cliche itself, though not the phrase, goes back at least to 1994).


postcard (n.)

1870, from post (n.3) + card (n).


postdate (v.)

also post-date, 1620s, from post- + date (v.1) to assign a date to, to mark a date on. Related:
Postdated; postdating. Intransitive meaning be of an earlier date is from 1909.


postdiluvial (adj.)

also post-diluvial, 1823, from post- + diluvial. Earlier was postdiluvian (1670s).


posted (adj.)

supplied with news, 1828, American English, past participle adjective from post (v.2).


poster (n.)

bill, placard, thing posted, 1838, from post (v.1). Poster boy/girl/child someone given prominence
in certain causes is attested by 1990, in reference to fund-raising drives for charities associated
with disability, featuring child sufferers, a feature since 1930s.


posterior (adj.)

1530s, later, from Latin posterior after, later, behind, comparative of posterus coming after,
subsequent, from post after (see post-). Meaning situated behind is from 1630s.


posterior (n.)

buttocks, euphemistic, 1610s, from posterior (adj.). Earlier it meant those who come after,
posterity (1530s). Compare Lithuanian pasturas the last, the hindmost, from pas at, by.


posteriority (n.)

late 14c., state of being behind, from Old French posteriorite (Modern French
post&eacute;riorit&eacute;), from Medieval Latin posterioritatem (nominative posterioritas), from
Latin posterior later (see posterior (adj.)).


posterity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French posterit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin posteritatem (nominative posteritas)
future, future time; after-generation, offspring; literally the condition of coming after, from
posterus coming after, subsequent, from post after (see post-). Old English words for this included
&aelig;ftercneoreso, framcynn.


postern (n.)

late 13c., back door, private door, from Old French posterne side or rear gate, earlier posterle,
from Late Latin posterula small back door or gate, diminutive of Latin posterus that is behind,
coming after, subsequent, from post after (see post-).


posthaste (adv.)

1590s, from a noun (1530s) meaning great speed, usually said to be from post haste instruction
formerly written on letters (attested from 1530s), from post (adv.) + haste (n.). The verb post to
ride or travel with great speed is recorded from 1550s.


posthumous (adj.)

mid-15c., born after the death of the originator (author or father), from Late Latin posthumus, from
Latin postumus last, last-born, superlative of posterus coming after, subsequent (see posterior).
Altered in Late Latin by association with Latin humare to bury, suggesting death; the one born after
the father's death obviously being the last. An Old English word for this was &aelig;fterboren,
literally after-born. Related: Posthumously.


postillon (n.)

1590s, from Middle French postillon (1530s), from Italian postiglione forerunner, guide, especially
for one carrying mail on horseback, from posta mail (see post (n.3)) + compound suffix from Latin
-ilio.


postlude (n.)

1821, from post- + ending abstracted from prelude.


postman (n.)

1520s, from post (n.3) + man (n.).


postmark (n.)

1670s, from post (n.3) + mark (n.1). As a verb from 1716. Related: Postmarked; postmarking.


postmaster (n.)

1510s, from post (n.3) + master (n.).


postmodernism (n.)

also post-modernism, by 1977, from post- + modernism. Defined by Terry Eagleton as the contemporary
movement of thought which rejects ... the possibility of objective knowledge and is therefore
skeptical of truth, unity, and progress [After Theory, 2003]. Related: post-modernist (1965).


postnatal (adj.)

1831, from post- + natal.


postpone (v.)

c.1500, from Latin postponere put after; esteem less; neglect; postpone, from post after (see post-)
+ ponere put, place (see position (n.)). Related: Postponed; postponing.


postponement (n.)

1770, from postpone + -ment.


postposition (n.)

act of placing after, 1630s, from post- + position (n.). Related: Postpositional.


postprandial (adj.)

also post-prandial, 1820, from post- after + Latin prandium luncheon (usually bread, fish, or cold
meat, taken around noon), from *pram early (from PIE *pre-, variant of root per- (1) forward,
through; see per) + edere to eat (see edible) + -al (1).


postscript (n.)

1550s, from Latin post scriptum written after, from neuter past participle of Latin postscribere
write after, from post after (see post-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).


postulant (n.)

1759, from French postulant applicant, candidate, literally one who asks, from Latin postulantem
(nominative postulans), present participle of postulare to ask, demand (see postulate (v.)).


postulate (v.)

1530s, nominate to a church office, from Medieval Latin postulatus, past participle of postulare to
ask, demand; claim; require, probably formed from past participle of Latin poscere ask urgently,
demand, from *posk-to-, Italic inchoative of PIE root *prek- to ask questions (cognates: Sanskrit
prcchati, Avestan peresaiti interrogates, Old High German forskon, German forschen to search,
inquire). Use in logic dates from 1640s, borrowed from Medieval Latin.


postulate (n.)

1580s, a request, demand, from Latin postulatum demand, request, properly that which is requested,
noun use of neuter past participle of postulare (see postulate (v.)). The sense in logic of self-
evident proposition is from 1640s. The earlier noun in English was postulation (c.1400).


posture (n.)

c.1600, from French posture (16c.), from Italian postura position, posture, from Latin positura
position, station, from postulus, past participle of ponere put, place (see position (n.)).


posture (v.)

1620s, literal, from posture (n.). The figurative sense of take up an artificial mental position is
attested from 1877. Related: Postured; posturing.


Posturpedic (n.)

trademark name (Sealy, Inc., Chicago, U.S.A.) for a brand of mattress, filed in 1951; from posture
(n.) + second element from orthopedic.


postwar (adj.)

also post-war, 1906, in reference to the U.S. Civil War, a hybrid from post- + war (n.). Compare
post-bellum.


posy (n.)

also posey, 1530s, line of verse engraved on the inner surface of a ring, from poesy poetry; a
passage of poetry, which is recorded in this sense from early 15c. Meaning flower, bouquet first
recorded 1570s, from notion of the language of flowers.


pot (n.1)

vessel, from late Old English pott and Old French pot pot, container, mortar (also in erotic
senses), both from a general Low Germanic (Old Frisian pott, Middle Dutch pot) and Romanic word from
Vulgar Latin *pottus, of uncertain origin, said by Barnhart and OED to be unconnected to Late Latin
potus drinking cup. Celtic forms are said to be borrowed from English and French.    Slang meaning
large sum of money staked on a bet is attested from 1823. Pot roast is from 1881; phrase go to pot
(16c.) suggests cooking. In phrases, the pot calls the kettle black-arse is from c.1700; shit or get
off the pot is traced by Partridge to Canadian armed forces in World War II.


pot (n.2)

marijuana, 1938, probably a shortened form of Mexican Spanish potiguaya marijuana leaves.


pot (v.)

to put in a pot, 1610s, from pot (n.1). Related: Potted; potting. Earlier it meant to drink from a
pot (1590s).


pot-bellied (adj.)

also potbellied, 1650s, from pot (n.1) + bellied. As a type of stove from 1973.


pot-belly (n.)

1714, from pot (n.1) + belly (n.). Pot-belly stove, so called for its shape, attested from 1943.


pot-holder (n.)

also potholder, the cloth variety so called by 1902, from pot (n.1) + holder.


pot-pie (n.)

also potpie, 1823, American English, from pot (n.1) + pie (n.).


potable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French potable (14c.) and directly from Late Latin potabilis drinkable, from
Latin potare to drink (see potion).


potage (n.)

thick soup, 1560s, from French potage soup, broth (see pottage, which is an earlier English
borrowing of the same French word).


potamo-

word-forming element meaning river, from comb. form of Greek potamos river, perhaps literally
rushing water, from PIE *pet- to rush, to fly (see petition).


potamology (n.)

the study of rivers, 1829, from potamo- + -logy.


potash (n.)

1751, earlier -pot-ashes (1640s), a loan-translation of older Dutch potaschen, literally pot ashes
(16c.); so called because it was originally obtained by soaking wood ashes in water and evaporating
the mixture in an iron pot. Compare German Pottasche, Danish potaske, Swedish pottaska, all also
from Dutch. See also potassium. French potasse (1570s), Italian potassa are Germanic loan-words. The
original plural was pot-ashes.


potassium (n.)

metallic element, 1807, coined by English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from Modern Latin
potassa, Latinized form of potash (q.v.). Davy first isolated it from potash. Symbol K is from Latin
kalium potash, from Arabic al-qaliy the ashes, burnt ashes (see alkali).


potation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French potacion, from Latin potationem (nom. potatio) a drinking; poisonous
drink, potion, noun of action from past participle stem of potare to drink (see potion).


potato (n.)

1560s, from Spanish patata, from a Carib language of Haiti batata sweet potato. Sweet potatoes were
first to be introduced to Europe; in cultivation in Spain by mid-16c.; in Virginia by 1648. Early
16c. Portuguese traders carried the crop to all their shipping ports and the sweet potato was
quickly adopted from Africa to India and Java.    The name later (1590s) was extended to the common
white potato, from Peru, which was at first (mistakenly) called Virginia potato, or, because at
first it was of minor importance compared to the sweet potato, bastard potato. Spanish invaders in
Peru began to use white potatoes as cheap food for sailors 1530s. The first potato from South
America reached Pope Paul III in 1540; grown in France at first as an ornamental plant. According to
popular tradition, introduced to Ireland 1565 by John Hawkins. Brought to England from Colombia by
Sir Thomas Herriot, 1586.  German kartoffel (17c.) is a dissimilation from tartoffel, ultimately
from Italian tartufolo (Vulgar Latin *territuberem), originally truffle. Frederick II forced its
cultivation on Prussian peasants in 1743. The French is pomme de terre, literally earth-apple; a
Swedish dialectal word for potato is jordp&auml;ron, literally earth-pear.    Colloquial
pronunciation tater is attested in print from 1759. Potato chip (n.) attested from 1879. To drop
(something) like a hot potato is from 1824. Children's counting-out rhyme that begins one potato,
two potato first recorded 1885 in Canada. Slang potato trap mouth attested from 1785.


potboiler (n.)

also pot-boiler, 1864 in the figurative literary sense, from pot (n.1) + agent noun from boil (v.).
The notion is of something one writes solely to put food on the table.


poteen (n.)

illicit whiskey, 1812, from Irish poitin little pot, suggesting distillation in small quantities,
from English pot (n.1) vessel + diminutive suffix -in, -een.


Potemkin

in reference to Grigory Aleksandrovich Potemkin (1739-1791), favorite of Catherine II of Russia,
especially in reference to the sham villages supposedly erected under his orders for the
empressâ&euro;&trade; tour of Crimea (1787) to create an impression of prosperity and progress. The
silent film Battleship Potemkin dates from 1925, depicting (with elaboration) events of 1905 and the
mutiny of a Russian battleship named for the Tsarist minister.


potence (n.)

potency, early 15c., from Old French potence power, from Latin potentia (see potent).


potency (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin potentia power, from potentem potent (see potent).


potent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin potentem (nominative potens) powerful, present participle of *potere be
powerful, from potis powerful, able, capable; possible; of persons, better, preferable; chief,
principal; strongest, foremost, from PIE root *poti- powerful, lord (cognates: Sanskrit patih
master, husband, Greek posis, Lithuanian patis husband). Meaning having sexual power is first
recorded 1899.


potentate (n.)

c.1400, from Old French potentat and directly from Late Latin potentatus a ruler, also political
power, from Latin potentatus might, power, rule, dominion, from potentem (nominative potens)
powerful (see potent).


potential (adj.)

late 14c., possible (as opposed to actual), from Old French potenciel and directly from Late Latin
potentialis potential, from Latin potentia power, might, force; figuratively political power,
authority, influence, from potens powerful (see potent). The noun, meaning that which is possible,
is first attested 1817, from the adjective.


potentiality (n.)

1620s, from potential + -ity, or else from Medieval Latin potentialitas, from potentialis (see
potential).


potentially (adv.)

early 15c., in possibility, opposed to actually; from potential + -ly (2).


potentiate (v.)

1817 (Coleridge) endow with power, from Latin potentia power, might, force (see potential) + -ate
(2) on model of German potenzieren. Related: Potentiated; potentiating; potentiation.


potentiometer (n.)

1868, a hybrid formed from comb. form of Latin potentia power (see potential) + Greek-derived
-meter.


pothead (n.)

also pot-head chronic marijuana user, 1967, from pot (n.2) + head (n.). Earlier it meant stupid
person (1530s), from pot (n.1).


pother (n.)

1590s, disturbance, commotion, of unknown origin. Meaning mental trouble is from 1640s; verb sense
of to fluster is attested from 1690s.


pothole (n.)

also pot-hole, 1826, originally a geological feature in glaciers and gravel beds, from Middle
English pot a deep hole for a mine, or from peat-digging (late 14c.), now generally obsolete, but
preserved in Scotland and northern England dialect; perhaps ultimately related to pot (n.1) on
notion of deep, cylindrical shape. Applied to a hole in a road from 1909.


potion (n.)

c.1300, pocioun medicinal drink, from Old French pocion potion, draught, medicine (12c.), from Latin
potionem (nominative potio) a potion, a drinking, also poisonous draught, magic potion, from potus,
irregular past participle of potare to drink, from PIE root *po(i)- to drink (cognates: Sanskrit
pati drinks, panam beverage; Greek pinein to drink, poton that which one drinks, potos drinking
bout; Old Church Slavonic piti to drink, pivo beverage). Potus as a past participle adjective in
Latin meant drunken.


potlatch (n.)

1845, a gift, from Chinook jargon pot-latch, a gift, from Nootka (Wakashan) patshatl giving, gift.
Later (1865) in sense ceremony in which gifts are exchanged.


potluck (n.)

also pot-luck, 1590s, from pot (n.1) + luck; with notion of one's luck or chance as to what may be
in the pot. As an adjective from 1775.


Potomac

river in eastern U.S., from Algonquian Patowmeck, originally the name of a native village in
Virginia, perhaps literally something brought.


potpourri (n.)

also pot-pourri, 1610s, mixed meats served in a stew, from French pot pourri stew, literally rotten
pot (loan-translation of Spanish olla podrida), from pourri, past participle of pourrir to rot, from
Vulgar Latin *putrire, from Latin putrescere grow rotten (see putrescent). Notion of medley led to
meaning mixture of dried flowers and spices, first recorded in English 1749. Figurative sense
(originally in music) of miscellaneous collection is recorded from 1855.


Potsdam

town in Germany, first recorded 993 as Poztupimi; the name is  Slavic, the first element is po by
near, the second element evidently was influenced by Dutch names in -dam. The Potsdam Conference of
the victorious Allies in World War II was held July 17-Aug. 2, 1945, to decide the fate of Germany.


potsherd (n.)

early 14c., from pot (n.1) + Middle English schoord, from Old English sceard (see shard).


potshot (n.)

also pot-shot, 1836, shot taken at animal simply to 'get it in the pot,' not for sport or
marksmanship; from pot (n.1) + shot (n.). Extended sense of opportunistic criticism first recorded
1926. Compare pot-hunter one who shoots whatever he finds; one who kills for food not for sport.


pottage (n.)

soup, broth, c.1200, potage, literally that which is put in a pot, from Old French potage vegetable
soup, food cooked in a pot, from pot pot (see pot (n.1)). The spelling with double -t- is from early
15c.


potted (adj.)

of meat, preserved in a pot, 1640s, past participle adjective from pot (v.). Of a plant, from 1718.
In the figurative sense of put into a short, condensed form, 1866,


potter (n.)

maker of pots (they also sometimes doubled as bell-founders), late Old English pottere potter,
reinforced by Old French potier potter, agent noun from root of pot (n.1). As a surname from late
12c. Potter's field (1520s) is Biblical, a ground where clay suitable for pottery was dug, later
purchased by high priests of Jerusalem as a burying ground for strangers, criminals, and the poor
(Matt. xxvii:7). An older Old English word for potter was crocwyrhta crock-wright.


potter (v.)

occupy oneself in a trifling way, 1740, earlier to poke again and again (1520s), frequentative of
obsolete verb poten to push, poke, from Old English potian to push (see put (v.)). Sense of occupy
oneself in a trifling way is first recorded 1740. Related: Pottered; pottering.


pottery (n.)

late 15c., a potter's workshop, from Old French poterie (13c.), from potier (see potter (n.)).
Attested from 1727 as the potter's art; from 1785 as potteryware.


potty (adj.)

crazy, silly, 1916, slang, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to potter (v.). Earlier slang senses
were easy to manage (1899) and feeble, petty (1860).


potty (n.)

1942, child's word for chamber pot, from pot (n.1). Potty-training is attested from 1958. Potty-
mouth one who uses obscene language is student slang from 1968.


POTUS (n.)

wire service acronym for president of the United States (or President of the United States),
occasionally used outside wire transmissions by those seeking to establish journalistic credibility,
a survival from the Phillips Code, created 1879 by U.S. journalist Walter P. Phillips to speed up
transmission by Morse code, but obsolete from c.1940 with the widespread use of teletype machines.
Other survivals include SCOTUS for Supreme Court of the United States.


pouch (n.)

early 14c., bag for carrying things, especially (late 14c.) small bag in which money is carried,
from Anglo-French puche, Old North French pouche (13c.), Old French poche purse, poke, all from a
Germanic source (compare Old English pocca bag; see poke (n.1)). Extended to cavities in animal
bodies from c.1400.


pouf (n.)

style of elaborate female head-dress, 1817 (in reference to styles of c.1780), from French bouffer
to blow out, puff, probably of imitative origin. In dress-making, recorded from 1869; in reference
to over-stuffed cushions, 1884. As a verb by 1882 (implied in pouffed).


poulter (n.)

see poulterer.


poulterer (n.)

dealer in poultry, 1630s, a redundancy, but it has largely ousted original poulter (mid-13c.,
pulter), from Anglo-French poleter, pulleter, Old French pouletier poulterer, from pouletrie (see
poultry). With agent suffix -er (1). Poetic poulter's measure (1570s), according to Miller Williams,
is So called because with its thirteen feet it suggests the poulter's old practice of giving an
extra egg with the second dozen. [Patterns of Poetry, Louisiana State University, 1986].


poultice (n.)

16c. alteration of Middle English pultes (late 14c.), ultimately from Latin pultes, plural of puls
porridge (see pulse (n.2)).


poultry (n.)

domestic fowls, late 14c. (mid-14c. as place where poultry is sold), from Old French pouletrie
domestic fowl (late 13c.), from pouletier dealer in domestic fowl, from poulet young fowl (see
pullet).


pounce (v.)

1680s, originally to seize with the pounces, from Middle English pownse (n.) hawk's claw  (see
pounce (n.)). Meaning to jump or fall upon suddenly is from 1812. Figurative sense of lay hold of
eagerly is from 1840. Related: Pounced; pouncing.


pounce (n.)

claw of a bird of prey, late 15c., pownse, probably from Old French ponchon lance, javelin; spine,
quill (Modern French poin&ccedil;on; see punch (v.)). So called for being the claws that punch holes
in things. In falconry, the heel claw is a talon, and others are pounces. Meaning an act of jumping
or falling upon is from 1825. In Middle English also the name of a tool for punching holes or
embossing metal (late 14c.).


pound (n.1)

measure of weight, Old English pund pound (in weight or money), also pint, from Proto-Germanic
*punda- pound as a measure of weight (source of Gothic pund, Old High German phunt, German Pfund,
Middle Dutch pont, Old Frisian and Old Norse pund), early borrowing from Latin pondo pound,
originally in libra pondo a pound by weight, from pondo (adv.) by weight, ablative of *pondus weight
(see span (v.)). Meaning unit of money was in Old English, originally pound of silver.    At first
12 ounces; meaning 16 ounces was established before late 14c. Pound cake (1747) so called because it
has a pound, more or less, of each ingredient. Pound of flesh is from Merchant of Venice IV.i. The
abbreviations lb., &#163; are from libra, and reflect the medieval custom of keeping accounts in
Latin.


pound (n.2)

enclosed place for animals, late 14c., from a late Old English word attested in compounds (such as
pundfald penfold, pound), related to pyndan to dam up, enclose (water), and thus from the same root
as pond. Ultimate origin unknown; some sources indicate a possible root *bend meaning protruding
point found only in Celtic and Germanic.


pound (v.)

hit repeatedly, from Middle English pounen, from Old English punian crush, pulverize, beat, bruise,
from West Germanic *puno- (cognates: Low German pun, Dutch puin fragments). With intrusive -d- from
16c. Sense of beat, thrash is from 1790. Related: Pounded; pounding.


poundage (n.)

late 14c., tax per pound; 1903 as weight; from pound (n.1) + -age.


pour (v.)

c.1300, of unknown origin, not in Old English; perhaps from Old French (Flanders dialect) purer to
sift (grain), pour out (water), from Latin purare to purify, from purus pure (see pure). Replaced
Old English geotan. Intransitive sense from 1530s. Related: Poured; pouring; pourable. As a noun
from 1790.


pouring (adj.)

raining heavily, c.1600, present participle adjective from pour (v.).


pout (v.)

early 14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish dialectal puta to be
puffed out), or Frisian (compare East Frisian p&uuml;t bag, swelling, Low German puddig swollen);
related via notion of inflation to Old English &aelig;lepute fish with inflated parts, and Middle
Dutch puyt, Flemish puut frog, from hypothetical PIE imitative root *beu- suggesting swelling (see
bull (n.2)). Related: Pouted; pouting. As a noun from 1590s.


pouty (adj.)

1833, from pout + -y (2). Related: Poutiness.


poverty (n.)

late 12c., from Old French poverte poverty, misery, wretched condition (Modern French
pauvret&#233;), from Latin paupertatem (nominative paupertas) poverty, from pauper poor (see poor
(adj.)).Seeing so much poverty everywhere makes me think that God is not rich. He gives the
appearance of it, but I suspect some financial difficulties. [Victor Hugo, Les Mis&eacute;rables,
1862] Poverty line attested from 1901; poverty trap from 1966; poverty-stricken from 1803.


pow

expression imitative of a blow, collision, etc., first recorded 1881.


POW (n.)

also P.O.W., initialism (acronym) for prisoner of war, coined 1919 but not common until World War
II.


powder (n.)

c.1300, ash, cinders; dust of the earth; early 14c., pulverized substance; mid-14c., medicinal
powder; late 14c. as gunpowder, from Old French poudre dust, powder; ashes; powdered substance
(13c.), earlier pouldre (11c.), from Latin pulverem (nominative pulvis) dust (see pollen).
Specialized sense gunpowder is from late 14c. In the sense powdered cosmetic, it is recorded from
1570s.    In figurative sense, powder keg is first attested 1855. Powder room, euphemistic for
women's lavatory, is attested from 1936. Earlier it meant place where gunpowder is stored on a
warship (1620s). Powder horn attested by 1530s. Powder puff first recorded 1704; as a symbol of
femaleness or effeminacy, in use from at least 1930s.    Phrase take a powder scram, vanish, is from
1920; it was a common phrase as a doctor's instruction, so perhaps from the notion of taking a
laxative medicine or a sleeping powder, with the result that one has to leave in a hurry (or, on
another guess, from a magician's magical powder, which made things disappear). Powder blue (1650s)
was smelt used in laundering; as a color name from 1894.


powder (v.)

c.1300, to put powder on; late 14c., to make into powder, from Old French poudrer to pound, crush to
powder; strew, scatter, from poudre (see powder (n.)). Related: Powdered; powdering.


powdery (adj.)

early 15c., from powder (n.) + -y (2).


power (n.)

c.1300, ability; ability to act or do; strength, vigor, might, especially in battle; efficacy;
control, mastery, lordship, dominion; legal power or authority; authorization; military force, an
army, from Anglo-French pouair, Old French povoir, noun use of the infinitive, to be able, earlier
podir (9c.), from Vulgar Latin *potere, from Latin potis powerful (see potent).    Whatever some
hypocritical ministers of government may say about it, power is the greatest of all pleasures. It
seems to me that only love can beat it, and love is a happy illness that can't be picked up as
easily as a Ministry. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Meaning one who has power is late 14c. Meaning
specific ability or capacity is from early 15c. Meaning a state or nation with regard to
international authority or influence [OED] is from 1726. Used for a large number of from 1660s.
Meaning energy available for work is from 1727. Sense of electrical supply is from 1896.    Phrase
the powers that be is from Rom. xiii:1. As a statement wishing good luck, more power to (someone) is
recorded from 1842. A power play in ice hockey so called by 1940. Power failure is from 1911; power
steering from 1921.


power (v.)

to supply with power, 1898, from power (n.). Earlier it meant make powerful (1530s). Related:
Powered; powering.


power-broker (n.)

1961, apparently coined by T.H. White in reference to the 1960 U.S. presidential election; from
power (n.) + broker (n.).


powerful (adj.)

c.1400, from power (n.) + -ful. Meaning of great quality or number is from 1811; colloquial sense of
exceedingly (adv.) is from 1822. Related: Powerfully. Thornton (American Glossary) notes powerful as
Much used by common people in the sense of very, along with monstrous and cites curious expressions
such as devilish good, monstrous pretty (1799), dreadful polite, cruel pretty, abominable fine
(1803), or when a young lady admires a lap dog for being so vastly small and declares him prodigious
handsome (1799).


powerhouse (n.)

1873, building where power is generated, from power (n.) + house (n.). Figurative sense is from
1913.


powerless (adj.)

early 15c., lacking might or fortitude, from power (n.) + -less. Related: Powerlessly;
powerlessness.


PowerPoint (n.)

Microsoft computer slide show program, 1987.


powwow (n.)

1620s, priest, sorcerer, from a southern New England Algonquian language (probably Narragansett)
powwaw shaman, medicine man, Indian priest, from a verb meaning to use divination, to dream, from
Proto-Algonquian *pawe:wa he dreams, one who dreams. Meaning magical ceremony among North American
Indians is recorded from 1660s. Sense of council, conference, meeting is first recorded 1812. Verb
sense of to confer, discuss is attested from 1780.


pox (n.)

late 15c., spelling alteration of pockes, plural of pocke (see pock (n.)). Especially (after c.1500)
of syphilis.


poxy (adj.)

1853 in literal sense, from pox + -y (2). As a deprecatory adjective, attested in English dialects
by 1899.


poy (n.)

pole used to propel a boat, late 15c., of unknown origin.


ppm

abbreviation of parts per million, attested by 1913.


PR (n.)

also p.r.; 1942, abbreviation of public relations (see public).


practic (n.)

late 14c., a way of doing something, method; practice, custom, usage; also an applied science; from
Old French practique practice, usage (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin practica practice,
practical knowledge, ultimately from Greek praktike practical (as opposed to theoretical; see
practical). From early 15c. as practical aspect or application of something; practice as opposed to
theory; also, knowledge of the practical aspect of something, practical experience.


practicability 1720

from practicable + -ity.


practicable (adj.)

1670s, from Middle French pratiquable (1590s), from pratiquer to practice, from Medieval Latin
practicare to practice (see practical). Related: practicableness (1640s).


practical (adj.)

early 15c., practicale of or pertaining to matters of practice; applied, with -al (1) + earlier
practic (adj.) dealing with practical matters, applied, not merely theoretical (early 15c.), or
practic (n.) method, practice, use (late 14c.). In some cases directly from Old French practique
(adj.) fit for action, earlier pratique (13c.) and Medieval Latin practicalis, from Late Latin
practicus practical, active, from Greek praktikos fit for action, fit for business; business-like,
practical; active, effective, vigorous, from praktos done; to be done, verbal adjective of prassein,
prattein to do, act, effect, accomplish.


practicality (n.)

1809, from practical + -ity. Related: Practicalities.


practically (adv.)

1620s, in a practical manner, from practical + -ly (2). Meaning for practical purposes, as good as
is from 1748; loosened sense of almost is from 1869.


practice (v.)

c.1400, to do, act; early 15c., to follow or employ; to carry on a profession, especially medicine,
from Old French pratiser, practiser to practice, alteration of practiquer, from Medieval Latin
practicare to do, perform, practice, from Late Latin practicus practical, from Greek praktikos
practical (see practical).    From early 15c. as to perform repeatedly to acquire skill, to learn by
repeated performance; mid-15c. as to perform, to work at, exercise. Related: Practiced; practicing.


practice (n.)

early 15c., practise, practical application, originally especially of medicine but also alchemy,
education, etc.; from Old French pratiser, from Medieval Latin practicare (see practice (v.)). From
early 15c. often assimilated in spelling to nouns in -ice. Also as practic, which survived in
parallel into 19c.


practiced (adj.)

expert, 1560s, past participle adjective from practice (v.).


practicing (adj.)

1620s in reference to professions; from 1906 in reference to religions; present participle adjective
from practice (v.).


practicum (n.)

1904, from Late Latin practicum, neuter of practicus (see practical). Compare German praktikum.


practise

chiefly British English spelling of practice.


practitioner (n.)

1540s, a hybrid formed from practitian practitioner (c.1500, from French practicien, from Late Latin
practicus fit for action, see practice (v.)) on model of parishioner. Johnson has as a secondary
sense One who uses any sly or dangerous arts.


Prado (n.)

public park and promenade in Madrid, 1640s, Spanish, from Latin pratum meadow (see prairie). Compare
Prater, large park in Vienna, German, from Italian prato meadow. French preau little meadow,
formerly pra&#235;l, Italian pratello are from Vulgar Latin *pratellum, diminutive of pratum.


prae-

word-forming element meaning before, from Latin prae (adv.) before, from PIE *prai-, *prei-, from
root *per- (1) forward, through (see per; also see pre-). Reduced to pre- in Medieval Latin.
According to OED the full form prae- in Modern English appears usually only in words that are still
regarded as Latin, ... or that are terms of classical antiquity ....


praecipe (n.)

c.1500 (in Magna Carta in Anglo-Latin), from Latin praecipe, imperative of praecipere to admonish,
enjoin, from the opening words of such a writ, praecipe quod reddat enjoin (him) that he render.


praenomen (n.)

from Latin praenomen, literally before the name, from prae- (see pre-) + nomen (see name (n.)).


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


praeter-

see preter-.


praetor (n.)

elected magistrate in ancient Rome (subordinate to consuls), early 15c., from Latin praetor one who
goes before; originally a consul as leader of an army, from prae before (see pre-) + root of ire to
go (see ion).


Praetorian (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin praetorianus belonging to a praetor, from praetor (see praetor). Praetorian
Guard is from cohors praetoria, the bodyguard troop of a Roman commander or emperor. Hence modern
figurative use for defenders of an existing order.


pragmatic (adj.)

1610s, meddlesome, impertinently busy, short for earlier pragmatical, or else from Middle French
pragmatique (15c.), from Latin pragmaticus skilled in business or law, from Greek pragmatikos fit
for business, active, business-like; systematic, from pragma (genitive pragmatos) a deed, act; that
which has been done; a thing, matter, affair, especially an important one; also a euphemism for
something bad or disgraceful; in plural, circumstances, affairs (public or private), often in a bad
sense, trouble, literally a thing done, from stem of prassein/prattein to do, act, perform (see
practical). Meaning matter-of-fact is from 1853. In some later senses from German pragmatisch.


pragmatical (adj.)

1590s, concerned with practical results, from Latin pragmaticus (see pragmatic) + -al (1). Related:
Pragmatically.


pragmaticism (n.)

1865, officiousness, from pragmatic + -ism. From 1905 as a term in philosophy by American
philosopher C.S. Peirce (1839-1914).


pragmatism (n.)

matter-of-fact treatment, 1825, from Greek pragmat-, stem of pragma that which has been done (see
pragmatic) + -ism. As a philosophical doctrine, 1898, said to be from 1870s; probably from German
Pragmatismus. As a name for a political theory, from 1951. Related: Pragmatist (1630s as busybody;
1892 as adherent of a pragmatic philosophy).


Prague

capital of the Czech Republic, Czech Praha, perhaps from an ancient Slavic word related to Czech
pra&#382;iti, a term for woodland cleared by burning. Popular etymology is from Czech prah
threshold. Related: Praguean; Praguian.


prairie (n.)

tract of level or undulating grassland in North America, by 1773, from French prairie meadow,
grassland, from Old French praerie meadow, pastureland (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *prataria, from
Latin pratum meadow, originally a hollow. The word existed in Middle English as prayere, but was
lost and reborrowed to describe the American plains. Prairie dog is attested from 1774; prairie
schooner immigrant's wagon is from 1841. Illinois has been the Prairie State since at least 1861. In
Latin, Neptunia prata was poetic for the sea.


praise (v.)

c.1300, to laud, commend, flatter, from Old French preisier, variant of prisier to praise, value,
from Late Latin preciare, earlier pretiare (see price (n.)). Replaced Old English lof, hre&thorn;.
Specifically with God as an object from late 14c. Related: Praised; praising. Now a verb in most
Germanic languages (German preis, Danish pris, etc.), but only in English is it differentiated in
form from cognate price.


praise (n.)

early 14c., not common until 16c., from praise (v.).


praiseworthy (adj.)

mid-15c., from praise (v.) + worthy. Usually hyphenated until mid-19c. Related: Praiseworthiness.


Prakrit (n.)

popular dialect of ancient northern and central India (distinguished from Sanskrit), sometimes also
applied to modern languages, 1766, from Sanskrit prakrta- natural, original (opposed to samskrta-
prepared, refined), from pra- before, forward, forth (see pro-) + krta- to make, do, perform, from
PIE root *k(w)er- to make, form (related to karma).


praline (n.)

1727, prawlin, from French praline (17c.), from the name of Marshal Duplessis-Praslin (1598-1675,
pronounced praline), whose cook invented this confection [Klein]. Modern spelling in English from
1809.


pram (n.)

baby carriage, 1881, shortening of perambulator, perhaps influenced by pram flat-bottomed boat
especially a type used in the Baltic (1540s), from Old Norse pramr, from Balto-Slavic (compare
Polish prom, Russian poromu ferryboat, Czech pram raft), from PIE *pro-, from root *per- (1)
forward, through (see per).


prance (v.)

late 14c., originally of horses, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English pranken to
show off, from Middle Dutch pronken to strut, parade (see prank); or perhaps from Danish dialectal
prandse to go in a stately manner. Klein suggests Old French paravancier. Related: Pranced;
prancing. As a noun from 1751, from the verb.


prancer (n.)

1560s, originally thieves' slang for a horse, agent noun from prance (v.).


prandial (adj.)

pertaining to dinner, 1820, from Latin prandium late breakfast, luncheon (see postprandial). OED
reports it as affected or jocose.


prank (n.)

a ludicrous trick [Johnson], 1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to obsolete verb prank
decorate, dress up (mid-15c.), related to Middle Low German prank display (compare also Dutch
pronken, German prunken to make a show, to strut). The verb in the modern sense also is from 1520s.
Related: Pranked; pranking.


prankster (n.)

1927, American English, from prank + -ster.


praseodymium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1885, coined in Modern Latin by discoverer Carl Auer von Welsbach (1858-1929)
from Greek prasios leek-green (from prason leek) + didymos double, the name given to an earth in
1840, so called because it was a twin to lanthana. When didymia was further analyzed in the 1880s,
it was found to have several components, one of which was characterized by green salts and named
accordingly, with the elemental suffix -ium.


prat (n.)

buttock, 1560s, criminals' slang, of unknown origin. Later in U.S. criminal slang, hip pocket
(1914), and in British slang contemptible person (1968).


prate (v.)

early 15c., from or related to Middle Dutch praten to chatter (c.1400), from a Proto-Germanic
imitative root (compare East Frisian proten, Middle Low German praten, Middle High German braten,
Swedish prata to talk, chatter). Related: Prated; prating. As a noun from 1570s.


pratfall (n.)

1939, from prat buttock + fall (n.). Chiefly N. Amer. slang [OED]. As a verb from 1940.


Pratt

the surname apparently is from Old English *pr&aelig;tt (adj.) cunning, astute; related to late Old
English noun pr&aelig;tt a trick (see pretty). As a type of pottery, named for Staffordshire pottery
manufacturer Felix Pratt (1780-1859).


prattle (v.)

1530s, frequentative of prate (q.v.). Related: Prattled; prattling. The noun is attested from 1550s.


pravity (n.)

depravity, 1540s, from Latin pravitas crookedness, distortion, deformity; impropriety, perverseness,
from pravus wrong, bad, literally crooked.


prawn (n.)

early 15c., prayne, of unknown origin. No similar name found in other langs. [OED].


praxis (n.)

1580s, from Medieval Latin praxis practice, exercise, action (mid-13c., opposite of theory), from
Greek praxis practice, action, doing, from stem of prassein, prattein to do, to act (see practical).


pray (v.)

early 13c., ask earnestly, beg, also (c.1300) pray to a god or saint, from Old French preier to pray
(c.900, Modern French prier), from Vulgar Latin *precare (also source of Italian pregare), from
Latin precari ask earnestly, beg, entreat, from *prex (plural preces, genitive precis) prayer,
request, entreaty, from PIE root *prek- to ask, request, entreat (cognates: Sanskrit prasna-,
Avestan frashna- question; Old Church Slavonic prositi, Lithuanian prasyti to ask, beg; Old High
German frahen, German fragen, Old English fricgan to ask a question).    Parenthetical expression I
pray you, please, if you will, attested from 1510s, contracted to pray 16c. Related: Prayed;
praying. Praying mantis attested from 1809. The Gardener's Monthly of July 1861 lists other names
for it as camel cricket, soothsayer, and rear horse.


prayer (n.)

c.1300, from Old French prier prayer, petition, request (12c., Modern French pri&#232;re), from
Medieval Latin precaria petition, prayer, noun use of Latin adjective precaria, fem. of precarius
obtained by prayer, given as a favor, from precari to ask, beg, pray (see pray). Related: Prayers.
Prayer-book attested from 1590s; prayer-meeting from 1780. To not have a prayer have no chance is
from 1941.


prayerful (adj.)

1620s, from prayer + -ful. Related: Prayerfully; prayerfulness.


pre-

word-forming element meaning before, from Old French pre- and Medieval Latin pre-, both from Latin
prae (adverb and preposition) before in time or place, from PIE *peri- (cognates: Oscan prai,
Umbrian pre, Sanskrit pare thereupon, Greek parai at, Gaulish are- at, before, Lithuanian pre at,
Old Church Slavonic pri at, Gothic faura, Old English fore before), extended form of root *per- (1)
beyond (see per).    The Latin word was active in forming verbs. Also see prae-. Sometimes in Middle
English muddled with words in pro- or per-.


pre-arrange (v.)

also prearrange, 1792 (implied in pre-arranged), from pre- + arrange. Related: Pre-arranging.


pre-arrangement (n.)

also prearrangement, 1775, from pre- + arrangement.


pre-atomic (adj.)

before the atomic age, 1914, in World Set Free -- H.G. Wells anticipating the word the future would
use to look back at a time defined by events that hadn't yet happened in his day;   from pre- +
atomic.


pre-date (v.)

also predate, 1859, to antedate, to assign an earlier date to, from pre- + date (n.1) point in time.
As to exist before, from 1857. Related: Pre-dated; pre-dating.


pre-dawn (adj.)

1940, from pre- + dawn (n.).


pre-eclampsia (n.)

also preeclampsia, 1903, from pre- + eclampsia, from Greek eklampsis a shining forth, from ek- out
(see ex-) + lampein to shine (see lamp). Related: Pre-eclamptic (1896).


pre-elect (v.)

1560s, from pre- + elect (v.). Related: Pre-elected; pre-electing.


pre-election (n.)

1580s, from pre- + election.


pre-electric (adj.)

1894, from pre- + electric.


pre-eminence (n.)

also pre-eminence, c.1200, from Late Latin praeeminentia distinction, superiority, from Latin
praeeminentem (nominative praeeminens), present participle of praeeminere transcend, excel,
literally project forward, rise above, from prae before (see pre-) + eminere stand out, project (see
eminent).


pre-eminent (adj.)

also preeminent, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin preeminentem, from Latin praeeminentem (nominative
praeeminens), present participle of praeeminare to transcend, excel, literally to project forward,
rise above (see pre-eminence). Related: Pre-eminently; preeminently.


pre-empt (v.)

also preempt, 1830, secure by pre-emtion, back-formation from pre-emption, originally American
English. In the broascasting sense, it is attested from 1965, American English, a euphemism for
cancel. Related: pre-empted; preempted.


pre-emption (n.)

also preemption, c.1600, literally the right of purchasing before others, from pre- before +
emption.


pre-emptive (adj.)

also preemptive, 1806, pertaining to preemption; from pre-emption + -ive. Specifically of an attack
on an enemy who is plotting his own attack, 1958, a term from the Cold War. Related: Pre-emptively;
preemptively.


pre-emptory (adj.)

also preemptory, 1822, relating to pre-emption, from pre-emption + -ory.


pre-engage (v.)

bind in advance by promise, 1640s, from pre- + engage (v.). Related: Pre-engaged; pre-engaging.


pre-exist (v.)

1590s, from pre- + exist. Related: Pre-existed; pre-existing.


pre-existence (n.)

1650s, from pre- + existence.


pre-existing (adj.)

also preexisting, 1590s, past participle adjective from pre-exist. The medical insurance pre-
existing condition is attested from 1942.


pre-law (adj.)

of or pertaining to study in preparation for law school, 1961, American English, from pre- + law
(school).


pre-med (n.)

undergraduate student in preparation for medical school, 1934, from premedical. From 1941 as a major
in preparation for medical training. As an adjective from 1936.


pre-op (n.)

1913 as short for pre-operative (preparation).


pre-order (v.)

1630s, from pre- + order (v.). Marked in OED 2nd ed. as rare. Related: Pre-ordered; pre-ordering.


pre-owned (adj.)

1961, American English, from pre- + owned. A euphemism for used.


pre-position (v.)

to position beforehand, 1946, from pre- + position (v.). Related: Pre-positioned; pre-positioning.


Pre-Raphaelite (n., adj.)

c.1848, in reference to the brotherhood (founded 1847) of Holman Hunt, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, John
Everett Millais, and others (seven in all) who, encouraged by Ruskin, sought to revive the
naturalistic spirit of art in the age before Raphael Sanzio (1483-1520).


pre-record (v.)

1937, from pre- + record (v.). Related: Pre-recorded; pre-recording.


pre-registration (n.)

also preregistration, 1901, from pre- + registration.


pre-release (adj.)

1916, in reference to motion pictures, from pre- + release (n.).


pre-teen (adj.)

also preteen, 1926, from pre- + teen. As a noun, pre-teen person, from 1962. Sub-teen (1944) also
was used.


preach (v.)

at first in late Old English predician, a loan word from Church Latin; reborrowed 12c. as preachen,
from Old French preechier to preach, give a sermon (11c., Modern French pr&#233;cher), from Late
Latin praedicare to proclaim publicly, announce (in Medieval Latin to preach), from Latin prae
before (see pre-) + dicare to proclaim, to say (see diction). Related: Preached; preaching. To
preach to the converted is recorded from 1867 (form preach to the choir attested from 1979).


preacher (n.)

c.1200, from Old French preecheor preacher (Modern French pr&#234;cheur), from Latin praedicatorem
(nominative praedicator) public praiser, eulogist, literally proclaimer (see preach). Slang short
form preach (n.) is recorded by 1968, American English.


preachment (n.)

late 14c., a preaching; earlier an annoying or tedious speech (c.1300); see preach (v.) + -ment.
Related: Preachments.


preachy (adj.)

1819, from preach + -y (2). Related: Preachiness.


preamble (n.)

late 14c., from Old French preambule (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin preambulum, neuter
adjective used as a noun, properly preliminary, from Late Latin praeambulus walking before, from
Latin prae- before (see pre-) + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).


preamplifier (n.)

1929, from pre- + amplifier. Shortened form pre-amp is attested from 1957.


preassembly (n.)

1921, from pre- + assembly.


prebend (n.)

early 15c., from Old French prebende, earlier provende (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
prebenda allowance, from Late Latin praebenda allowance, pension (see provender). Related:
Prebendary.


Precambrian (adj.)

also Pre-Cambrian, 1861, from pre- + Cambrian.


precarious (adj.)

1640s, a legal word, held through the favor of another, from Latin precarius obtained by asking or
praying, from prex (genitive precis) entreaty, prayer (see pray). Notion of dependent on the will of
another led to extended sense risky, dangerous, uncertain (1680s). No word is more unskillfully used
than this with its derivatives. It is used for uncertain in all its senses; but it only means
uncertain, as dependent on others ... [Johnson]. Related: Precariously; precariousness.


precatory (adj.)

1630s, from Late Latin precatorius pertaining to petitioning, from precatorem one who prays, agent
noun from precari to pray (see pray).


precaution (n.)

c.1600, from French pr&eacute;caution (16c.) and directly from Late Latin praecautionem (nominative
praecautio) a safeguarding, from past participle stem of Latin praecavere to guard against
beforehand, from prae before (see pre-) + cavere to be one's own guard (see caution (n.)). The verb
meaning to warn (someone) in advance is from c.1700.


precautionary (adj.)

1720, from precaution + -ary.


precautious (adj.)

1680s, from precaution + -ous. Related: Precautiously; precautiousness.


precede (v.)

early 15c., lead the way; occur before, from Middle French preceder and directly from Latin
praecedere to go before, from prae before (see pre-) + cedere to go (see cede). Meaning to walk in
front of is late 15c.; that of to go before in rank or importance is attested from mid-15c. Related:
Preceded; preceding.


precedence (n.)

late 15c., a being a precedent, from precedent (n.) + -ence. Meaning fact of preceding another,
right of preceding another is from c.1600.


precedent (n.)

early 15c., case which may be taken as a rule in similar cases, from Middle French precedent, noun
use of an adjective, from Latin praecedentum (nominative praecedens), present participle of
praecedere go before (see precede). Meaning thing or person that goes before another is attested
from mid-15c. As an adjective in English from c.1400. As a verb meaning to furnish with a precedent
from 1610s, now only in past participle precedented.


precedented (adj.)

1650s, past participle adjective from precedent, which is attested as a verb from 1610s.


precent (v.)

to lead others in singing, 1732, from Latin praecantare to sing before, or a back-formation from
precentor.


precentor (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin praecentor a leader in singing, from Latin praecantare to sing before, from
prae before (see pre-) + canere to sing (see chant (v.)). For change of vowel, see biennial.


precept (n.)

late 14c., from Old French percept, percet (12c.), from Latin praeceptum maxim, rule of conduct,
order, noun use of neuter past participle of praecipere give rules to, order, advise, literally take
beforehand, from prae before (see pre-) + capere (past participle captus) to take (see capable). For
change of vowel, see biennial.


preception (n.)

1610s, from Latin praeceptionem (nominative praeceptio) a previous notion, preconception, literally
a taking beforehand, noun of action from past participle stem of praecipere (see precept).


preceptor (n.)

early 15c., tutor, instructor (earliest reference might be to expert in the art of writing), from
Latin praeceptor teacher, instructor, agent noun from praecipere (see precept). Medical training
sense attested from 1803.


preceptorship (n.)

1764, from preceptor + -ship.


precession (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin praecissionem (nominative praecissio) a coming before, from past participle
stem of Latin praecedere to go before (see precede). Originally used in reference to calculations of
the equinoxes, which come slightly earlier each year.


precieuse (n.)

pedantic woman, woman aiming at refined delicacy of language and taste (1727), from French
pr&eacute;cieuse, noun use of fem. of pr&eacute;cieux (see precious (adj.)); especially as lampooned
in Moli&egrave;re's comedy Les Pr&eacute;cieuses ridicules (1659).


precinct (n.)

c.1400, prasaynt (mid-15c. as precincte), district defined for purposes of government or
representation, from Medieval Latin precinctum enclosure, boundary line, noun use of neuter past
participle of Latin praecingere to gird about, surround, from prae- before (see pre-) + cingere to
surround, encircle (see cinch (v.)).


precious (adj.)

mid-13c., from Old French precios precious, costly, honorable, of great worth (11c., Modern French
pr&eacute;cieux), from Latin pretiosus costly, valuable, from pretium value, worth, price (see price
(n.)). Meaning over-refined in English first recorded late 14c. In Johnson's day, it also had a
secondary inverted sense of worthless. Related: Preciously; preciousness.


precious (n.)

beloved or dear person or object, 1706, from precious (adj.).


precipe (n.)

1610s, from Latin praecipes, variant of praeceps headfirst, headlong, precipitous, as a noun, a
precipice (see precipice).


precipice (n.)

steep face of rock, 1630s, from Middle French pr&eacute;cipice, from Latin praecipitium a steep
place, literally a fall or leap, from praeceps (genitive praecipitis) steep, headlong, headfirst,
from prae before, forth (see pre-) + caput head (see head (n.)). Earlier in English as a verb
(1590s) meaning fall to great depth.


precipitant (adj.)

1610s, from Latin precipitantem, present participle of praecipitare (see precipitate (v.)). As a
noun in chemistry from 1680s. The adjective senses now are taken by precipitate (adj.).


precipitate (v.)

to hurl or fling down, 1520s, a back formation from precipitation or else from Latin praecipitatus,
past participle of praecipitare to throw or dive headlong, from praeceps steep, headlong, headfirst
(see precipice). Meaning to cause to happen, hurry the beginning of is recorded from 1620s. Chemical
sense is from 1620s; meteorological sense first attested 1863. Related: Precipitated; precipitating.


precipitate (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin praecipitatus, past participle of praecipitare to throw or dive headlong (see
precipitate (v.)). Meaning hasty is attested from 1650s. Related: Precipitately.


precipitate (n.)

1560s, probably a back formation from precipitation.


precipitation (n.)

late 15c., a casting down (of the evil angels from heaven), also, in alchemy separation of a solid
substance from a solution, from Middle French precipitation (15c.) and directly from Latin
praecipitationem (nominative praecipitatio) act or fact of falling headlong, haste, noun of action
from past participle stem of praecipitare fall, be hasty, from praeceps steep (see precipice).
Meaning sudden haste is c.1500. Meaning act of falling from a height is attested from 1610s.
Meteorological sense of rain, snow, dew, etc. is from 1670s.


precipitious (adj.)

1610s, now obsolete, but prefered by purists for the sense high and steep over the later formation
precipitous.


precipitous (adj.)

1640s, rash, headlong, from obsolete French precipiteux (16c.), from Vulgar Latin *praecipitosus,
from praecipitare (see precipitation). Related: Precipitously; precipitousness.


precis (n.)

1760, from French noun use of Middle French pr&eacute;cis cut short, condensed (see precise). As a
verb, from 1856.


precise (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French pr&eacute;cis condensed, cut short (14c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin precisus, from Latin praecisus abrupt, abridged, cut off, past participle of praecidere to cut
off, shorten, from prae before (see pre-) + caedere to cut (see -cide; for Latin vowel change, see
acquisition). Related: Precisely (late 14c.).


preciseness (n.)

precision, 1560s, from precise + -ness.


precisian (n.)

one devoted to precision, 1570s, from precise + -ian on model of Christian, etc.


precision (n.)

1630s, a cutting off (mentally), abstraction, from French pr&eacute;cision (16c.) and directly from
Latin praecisionem (nominative praecisio) a cutting off, noun of action from past participle stem of
praecidere (see precise). Meaning preciseness is from 1740.


preclude (v.)

1610s, from Latin praecludere to close, shut off; hinder, impede, from prae- before, ahead (see
pre-) + claudere to shut (see close (v.)). Related: Precluded; precluding.


preclusion (n.)

1610s, from Latin praeclusionem (nominative praeclusio) a shutting off, noun of action from past
participle stem of praecludere (see preclude).


precocious (adj.)

1640s, developed before the usual time (of plants), with -ous + Latin praecox (genitive praecocis)
maturing early, from prae before (see pre-) + coquere to ripen, literally to cook (see cook (n.)).
Originally of flowers or fruits. Figurative use, of persons, dates from 1670s. Related:
Precociously; precociousness.


precocity (n.)

1630s, from French pr&eacute;cocit&eacute; (17c.), from pr&#233;coce precicious, from Latin
praecocem (nom. praecox); see precocious.


precognition (n.)

foreknowledge, mid-15c., from Late Latin praecognitionem (nom. praecognitio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin praecognoscere to foreknow, from prae before (see pre-) + cognoscere
to know (see cognizance).


preconceive (v.)

1570s, from pre- + conceive. Related: Preconceived; preconceiving.


preconception (n.)

1620s, from pre- + conception. Related: Preconceptions.


precondition (n.)

1825, from pre- + condition (n.). As a verb from 1841.


preconscious (adj.)

1860, from pre- + conscious (adj.).


precool (v.)

also pre-cool, 1904, from pre- + cool (v.). Related: Precooled; precooling.


precursor (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French precurseur and directly from Latin praecursor forerunner, agent noun
from past participle stem of praecurrere, from prae before (see pre-) + currere to run (see current
(adj.)). Related: Precursory.


predacious (adj.)

also predaceous, 1713, from stem of predation (Latin praedari) + -acious.


predate (v.)

to seek prey, 1974, a back-formation from predator, etc. Related: Predated; predating. For the word
meaning antedate; pre-exist, see pre-date.


predation (n.)

late 15c., act of plundering or pillaging, from Latin praedationem (nominative praedatio) a
plundering, act of taking booty, from praedari to rob, to plunder, from praeda plunder, booty, prey
(see prey (n.)). Zoological sense recorded from 1907.


predator (n.)

1862, from Latin praedator plunderer, from praedari to rob (see predation). Originally Predatores
(Swainson, 1840) used of insects that ate other insects.


predatory (adj.)

1580s, involving plundering, from Latin praedatorius pertaining to plunder, from praedator
plunderer, from praedor to plunder, from praeda prey (see prey (n.)). Of animals, from 1660s.


predecease (v.)

to die before, 1590s, from pre- + decease (v.). Related: Predeceased; predeceasing.


predecessor (n.)

late 14c., one who has held an office or position before the present holder, from Old French
predecesseor forebear and directly from Late Latin praedecessorem (nominative praedecessor), from
Latin prae before (see pre-) + decessor retiring official, from decess-, past participle stem of
decedere go away, also die (see decease (n.)). Meaning ancestor, forefather is recorded from c.1400.


predestination (n.)

mid-14c., the action of God in foreordaining certain of mankind through grace to salvation or
eternal life, from Old French predestinacion and directly from Church Latin praedestinationem
(nominative praedestinatio) a determining beforehand, noun of action from past participle stem of
praedestinare set before as a goal; appoint or determine beforehand, from Latin prae- before (see
pre-) + destinare appoint, determine (see destiny). First used in theological sense by Augustine;
given prominence by Calvin.


predestine (v.)

late 14c., to foreordain, from Old French pr&eacute;destiner (12c.) predestine, ordain (of God) and
directly from Latin praedestinare determine beforehand (see predestination). Related: Predestined;
predestining; predestinate.


predetermination (n.)

1630s; see predetermine + -ation.


predetermine (v.)

1620s, originally theological, from pre- + determine or else from Late Latin praedeterminare
(Augustine). Related: Predetermined; predetermining; predeterminate.


predicament (n.)

early 15c., category, class; one of Aristotle's 10 categories, from Medieval Latin predicamentum,
from Late Latin praedicamentum quality, category, something predicted, that which is asserted, from
Latin praedicatus, past participle of praedicare (see predicate). Praedicamentum is a loan-
translation of Greek kategoria, Aristotle's word. The meaning unpleasant situation is first recorded
1580s.


predicate (n.)

mid-15c., a term in logic, from Middle French predicat and directly from Medieval Latin predicatum,
from Latin praedicatum that which is said of the subject, noun use of neuter past participle of
praedicare assert, proclaim, declare publicly, from prae- forth, before (see pre-) + dicare
proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction). Grammatical sense is from 1630s.
Related: Predicative; predicator; predicatory.


predicate (adj.)

1887, from Latin praedicatus, past participle of praedicare proclaim, announce (see predicate (n.)).


predicate (v.)

1550s, back formation from predication, or else from Latin praedicatus, past participle of
praedicare proclaim, announce (see predicate (n.)). Related: Predicated; predicating. Phrase
predicated on founded on, based on, is American English, first recorded 1766.


predication (n.)

early 14c., from Old French predicacion (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin predicationem, from
Latin praedicationem (nominative praedicatio) a foretelling, prediction, noun of action from past
participle stem of praedicare (see predicate (n.)).


predict (v.)

1620s (implied in predicted), foretell, prophesy, a back formation from prediction or else from
Latin praedicatus, past participle of praedicere foretell, advise, give notice, from prae before
(see pre-) + dicere to say (see diction). Related: Predicted; predicting.


predictability (n.)

1855, from predictable + -ity.


predictable (adj.)

1820, from predict + -able. Related: Predictably, which in the sense as could have been predicted is
attested from 1914.


prediction (n.)

1560s, from Middle French pr&#233;diction and directly from Medieval Latin predictionem (nominative
predictio), from Latin praedictio a foretelling, noun of action from past participle stem of
praedicere (see predict).


predictive (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin praedictivus, from praedict-, past participle stem of praedicere (see
predict).


predictor (n.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin praedictor, agent noun from praedicere (see predict). Statistical sense
is from 1950.


predilection (n.)

1742, from French pr&eacute;dilection (16c.), noun of action from Medieval Latin praedilectus, past
participle of prediligere prefer before others, from Latin prae- before (see pre-) + diligere
choose, love (see diligent).


predispose (v.)

1640s, to put into a certain frame of mind, perhaps a back-formation from predisposition. Related:
Predisposed; predisposing.


predisposition (n.)

1620s, from pre- + disposition.


prednisone (n.)

1955, probably from elements of pregnadiene (from pregnane, name of the compound from which
pregnancy hormones were derived, from the Latin stem of pregnancy) + ending from cortisone.


predominance (n.)

1590s; see predominant + -ance.


predominant (adj.)

1570s, from Middle French pr&eacute;dominant (14c.), from Medieval Latin *praedominantem (nominative
praedominans), present participle of *praedominare, from Latin prae- before (see pre-) + dominari to
rule (see dominate). Related: Predominantly.


predominate (v.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin predominatus, past participle of predominare (see predominant). Related:
Predominated; predominating; predominatingly.


preemie (n.)

baby born prematurely, 1927, premy, American English shortening of premature + -y (2). Spelling with
-ie attested from 1949.


preen (v.)

to trim, to dress up, late 14c., perhaps a variation of Middle English proynen, proinen trim the
feather with the beak (see prune (v.)); or perhaps from Old French poroindre anoint before, and Old
French proignier round off, prune. Middle English prene (from Old English preon, a general Germanic
word) meant to pin, and probably influenced the form of this word. Watkins, however, connects it
with Latin unguere to smear, anoint.    Because of the popularity of falconry, bird activities
formerly were more closely observed and words for them were more precise in English than today.Youre
hawke proynith and not pikith and she prenyth not bot whan she begynnyth at hir leggys, and fetcheth
moystour like oyle at hir taill. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


prefab (adj.)

1937, short for prefabricated (see prefabricate). As a noun, prefabricated housing, from 1942.


prefabricate (v.)

1919 (implied in prefabricated), from pre- + fabricate (v.). Related: Prefabricating.


preface (n.)

late 14c., from Old French preface opening part of sung devotions (14c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin prefatia, from Latin praefationem (nominative praefatio) fore-speaking, introduction, in
Medieval Latin prologue, noun of action from past participle stem of praefari to say beforehand,
from prae before (see pre-) + fari speak (see fame (n.)).


preface (v.)

1610s, from preface (n.). Related: Prefaced; prefacing.


prefatory (adj.)

1670s, from Latin praefat-, past participle stem of praefari (see preface (n.)) + -ory.


prefect (n.)

mid-14c., civil or military official, from Old French prefect (12c., Modern French pr&#233;fet) and
directly from Latin praefectus public overseer, superintendent, director, noun use of past
participle of praeficere to put in front, to set over, put in authority, from prae in front, before
(see pre-) + root of facere (past participle factus) to perform (see factitious). Spelling restored
from Middle English prefet. Meaning administrative head of the Paris police is from 1800; meaning
senior pupil designated to keep order in an English school is from 1864. Related: Prefectorial.


prefectural (adj.)

1807, from prefecture + -al (1).


prefecture (n.)

administrative district of a prefect, mid-15c., from Middle French pr&#233;fecture and directly from
Latin praefectura, or assembled locally from prefect + -ure.


prefer (v.)

late 14c., to put forward or advance in rank or fortune, to promote, from Old French preferer (14c.)
and directly from Latin praeferre place or set before, carry in front, from prae before (see pre-) +
ferre to carry, to place (see infer). Meaning to esteem (something) more than others also is
recorded from late 14c. Original sense in English is preserved in preferment.


preferable (adj.)

1640s, from or on model of French pr&eacute;f&eacute;rable, from pr&eacute;f&eacute;r (see prefer).
OED notes preferrable is better English but has not prevailed. Related: Preferably.


preference (n.)

mid-15c., advancement in position or status; 1650s as act of prefering, from Middle French
preference (14c., Modern French pr&#233;f&#233;rence), from Medieval Latin preferentia, from past
participle stem of Latin praeferrere (see prefer). Sense of that which one prefers is from 1852.


preferential (adj.)

1805, from Medieval Latin preferentia, from Latin praeferre (see prefer) + -al (1).


preferment (n.)

mid-15c., from prefer + -ment.


prefiguration (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin praefigurationem (nominative praefiguratio),  noun of action from past
participle stem of praefigurare to prefigure (see prefigure).


prefigure (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin praefigurare to prefigure, from Latin prae before (see pre-) + figurare
to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)). Related: Prefigured;
prefiguring.


prefix (n.)

1640s, from Latin praefixum, noun use of neuter past participle of praefigere fix in front, fasten
on before, from prae before (see pre-) + root of figere to fasten, fix (see fix (v.)).


prefix (v.)

early 15c., appoint beforehand, from Middle French prefixer, from pre- (see pre-) + fixer (see fix
(v.)). Meaning to place at the beginning is from 1530s; of words or parts of words from c.1600.
Related: Prefixed; prefixing.


preflight (adj.)

also pre-flight, 1918 with reference to aviation, from pre- + flight (n.).


preformed (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin praeformare or else from pre- + formed (see form (v.)). Of plastic and synthetic
products, from 1918.


preggers (adj.)

1942, from pregnant (adj.1).


preggo (adj.)

Australian slang, 1951, from pregnant (adj.1).


preglacial (adj.)

also pre-glacial, 1853, from pre- + glacial.


pregnable (adj.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English preignable, earlier prenable (early 15c.), from Old French
prenable assailable, vulnerable, from stem of prendre to take, grasp, seize, from Latin prehendere
to take hold of, to seize (see prehensile).


pregnancy (n.)

1520s (originally figurative), from pregnant (adj.1) + -cy. Literal use attested from 1590s.


pregnant (adj.2)

convincing, weighty, pithy, late 14c., cogent, convincing, compelling (of evidence, an argument,
etc.); sense of full of meaning is from c.1400. According to OED from Old French preignant, present
participle of preindre press, squeeze, stamp, crush, from earlier priembre, from Latin premere to
press (see press (v.1)). But Watkins has it from Latin praehendere to grasp, seize, and in Barnhart
it is from Latin praegnans with child, literally before birth and thus identical with pregnant
(adj.1).


pregnant (adj.1)

with child, early 15c., from Latin praegnantem (nominative praegnans, originally praegnas) with
child, literally before birth, probably from prae- before (see pre-) + root of gnasci be born (see
genus).    Retained its status as a taboo word until c.1950; modern euphemisms include anticipating,
enceinte, expecting, in a family way, in a delicate (or interesting) condition. Old English terms
included mid-bearne, literally with child; bearn-eaca, literally child-adding or child-increasing;
and geacnod increased. Among c.1800 slang terms for pregnant was poisoned (in reference to the
swelling).


preheat (v.)

also pre-heat, 1878, from pre- + heat (v.). Related: Preheated; preheating.


prehensile (adj.)

1771, from French pr&eacute;hensile adapted for grasping (Buffon), from Latin prehensus, past
participle of prehendere to grasp, seize, get hold of, from prae- before (see pre-) + -hendere, from
PIE root *ghend- to seize, take (see get (v.)). Latin -hendere is related to hedera ivy, via notion
of clinging.


prehension (n.)

1530s, seizure, arrest, from Latin prehensionem (nominative prehensio), noun of action from past
participle stem of prehendere (see prehensile). Use in philosophy is from 1925.


prehistoric (adj.)

1832, modeled on French pr&eacute;historique; see pre- + historic.


prehistory (n.)

1869, perhaps a back-formation from prehistoric. Related: Prehistorian.


prejudge (v.)

1560s, from French pr&eacute;juger (16c.), equivalent to Latin praejudicare to judge beforehand; see
pre- + judge (v.). Related: Prejudged; prejudging; prejudgment.


prejudice (n.)

c.1300, despite, contempt, from Old French prejudice prejudice, damage (13c.), from Medieval Latin
prejudicium injustice, from Latin praeiudicium prior judgment, from prae- before (see pre-) +
iudicium judgment, from iudex (genitive iudicis) a judge (see judge (v.)). Meaning injury, physical
harm is mid-14c., as is legal sense detriment or damage caused by the violation of a legal right.
Meaning preconceived opinion (especially but not necessarily unfavorable) is from late 14c. in
English.


prejudice (v.)

mid-15c., to injure or be detrimental to, from prejudice (n.). The meaning to affect or fill with
prejudice is from c.1600. Related: Prejudiced; prejudicing.


prejudicial (adj.)

early 15c., causing prejudice; 1530s, full of prejudice, from prejudice (n.) + -al (1), or else from
Middle French prejudicial and directly from Medieval Latin prejudicialis injurious, from Latin
praeiudicium.


prelapsarian (adj.)

pertaining to the condition before the Fall, 1834, from pre- + Latin lapsus a fall (see lapse (n.))
+ ending from unitarian, etc.


prelate (n.)

c.1200, from Old French prelat (Modern French pr&#233;late) and directly from Medieval Latin
prelatus clergyman of high rank, from Latin praelatus one preferred, noun use of past participle of
praeferre (see prefer), from prae before (see pre-) + latus borne, carried (see oblate (n.)).


prelim (n.)

1891, short for preliminary (race, test, event, etc.).


preliminary (adj.)

1660s, from French pr&eacute;liminaire and directly from Medieval Latin praeliminaris, from Latin
prae- before (see pre-) + limen (genitive liminis) threshold (see limit (n.)). A word that arose in
reference to negotiations to end the Thirty Years' War. Earliest attested form in English is
preliminaries (n.), 1650s.


prelude (n.)

1560s, from Middle French pr&eacute;lude notes sung or played to test the voice or instrument
(1530s), from Medieval Latin preludium prelude, preliminary, from Latin praeludere to play
beforehand for practice, preface, from prae- before (see pre-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).
Purely musical sense first attested in English 1650s. Related: Prelusion.


premarital (adj.)

also pre-marital, 1863, from pre- + marital. Phrase pre-marital sex attested from 1953.


premature (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin praematurus early ripe (as fruit), too early, untimely, from prae before (see
pre-) + maturus ripe, timely (see mature (v.)). Related: Prematurely; prematurity; prematuration.
Premature ejaculation is attested from 1848; Latin euphemism ejaculatio praecox dates to 1891 in
English but was used earlier in German and appears to have been, at first at least, the
psychologist's term for it.


premedical (adj.)

also pre-medical, 1881, in reference to study for medical training, from pre- + medical.


premeditate (v.)

1540s, from pre- + meditate, or a back formation from premeditation, or else from Latin
praemeditatus, past participle of praemeditari to think over. Related: Premeditated; premeditating.


premeditation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French premeditacion and directly from Latin praemeditationem (nominative
praemeditatio) consideration beforehand, noun of action from past participle stem of praemeditari to
consider beforehand, from prae- before (see pre-) + meditari to consider (see meditation).


premenstrual (adj.)

also pre-menstrual, 1865, from pre- + menstrual. Premenstrual syndrome (1971) earlier was
premenstrual tension (1928).


premier (adj.)

mid-15c., first in time; late 15c. as first in rank, from Middle French premier first, chief, from
Latin primarius of the first rank, chief (see primary (adj.)).


premier (n.)

1711 in the political sense, a shortening of premier minister (1680s); see premier (adj.). In U.S.
usage, premier formerly was applied occasionally to the Secretary of State (1855-c.1900).


premiere (n.)

1889, first performance of a play, from French premi&egrave;re, in phrase premi&egrave;re
repr&eacute;sentation, from fem. of Old French premier first (see premier). The verb is recorded
from 1940.


premillennial (adj.)

1829, before the millennium, especially in theological sense of before the Second Coming of Christ;
from pre- + millennial. Premillenarian, one who believes the second coming of Christ will precede
the Millennium, is from 1842. Related: Premillenialism.


premise (n.)

late 14c., in logic, a previous proposition from which another follows, from Old French premisse
(14c.), from Medieval Latin premissa (propositio or sententia) (the proposition) set before, noun
use of fem. past participle of Latin praemittere send forward, put before, from prae before (see
pre-) + mittere to send (see mission). In legal documents it meant matter previously stated (early
15c.), which in deeds or wills often was a house or building, hence the extended meaning house or
building, with grounds (1730).


premise (v.)

to state before something else, mid-15c., from premise (n.). Related: Premised; premising.


premises (n.)

building and grounds, 1730; see premise (n.).


premium (n.)

c.1600, reward given for a specific act, from Latin praemium reward, profit derived from booty, from
prae- before (see pre-) + emere to buy, originally to take (see exempt (adj.)). Insurance sense is
1660s, from Italian premio. Adjectival sense of superior in quality is first attested 1925,
originally in reference to butter.


premolar (n.)

premolar tooth, 1841, from pre- + molar. Related: Premolars.


premonition (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French premunition, Middle French premonicion, from Late Latin praemonitionem
(nominative praemonitio) a forewarning, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin praemonere
forewarn, from prae before (see pre-) + monere to warn (see monitor (n.)).


premonitory (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin praemonitorius, from praemonitor, agent noun from stem of praemonere (see
premonition).


premorbid (adj.)

also pre-morbid, 1905, from pre- + morbid.


premotion (n.)

1640s, from medical Latin praemotionem (nominative praemotio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Late Latin praemovere, from prae- (see pre-) + movere to move (see move (v.)).


prenatal (adj.)

1826, formed in English from pre- + natal.


prentice (n.)

c.1300, shortened form of apprentice (n.). As a verb from 1590s.


prenup (n.)

by 1988 as a shortening of prenuptial agreement (see prenuptial).


prenuptial (adj.)

1826, from pre- + nuptial. Prenuptial agreement first recorded 1833.


preoccupancy (n.)

also pre-occupancy, prior occupation, 1734, from pre- + occupancy.


preoccupation (n.)

1550s, state of occupying beforehand, from Latin praeoccupationem (nominative praeoccupatio) a
seizing beforehand, anticipation, noun of action from past participle stem of praeoccupare, from
prae- before (see pre-) + occupare seize (see occupy). Meaning mental absorption is from 1854.
Earlier its secondary sense was bias, prejudice (c.1600).


preoccupied (adj.)

absorbed in thought, 1823, past participle adjective from preoccupy (v.). Earlier it meant occupied
in advance.


preoccupy (v.)

1560s, from pre- + occupy. Related: Preoccupied; preoccupying.


preordain (v.)

1530s, from pre- + ordain (q.v.). Related: Preordained; preordaining.


prep (n.)

1862, short for preparation. Prep school attested from 1895, short for preparatory school. First
record of prep in the sense student or graduate of a preparatory school is from 1899 (also see
preppie).


prep (v.)

slang shortening of prepare, 1908. Related: Prepped; prepping.


preparation (n.)

late 14c., act of preparing, from Latin praeparationem (nominative praeparatio) a making ready, noun
of action from past participle stem of praeparare prepare, from prae before (see pre-) + parare make
ready (see pare). Meaning a substance especially prepared is from 1640s.


preparatory (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin praeparatorius, from Latin praeparatus (see preparation). Earlier in
same sense was preparative (late 14c.). Applied from 1822 to junior schools in which pupils are
prepared for a higher school.


prepare (v.)

mid-15c., a back formation from preparation and in part from Middle French preparer (14c.), from
Latin praeparare make ready beforehand (see preparation). Related: Prepared; preparing. Be prepared
as the Boy Scouts' motto is attested from 1911.


preparedness (n.)

1580s, from prepared + -ness.


prepay (v.)

also pre-pay, 1839, originally of postage, from pre- + pay (v.). Related: Prepaid; prepayment.


prepend (v.)

ponder, consider, 1560s, from pre- + Latin pendere to weigh (see pendant). Related: Prepended;
prepending.


prepense (adj.)

planned beforehand, c.1700, short for prepensed (1520s), past participle adjective from obsolete
prepense, originally purpense, from Old French pourpenser to plan, meditate (11c.), from pro- before
(see pro-) + penser to think (see pensive).


preponderance (n.)

1680s, greater weight, from Latin praeponderans, present participle of praeponderare make heavier
(see preponderate). Sense of greater importance is from 1780; that of greater number is from 1845.


preponderant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin praeponderantem (nominative praeponderans), present participle of praeponderare
(see preponderate).


preponderate (v.)

1610s, to weigh more than, from Latin praeponderatus, past participle of praeponderare outweigh,
make heavier, from prae before (see pre-) + ponderare to weigh (see pound (n.1)). Meaning to exceed
in force or power is from 1799. Related: Preponderation.


preponderous (adj.)

1700, from preponderate + -ous. Related: Preponderously.


preposition (n.)

late 14c., from Latin praepositionem (nominative praepositio) a putting before, a prefixing, noun of
action from past participle stem of praeponere put before, from prae before (see pre-) + ponere put,
set, place (see position (n.)). In grammatical use, a loan-translation of Greek prothesis, literally
a setting before.


prepositional (adj.)

1754, from preposition + -al (1).


prepossess (v.)

1610s, to get possession of beforehand, from pre- + possess. Meaning to possess (a person)
beforehand with a feeling, notion, etc. is from 1630s; specifically, to cause (someone) to have a
favorable opinion of something (1640s). Related: Prepossessed; prepossessing.


prepossessing (adj.)

1640s, causing prejudice, present participle adjective from prepossess. Opposite meaning causing
agreeable first impression first recorded 1805.


prepossession (n.)

1640s, noun of action from prepossess (v.).


preposterous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin praeposterus absurd, contrary to nature, inverted, perverted, in reverse order,
literally before-behind (compare topsy-turvy, cart before the horse), from prae before + posterus
subsequent. Related: Preposterously; preposterousness.


preppie (n.)

student at a preparatory school, 1962, also preppy; see prep. As an adjective from 1966. An older
variant in the noun sense was prepper (1921), also prepster (1938).


preprandial (adj.)

also pre-prandial, 1822, from pre- + Latin prandium luncheon (see postprandial).


preprint (v.)

also pre-print, 1913, from pre- + print (v.). Related: Preprinted; preprinting.


preprint (n.)

1889, from pre- + print (n.).


preprocess (v.)

also pre-process, 1956, from pre- + process (v.). Related: Preprocessed; preprocessing.
Preprocessed foods are not only here but are gaining such a tremendous acceptance that soon there
will be little else on the market. This eliminates the need for mixing, peeling, blending and other
devices used in the preparation of raw foods. Popular Mechanics October 1956]


preprogram (v.)

also pre-program, 1955, from pre- + program (v.). Related: Preprogrammed; preprogramming.


prepubescent (adj.)

1883, from pre- + pubescent.


prepublication (adj.)

1903, from pre- + publication.


prepuce (n.)

c.1400, from Old French prepuce, from Latin praeputium foreskin, possibly from pr&aelig;- before
(see pre-) + *putos penis. Earlier in English as prepucy (late 14c.), directly from Latin.


prequel (n.)

1973, from pre-, based on sequel (n.).


prerecord (v.)

also pre-record, 1936, of music, from pre- + record (v.). Related: Prerecorded; prerecording.


prerequisite

1630s (n.) something required beforehand, 1650s (adj.), required beforehand, both from pre- +
requisite.


prerogative (n.)

special right or privilege granted to someone, late 14c. (in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Old
French prerogative (14c.), Medieval Latin prerogativa special right, from Latin praerogativa
prerogative, previous choice or election, originally (with tribus, centuria) unit of 100 voters who
by lot voted first in the Roman comita, noun use of fem. of praerogativus (adj.) chosen to vote
first, from praerogere ask before others, from prae- before (see pre-) + rogare to ask (see
rogation).


presage (n.)

late 14c., something that portends, from Latin praesagium a foreboding, from praesagire to perceive
beforehand, forebode, from praesagus (adj.) perceiving beforehand, prophetic, from prae before (see
pre-) + sagus prophetic, related to sagire perceive (see sagacious).


presage (v.)

1560s, from Middle French pr&eacute;sager (16c.), from pr&eacute;sage omen, from Latin praesagium
(see presage (n.)). Related: Presaged; presaging.


presby-

word-forming element meaning old, from Greek presby-, combining form of presbys elder, old man,
possibly originally one who leads the cattle, from *pres- before, extended form of *pre- (see per) +
root of bous cow. Watkins, however, has it from PIE *pres-gwu- going before, with second element
from root *gw-u- going (see venue).


presbycousis (n.)

loss of hearing acuteness due to age, 1890, medical Latin (by 1886 in German), from Greek presbys
elder, old man (see presby-) + akousis hearing, from akouein to hear (see acoustic). Related:
Presbyotic.


presbyopia (n.)

far-sightedness brought on by age, 1791, medical Latin, from Greek presbys old man (see presby-) +
-opia, from ops eye (see eye (n.)). Related: Presbyopic.


presbyter (n.)

elder of the Christian church, 1590s, from Late Latin presbyter, used for a priest in Jerome and
Prudentius, from Greek presbyteros older, comparative of presbys old; old man (see presby-).


Presbyterian (adj., n.)

1640, in reference to the Scottish church governed by elders (as opposed to bishops), from presbyter
an elder in a church (1590s), from Late Latin presbyter an elder, from Greek presbyteros an elder,
also an adjective meaning older, comparative of presbys old (see presby-).   Presbyterial was used
from c.1600 in the sense of or pertaining to a presbytery; also from 1590s as presbyterian (adj.).


presbytery (n.)

part of a church reserved for the clergy, early 15c., from Church Latin presbyterium, from Greek
presbyterion, from presbyteros an elder (see Presbyterian). Meaning body of elders in the
Presbyterian system is recorded from 1570s.


preschool (adj.)

also pre-school, 1886, from pre- + school (n.); the noun is from 1910. Related: pre-schooling; pre-
schooler.


prescience (n.)

late 14c., from Old French prescience (13c.) and directly from Late Latin praescientia fore-
knowledge, from *praescientem, present participle of *praescire to know in advance, from Latin prae
before (see pre-) + scire to know (see science).


prescient (adj.)

1620s, from Middle French prescient (15c.) and directly from Latin praescientem (nominative
praesciens), present participle of praescire (see prescience).


prescreen (v.)

also pre-screen, 1952, of movies, from pre- + screen (v.). Related: Prescreened; prescreening.


prescribe (v.)

to write down as a direction, mid-15c., from Latin praescribere write beforehand (see prescription).
Related: Prescribed; prescribing. Medical sense is from 1580s, probably a back formation from
prescription.


prescription (n.)

late 14c., in law, the right to something through long use, from Old French prescription (13c.) and
directly from Latin praescriptionem (nominative praescriptio) a writing before, order, direction,
noun of action from past participle stem of praescribere write before, prefix in writing; ordain,
determine in advance, from prae before (see pre-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)). Medical
sense of written directions from a doctor first recorded 1570s.


prescriptive (adj.)

1748, from Late Latin praescriptivus, from praescript-, past participle stem of praescribere (see
prescription). Or formed in English from archaic prescript a direction (1530s), from Latin
praescriptum.


preselect (v.)

also pre-select, 1856, from pre- + select (v.). Related: Preselected; preselecting.


preselection (n.)

also pre-selection, 1882, from pre- + selection.


presence (n.)

mid-14c., fact of being present, from Old French presence (12c., Modern French pr&#233;sence), from
Latin praesentia a being present, from praesentem (see present (n.)). Meaning carriage, demeanor,
aspect (especially if impressive) is from 1570s; that of divine, spiritual, or incorporeal being
felt as present is from 1660s. Presence of mind (1660s) is a loan-translation of French
pr&eacute;sence d'esprit, Latin praesentia animi.


present (adj.)

c.1300, existing at the time, from Old French present evident, at hand, within reach; as a noun, the
present time (11c., Modern French pr&#233;sent) and directly from Latin praesentem (nominative
praesens) present, at hand, in sight; immediate; prompt, instant; contemporary, from present
participle of pr&aelig;esse be before (someone or something), be at hand, from prae- before (see
pre-) + esse to be (see essence). Meaning being there is from mid-14c. in English. As a grammatical
tense, recorded from late 14c.


present (v.)

c.1300, introduce (someone or something) formally or ceremonially; also make a formal presentation
of; give as a gift or award; bestow, from Old French presenter (11c., Modern French pr&#233;senter)
and directly from Latin praesentare to place before, show, exhibit, from stem of praesens (see
present (adj.)). From late 14c. as exhibit (something), offer for inspection, display; also, in law,
make a formal complaint or charge of wrongdoing. From c.1400 asrepresent, portray. Related:
Presented; presenting.


present (n.1)

this point in time (opposed to past and future), c.1300, the present time, also act or fact of being
present; portion of space around someone, from Old French present (n.) from Latin praesens being
there (see present (adj.)). In old legalese, these presents means these documents.


present (n.2)

c.1200, thing offered, what is offered or given as a gift, from Old French present and Medieval
Latin presentia, from phrases such as French en present (to offer) in the presence of, mettre en
present place before, give, from Late Latin inpraesent face to face, from Latin in re praesenti in
the situation in question, from praesens being there (see present (adj.)), on the notion of bringing
something into someone's presence.


present-day

1870, from present (adj.) + day.


presentable (adj.)

mid-15c., of a benefice; also, in law, liable to formal charge of wrongdoing, from present (v.) +
-able. Meaning suitable in appearance is from 1800. Related: Presentably.


presentation (n.)

late 14c., act of presenting, from Old French presentacion (13c.), from Latin praesentationem
(nominative praesentatio) a placing before, noun of action from  past participle stem of praesentare
(see present (v.)). Meaning that which is offered or presented is mid-15c.; that of a theatrical or
other representation is recorded from c.1600. Related: Presentational.


presenter (n.)

1540s, one who presents (a position, degree, etc.), agent noun from present (v.); meaning host of a
radio or television program is from 1967.


presentiment (n.)

1714, from obsolete French presentiment (Modern French Related: pressentiment), from Middle French
pressentir to have foreboding, from Latin praesentire to sense beforehand, from prae before (see
pre-) + sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).


presently (adv.)

late 14c., immediately, at this time, from present (adj.) + -ly (2). By 1560s it had relaxed into
sooner or later.


presentment (n.)

act of presenting, c.1300, from Old French presentement presentation (of a person) at a ceremony
(12c.), from presenter (see present (v.)).


preservation (n.)

early 15c., preservacioun protection from disease, from Old French preservacion (13c.), from
Medieval Latin preservationem (nominative preservatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
preservare (see preserve (v.)).


preservationist (n.)

advocate of protecting existing things, 1905, from preservation + -ist; specifically of historic
buildings by 1957.


preservative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French preservatif and directly from Medieval Latin praeservativus, from stem of
praeservare (see preserve (v.)). The noun is from early 15c., a preservative medication; sense of
chemical added to foods to keep them from rotting is from 1875.


preserve (v.)

late 14c., keep safe, from Anglo-French preservare, Old French preserver, from Medieval Latin
preservare keep, preserve, from Late Latin praeservare guard beforehand, from Latin prae before (see
pre-) + servare to keep safe (see observe). As a treatment of fruit, etc., 1570s; of organic bodies
from 1610s. Related: Preserved; preserving.


preserve (n.)

fruit preserved with sugar, c.1600, from preserve (v.). Earlier it meant a preservative (1550s).
Sense of protected place for animals or plants (a sense more properly belonging to conserve) is from
1807.


preset

also pre-set, 1934 (adj.); 1946 (v.); from pre- + set (v.).


preside (v.)

1610s, from French pr&eacute;sider preside over, govern (15c.), from Latin praesidere stand guard;
superintend, literally sit in front of, from prae before (see pre-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary).


presidence (n.)

action of presiding, 1590s, from French pr&eacute;sidence (14c.), from Medieval Latin praesidentia
(see presidency).


presidency (n.)

1590s, office of a president, from Medieval Latin praesidentia office of a president (mid-13c.),
from Latin praesidentem (nominative praesidens) president, governor (see president). Earlier in same
sense was presidentship (1520s). Meaning a president's term in office is from 1610s.


president (n.)

late 14c., appointed governor of a province; chosen leader of a body of persons, from Old French
president and directly from Latin praesidentum (nominative praesidens) president, governor, noun use
of present participle of praesidere to act as head or chief (see preside).    In Middle English of
heads of religious houses, hospitals, colleges and universities. First use for chief executive
officer of a republic is in U.S. Constitution (1787), from earlier American use for officer in
charge of the Continental Congress (1774), a sense derived from that of chosen head of a meeting or
group of persons, which is from Middle English. It had been used of chief officers of banks from
1781, of individual colonies since 1608 (originally Virginia) and heads of colleges since mid-15c.
Slang shortening prez is recorded from 1883. Fem. form presidentess is attested from 1763.


presidential (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to a president, from Medieval Latin praesidentialis, from praesidentia office of
a president (see presidency). Related: Presidentially.


presidio (n.)

1808, American English, from Spanish presidio fort, settlement, from Latin praesidium defense,
protection, from praesidere to sit before, protect (see preside).


Presidium (n.)

permanent administrative committee of the U.S.S.R., 1924, from Russian prezidium, from Latin
praesidium a presiding over, defense, from praesidere (see preside).


press (n.)

c.1300, presse, crowd, throng, company; crowding and jostling of a throng; a massing together, from
Old French presse (n.) throng, crush, crowd; wine or cheese press (11c.), from Latin pressare (see
press (v.1)). Late Old English had press clothes press.    Meaning device for pressing cloth is from
late 14c., as is also the sense device to squeeze juice from grapes, oil from olives, cider from
apples, etc., from Middle French presse. Specific sense machine for printing is from 1530s; this was
extended to publishing houses by 1570s and to publishing generally (in phrases like freedom of the
press) from c.1680. This gradually shifted c.1800-1820 to periodical publishing, journalism. The
press, meaning journalists collectively is attested from 1921 (though superseded by media since the
rise of television, etc.).   Press agent is from 1873; press conference is attested from 1931,
though the thing itself dates to at least World War I. Press secretary is recorded from 1940. Via
the sense crowd, throng, Middle English in press meant in public, a coincidental parallel to the
modern phrase in the press. Weightlifting sense is from 1908. The basketball defense so called from
1959 (in full-court press).


press (v.1)

push against, early 14c., to clasp, embrace; mid-14c. to squeeze out; also to cluster, gather in a
crowd;  late 14c., to press against, exert pressure, also assault, assail; also forge ahead, push
one's way, move forward, from Old French presser squeeze, press upon; torture (13c.), from Latin
pressare to press, frequentative formation from pressus, past participle of premere to press, hold
fast, cover, crowd, compress, from PIE *per- (4) to strike. Related: Pressed; pressing. Figurative
sense is from late 14c. Meaning to urge, argue for is from 1590s.


press (v.2)

force into service, 1570s, alteration (by association with press (v.1)) of prest (mid-14c.) engage
by loan, pay in advance, especially money paid to a soldier or sailor on enlisting, from Latin
praestare to stand out, stand before; fulfill, perform, provide, from prae- before (see pre-) +
stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related to praesto (adv.) ready, available.
Related: Pressed; pressing.


press-gang (n.)

1690s, from press (v.2) + gang (n.).


pressing (adj.)

exerting pressure, mid-14c., present participle adjective from press (v.1). Sense of urgent,
compelling, forceful is from 1705. Related: Pressingly.


pressman (n.)

1590s, from press (n.) + man (n.).


pressroom (n.)

1680s, from press (n.) + room (n.).


pressure (n.)

late 14c., suffering, anguish; act or fact of pressing on the mind or heart, from Old French
presseure oppression; torture; anguish; press (for wine or cheeses), instrument of torture (12c.)
and directly from Latin pressura action of pressing, from pressus, past participle of premere to
press (see press (v.1)).    Literal meaning act or fact of pressing in a physical sense is attested
from early 15c. Meaning moral or mental coercing force is from 1620s; meaning urgency is from 1812.
Scientific sense in physics is from 1650s. Pressure cooker is attested from 1915; figurative sense
is from 1958. Pressure point is attested from 1876. Pressure-treated, of woods, is from 1911.


pressure (v.)

to pressurize, 1886, American English, from pressure (n.). Meaning to exert pressure on (someone) is
attested by 1922. Related: Pressured; pressuring.


pressurization (n.)

1937, from pressure + -ization.


pressurize (v.)

1938 (implied in pressurized), from pressure (n.) + -ize. Related: Pressurizing.


Prester John

c.1300, Prestre Johan, legendary medieval Christian king and priest, said to have ruled either in
the Far East or Ethiopia. From Vulgar Latin *prester, a transition between Latin presbyter and
English priest. First mentioned in the West by mid-12c. chronicler Otto of Freising, who told how
Johannes Presbyter won a great victory over the Persians and the Medes. Between 1165 and 1177 a
forged letter purporting to be from him circulated in Europe. All this recalls the time when the
Christian West was culturally backwards and militarily threatened, dreaming of a mythical deliverer.
Compare Old French prestre Jehan (13c.), Italian prete Gianni.


prestidigitation (n.)

1843, from French prestidigitation, which was coined along with prestidigitator (q.v.).


prestidigitator (n.)

1843, from French prestidigitateur, a hybrid coined 1830 by Jules de Rov&egrave;re (who sought a new
word, qui s'accorderait mieux &agrave; ses nobles origines to replace escamoteur and physicien),
roughly based on Latin praestigiator juggler (see prestigious); influenced by Italian presto quick,
a conjuror's word (see presto), and by Latin digitus finger (see digit).


prestige (n.)

1650s, trick, from French prestige (16c.) deceit, imposture, illusion (in Modern French, illusion,
magic, glamour), from Latin praestigium delusion, illusion (see prestigious). Derogatory until 19c.;
sense of dazzling influence first applied 1815, to Napoleon.


prestigious (adj.)

1540s, practicing illusion or magic, deceptive, from Latin praestigious full of tricks, from
praestigiae juggler's tricks, probably altered by dissimilation from praestrigiae, from
praestringere to blind, blindfold, dazzle, from prae before (see pre-) + stringere to tie or bind
(see strain (v.)). Derogatory until 19c.; meaning having dazzling influence is attested from 1913
(see prestige). Related: Prestigiously; prestigiousness.


presto (adv.)

1590s, quickly, used by conjurers, etc., from Italian presto quick, quickly in conjuror's patter,
from Latin praestus ready, praesto (adv.) ready, available, from prae before (see pre-) + stare to
stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Compare Latin praesto esse to be at hand, be ready,
source of French pr&ecirc;t ready. As a musical direction, it is a separate borrowing from Italian,
first recorded 1683.


presumable (adj.)

1690s, from presume + -able.


presumably (adv.)

1640s, with presumption, without examination, from presumable + -ly (2). As a qualifier, probably,
as one would presume, from 1830.


presume (v.)

late 14c., to take upon oneself, to take liberty, also to take for granted, presuppose, especially
overconfidently, from Old French presumer (12c.) and directly from Latin praesumere anticipate, in
Late Latin, assume (see presumption). Related: Presumed; presumedly; presuming.


presumption (n.)

mid-13c., seizure and occupation without right, also taking upon oneself more than is warranted,
from Old French presumcion (12c., Modern French pr&#233;somption) and directly from Late Latin
praesumptionem (nominative praesumptio) confidence, audacity, in classical Latin, a taking for
granted, anticipation, noun of action from past participle stem of praesumere to take beforehand,
from prae before (see pre-) + sumere to take (see exempt (adj.)). In English, the meaning the taking
of something for granted is attested from c.1300. Presumptuous preserves the older sense.


presumptive (adj.)

speculative, mid-15c., from French pr&eacute;somptif (15c.), from Medieval Latin presumptivus, from
Late Latin praesumptivus, from Latin praesumpt- past participle stem of praesumere (see presume).
The heir presumptive (1620s) is presumed to be the heir if the heir apparent is unavailable.
Related: Presumptively.


presumptuous (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French presumtuex (12c.; Modern French pr&#233;somptueux) and directly from Late
Latin praesumptuosus, variant of praesumptiosus, from past participle stem of Latin praesumere
anticipate, in Late Latin, assume (see presumption). Related: Presumptuously; presumptuousness.


presuppose (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French presupposer (14c.), from Medieval Latin praesupponere; see pre- + suppose.
Related: Presupposed; presupposing.


presupposition (n.)

1530s, from Middle French pr&#233;supposition and directly from Medieval Latin praesuppositionem
(nominative praesuppositio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin  praesupponere, from
prae before (see pre-) + suppositio (see suppose).


pret a porter (adj.)

1957, from French pr&ecirc;t &agrave; porter, ready-to-wear. For pret, see presto. Porter is
literally to carry, from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)). For a similar sense evolution,
compare German kleider tragen.


pretend (v.)

late 14c., to profess, assert, maintain (a claim, etc.), to direct (one's) efforts, from Old French
pretendre to lay claim, from Latin praetendere stretch in front, put forward, allege, from prae
before (see pre-) + tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- to stretch (see tend).    Main modern
sense of feign, put forward a false claim is recorded from c.1400; the older sense of simply to
claim is behind the string of royal pretenders (1690s) in English history. Meaning to play, make
believe is recorded from 1865. In 17c. pretend also could mean make a suit of marriage for, from a
sense in French. Related: Pretended; pretending.


pretend (n.)

fact of pretending, 1888, from children's talk, from pretend (v.). Earlier in same sense was verbal
noun pretending (1640s).


pretended (adj.)

mid-15c., so-called, past participle adjective from pretend (v.).


pretender (n.)

1590s, one who intends; 1620s as one who puts forth a claim; agent noun from pretend (v.).
Specifically of a claimant to the English throne from 1690s.


pretense (n.)

also pretence, early 15c., the putting forth of a claim, from Anglo-French pretensse, Middle French
pretensse (Modern French pr&#233;tense), from Medieval Latin noun use of fem. of Late Latin
praetensus, altered from Latin praetentus, past participle of praetendere (see pretend). Meaning
false or hypocritical profession is from 1540s.


pretension (n.)

mid-15c., assertion, allegation; objection; intention; signification, from Medieval Latin
pretensionem (nominative praetensio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin praetendere
stretch in front, put forward, allege (see pretend (v.)). Meaning unproven claim is from c.1600.
Sense of ostentation is from 1727.


pretentious (adj.)

1836, from French pr&eacute;tentieux (17c.), from pr&eacute;tention pretension, from Medieval Latin
pretentionem (nominative pretentio) pretension, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
praetendere (see pretend (v.)).


preter-

also praeter-, word-forming element meaning beyond, from Latin praeter (adverb and preposition)
beyond, before, above, more than, properly comparative of prae before (see pre-).


preterhuman (adj.)

1803, from preter- + human (adj.).


preterist (n.)

one who favors the past, 1864 (as a theological term from 1843, one who holds that the Apocalyptic
prophecies have begun to be fulfilled), from preter- + -ist.


preterite (adj.)

mid-14c., having to do with the past, from Old French preterit past tense (13c.) and directly from
Latin praeteritum (as in tempus praeteritum time past), past participle of praeterire to go by, go
past, from praeter beyond, before, above, more than (see prae-) + itum, past participle of ire to go
(see ion). Grammar sense is late 14c. The word also was a noun in Middle English meaning past times
(late 14c.). Related: Preteritive. Preterite-present attested from 1813.


preterm (adj.)

also pre-term, 1928, from pre- + term (n.).


pretermission (n.)

1580s, from Latin pretermissionem (nominative pretermissio), noun of action from past participle
stem of praetermittere (see pretermit).


pretermit (v.)

1510s, from Latin praetermittere let pass, overlook, from praeter- (see preter-) + mittere (see
mission). Related: Pretermitted; pretermitting.


preternatural (adj.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin preternaturalis (mid-13c.), from Latin phrase praeter naturam (praeterque
fatum) beyond nature (and beyond fate), from praeter beyond (see preterite) + accusative of natura
nature (see natural). Preternatural is used especially to note that which might have been a work of
nature, but is not [Century Dictionary].


preterperfect (n.)

1530s, from Late Latin praeteritum perfectum complete past; see preter- + perfect (adj.). Related:
Preterpluperfect.


pretest

also pre-test, 1949 (v. and n.), from pre- + test.


pretext (n.)

1510s, from French pr&#233;texte, from Latin praetextum a pretext, outward display, noun use of
neuter past participle of praetexere to disguise, cover, literally weave in front (for sense,
compare pull the wool over (someone's) eyes); from prae- in front (see pre-) + texere to weave, from
PIE root *teks- to weave, to make (see texture (n.)).


pretrial (n.)

preliminary hearing before a trial, 1938, American English, from pre- + trial.


prettification (n.)

1902, noun of action from prettify.


prettify (v.)

1836, from pretty (adj.) + -fy. Related: Prettified; prettifying.


prettily (adv.)

early 15c., from pretty (adj.) + -ly (2).


prettiness (n.)

1520s, from pretty + -ness.


pretty (adj.)

Old English pr&aelig;ttig (West Saxon), pretti (Kentish), *prettig (Mercian) cunning, skillful,
artful, wily, astute, from pr&aelig;tt, *prett a trick, wile, craft, from Proto-Germanic *pratt-
(cognates: Old Norse prettr a trick, prettugr tricky; Frisian pret, Middle Dutch perte, Dutch pret
trick, joke, Dutch prettig sportive, funny, Flemish pertig brisk, clever), of unknown origin.
Connection between Old English and Middle English words is uncertain, but if they are the same,
meaning had shifted by c.1400 to manly, gallant, and later moved via attractive, skillfully made, to
fine, to beautiful in a slight way (mid-15c.). Ironical use from 1530s. For sense evolution, compare
nice, silly. Also used of bees (c.1400). After the OE. period the word is unknown till the 15th c.,
when it becomes all at once frequent in various senses, none identical with the OE., though
derivable from it [OED].     Meaning not a few, considerable is from late 15c. With a sense of
moderately, qualifying adjectives and adverbs, since 1560s. Pretty please as an emphatic plea is
attested from 1902. A pretty penny lot of money is first recorded 1768.


pretty (n.)

a pretty person or thing, 1736, from pretty (adj.).


pretty (v.)

1916, usually with up, from pretty (adj.). Related: Prettied; prettying. Compare prettify.


pretty-boy

1885 as an adjective, 1888 as a noun, from pretty (adj.) + boy (n.). In Middle English a pretty man
was a worthy or clever fellow.


pretzel (n.)

1851, from German Prezel, also Brezel, from Middle High German brezel, prezel, from Old High German
brezitella, brecedela, from Medieval Latin *brachitella, presumably a kind of biscuit baked in the
shape of folded arms (source also of Italian bracciatella, Old Proven&ccedil;al brassadel),
diminutive of Latin bracchiatus with branches, with arms, from bracchium arm (see brace (n.)).


prevail (v.)

c.1400, be successful; be efficacious, from Old French prevaleir (Modern French pr&#233;valoir) and
directly from Latin praevalere be stronger, have greater power, from prae before (see pre-) + valere
have power, be strong (see valiant). Spelling in English perhaps influenced by avail. Related:
Prevailed; prevailing.


prevailing (adj.)

1590s, vigorous; 1680s, widely accepted, present participle adjective from prevail (v.).


prevalence (n.)

1590s, fact of having mastery, from Middle French pr&eacute;valence (15c.), from Late Latin
praevalentia, from praevalens, present participle of praevalere (see prevalent). Meaning condition
of being widespread or general is from 1713.


prevalent (adj.)

early 15c., having great power or force, from Latin praevalentem (nominative praevalens) of superior
strength; mighty, present participle of praevalere to be more able (see prevail). Meaning
extensively existing, in general use is from 1650s.


prevaricate (v.)

1580s, to transgress, a back formation from prevarication, or else from Latin praevaricatus, past
participle of praevaricari to make a sham accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly; in Church
Latin, to transgress (see prevarication). Meaning to speak evasively is from 1630s. Related:
Prevaricated; prevaricating.


prevarication (n.)

late 14c., divergence from a right course, transgression, from Old French prevaricacion breaking of
God's laws, disobedience (to the Faith) (12c., Modern French pr&#233;varication) and directly from
Latin praevaricationem (nominative praevaricatio) duplicity, collusion, a stepping out of line (of
duty or behavior), noun of action from past participle stem of praevaricari to make a sham
accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly, in Church Latin, to transgress, from prae before (see
pre-) + varicare to straddle, from varicus straddling, from varus bowlegged, knock-kneed (see
varus). Meaning evasion, quibbling is attested from 1650s.


prevaricator (n.)

c.1400, from Old French prevaricator and directly from Latin praevaricator sham accuser; unfaithful
advocate, agent noun from past participle stem of praevaricari (see prevaricate).


prevenient (adj.)

1650s, from Latin praevenientem (nominative praeveniens), present participle of praevenire, from
prae- (see pre-) + venire to come (see venue).


prevent (v.)

early 15c., act in anticipation of, from Latin praeventus, past participle of praevenire come
before, anticipate, hinder, in Late Latin also to prevent, from prae before (see pre-) + venire to
come (see venue). Originally literal; sense of anticipate to hinder was in Latin, but not recorded
in English until 1540s.


preventable (adj.)

1630s, from prevent + -able.


preventative (adj.)

1650s, from prevent + -ative. OED points out that preventive is better-formed. As a noun, from 1774.


prevention (n.)

mid-15c., action of stopping an event or practice, from Middle French pr&#233;vention and directly
from Late Latin praeventionem (nominative praeventio) action of anticipating, noun of action from
past participle stem of praevenire (see prevent).


preventive (adj.)

1630s, from Latin praevent-, past participle stem of praevenire (see prevent), + -ive. As a noun,
from 1630s; in medical use from 1670s.


preverbal (adj.)

1931, from pre- + verbal.


preview (v.)

c.1600, to see beforehand, from pre- + view (v.). Meaning to show (a film, etc.) before its public
opening is from 1928. Related: Previewed; previewing.


preview (n.)

a foretaste, 1880, from preview (v.); specifically a showing of a book, film, etc. before public
release from 1920.


previous (adj.)

1620s, from Latin praevius going before, from prae before (see pre-) + via road (see via). Related:
Previously.


prevision (n.)

1610s, foresight, from French pr&eacute;vision (14c.), from Late Latin praevisionem (nominative
praevisio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin praevidere see first, see beforehand,
from prae- before (see pre-) + videre to see (see vision).


prex (n.)

U.S. college slang for president (of a college), 1828. As a Latin verb, it meant a request,
entreaty.


prexy (n.)

1871, slang extension of prex.


prey (v.)

c.1300, to plunder, pillage, ravage, from prey (n.) and in part from Old French preer, earlier
preder (c.1040), from Late Latin praedare, from praeda (see prey (n.)). Its sense of to kill and
devour is attested from mid-14c. Related: Preyed; preying.


prey (n.)

mid-13c., animal hunted for food, also that which is taken in war, from Old French preie booty,
animal taken in the chase (mid-12c., Modern French proie), from Latin praeda booty, plunder, game
hunted, earlier praeheda, literally something seized before, from PIE *prai-heda-; for first element
see prae-; second element related to the second element in prehendere to grasp, seize (see
prehensile).


prez (n.)

slang shortening of president, 1892, American English. Compare prex.


priapic (adj.)

phallic, 1786, with -ic + Priapus (Greek Priapos), son of Dionysus and Aphrodite, the god who
personified male reproductive power. His name is of unknown origin.


priapism (n.)

persistent erection of the penis, 1620s, from Late Latin priapismus, from Greek priapismos, from
priapizein, from Priapos (see priapic + -ism).


price (n.)

c.1200, pris value, worth; praise, later cost, recompense, prize (mid-13c.), from Old French pris
price, value, wages, reward, also honor, fame, praise, prize (Modern French prix), from Late Latin
precium, from Latin pretium reward, prize, value, worth, from PIE *pret-yo-,   from root *per- (5)
to traffic in, to sell (cognates: Sanskrit aprata without recompense, gratuitously; Greek porne
prostitute, originally bought, purchased, pernanai to sell; Lithuanian perku I buy).   Praise,
price, and prize began to diverge in Old French, with praise emerging in Middle English by early
14c. and prize being evident by late 1500s with the rise of the -z- spelling. Having shed the extra
Old French and Middle English senses, the word now again has the base sense of the Latin original.
To set (or put) a price on someone, offer a reward for capture is from 1766.


price (v.)

to set the price of, late 14c., from price (n.) or from Old French prisier, variant of preisier to
value, estimate; to praise. Related: Priced; pricing.


price-tag (n.)

1881, from price (n.) + tag (n.).


priceless (adj.)

having a value beyond price, 1590s, from price (n.) + -less. Colloquial sense of delightful attested
from 1907. Related: Pricelessly; pricelessness.


pricey (adj.)

also pricy, expensive, 1932, from price (n.) + -y (2).


prick (n.)

Middle English prikke, from Old English prica (n.) point, puncture; particle, small portion of space
or time, common Proto-Germanic (compare Low German prik point, Middle Dutch prick, Dutch prik,
Swedish prick point, dot). Meaning pointed weapon, dagger is first attested 1550s.    Earliest
recorded use for penis is 1590s (Shakespeare puns upon it). My prick was used 16c.-17c. as a term of
endearment by immodest maids for their boyfriends. As a term of abuse, it is attested by 1929.
Prick-teaser attested from 1958. The use in kick against the pricks (Acts ix:5, first in the
translation of 1382) probably is from sense of a goad for oxen (mid-14c.), which made it a plausible
translation of Latin stimulus; advorsum stimulum calces was proverbial in Latin.


prick (v.)

Old English prician to prick, pierce, prick out, sting, from West Germanic *prikojan (cognates: Low
German pricken, Dutch prikken to prick), of uncertain origin. Danish prikke to mark with dots,
Swedish pricka to point, prick, mark with dots probably are from Low German. Related: Pricked;
pricking. To prick up one's ears is 1580s, originally of animals with pointed ears (prycke-eared, of
foxes, is from 1520s).


prickle (n.)

Old English pricel thing to prick with, goad, point, from the same source as Old English prician
(see prick (v.)) with instrumental suffix -el (compare Middle Low German prickel, Dutch prikkel).


prickly (adj.)

1570s, spiny, armed with prickles (originally of holly leaves), from prickle (n.) + -y (2).
Figurative sense of irritable first recorded 1862. Prickly heat is from 1736, so called for the
sensation; prickly pear is from 1760 (earlier prickle pear, 1610s). Related: Prickliness.


pride (n.)

late Old English pryto, Kentish prede, Mercian pride pride, haughtiness, pomp, from prud (see
proud). There is debate whether Scandinavian cognates (Old Norse pry&#240;i, Old Swedish prydhe ,
Danish pryd, etc.) are borrowed from Old French (from Germanic) or from Old English. Meaning that
which makes a person or people most proud is from c.1300. First applied to groups of lions late
15c., but not commonly so used until c.1930. Paired with prejudice from 1610s.


pride (v.)

mid-12c. in the reflexive sense congratulate (oneself), be proud, c.1200 as be arrogant, act
haughtily, from pride (n.). Related: Prided; priding.


prideful (adj.)

c.1500, from pride (n.) + -ful. Related: Pridefully; pridefulness. Old English had prutswongor
overburdened with pride.


prier (n.)

one who pries, 1550s, agent noun from pry.


priest (n.)

Old English preost probably shortened from the older Germanic form represented by Old Saxon and Old
High German prestar, Old Frisian prestere, all from Vulgar Latin *prester priest, from Late Latin
presbyter presbyter, elder, from Greek presbyteros (see Presbyterian).    An alternative theory (to
account for the -eo- of the Old English word) makes it cognate with Old High German priast, prest,
from Vulgar Latin *prevost one put over others, from Latin praepositus person placed in charge, from
past participle of praeponere (see provost). In Old Testament sense, a translation of Hebrew kohen,
Greek hiereus, Latin sacerdos.


priestcraft (n.)

late 15c., business of being a priest, from priest + craft (n.). After rise of Protestantism and the
Enlightenment, it acquired a pejorative sense of arts and devices of ambitious priests for attaining
and holding temporal power and social control (1680s).


priestess (n.)

1690s, from priest + -ess. Earlier was priestress (late 15c.).


priesthood (n.)

Old English preosthad; see priest + -hood.


priestly (adj.)

mid-15c.; see priest + -ly (1). Old English had preostlic, but the modern word seems to be a Middle
English re-formation.


prig (n.)

precisian in speech or manners, 1753, originally in reference to theological scruples (1704), of
unknown origin; earlier appearances of the same word meaning dandy, fop (1670s), thief (c.1600; in
form prigger recorded from 1560s) could be related, as could thieves' cant prig a tinker (1560s).
A p[rig] is wise beyond his years in all the things that do not matter. A p. cracks nuts with a
steam hammer: that is, calls in the first principles of morality to decide whether he may, or must,
do something of as little importance as drinking a glass of beer. On the whole, one may, perhaps,
say that all his different characteristics come from the combination, in varying proportions, of
three things--the desire to do his duty, the belief that he knows better than other people, &amp;
blindness to the difference in value between different things. [anonymous essay, quoted in Fowler,
1926]    Related: Priggery.


prim

1680s (v.) to assume a formal, precise demeanor, perhaps from French prim thin, small, delicate,
from Old French prim fine, delicate, from Latin primus finest, literally first (see prime (adj.)).
Later, deck out, dress to effect (1721). Attested as a noun from 1700. The adjective, the sole
surviving sense, is from 1709. A cant word at first. Related: Primly; primness.


prima

Italian fem. of primo first (see primo); as in prima ballerina (1799).


prima donna (n.)

1782, principal female singer in an opera, from Italian prima donna first lady, from Latin prima,
fem. of primus first (see prime (adj.)) + domina lady (see dame). Meaning temperamental person first
recorded 1834.


prima facie

Latin, literally at first sight, ablative of prima facies first appearance, from prima, fem.
singular of primus first (see prime (adj.)) + facies form, face (see face (n.)).


primacy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French primacie (14c., in Modern French spelled primatie) and directly from
Medieval Latin primatia office of a church primate (late 12c.), from Late Latin primas (genitive
primatis) principal, chief, of the first rank (see primate).


primal (adj.)

c.1600, belonging to the earliest age, from Medieval Latin primalis primary, from Latin primus first
(see prime (adj.)). Psychological sense, in reference to Freud's theory of behaviors springing from
the earliest stage of emotional development, is attested from 1918. Primal scream is from a best-
selling book of 1971.


primary (adj.)

early 15c., of the first order, from Latin primarius of the first rank, chief, principal, excellent,
from primus first (see prime (adj.)). Meaning first in order is from 1802. Primary color is first
recorded 1610s (at first the seven of the spectrum, later the three from which others can be made);
primary school is 1802, from French &eacute;cole primaire.The Paris journals ... are full of a plan,
brought forward by Fourcroy, for the establishment of primary schools, which is not interesting to
an English reader. [London Times, April 27, 1802]  Related: Primarily.


primary (n.)

1861, American English, short for primary election (1792, with reference to France; in a U.S.
context from 1835); earlier primary caucus (1821).


primate (n.)

high bishop, c.1200, from Old French primat and directly from Medieval Latin primatem (nominative
primas) church primate, noun use of Late Latin adjective primas of the first rank, chief, principal,
from primus first (see prime (adj.)).    Meaning animal of the biological order including monkeys
and humans is attested from 1876, from Modern Latin Primates (Linn&aelig;us), from plural of Latin
primas; so called from supposedly being the highest order of mammals (originally also including
bats).


primatology (n.)

study of Primates, 1941, from primate (n.) + -ology.


primavera (n.)

spring, spring time, Italian, from Latin prima vera, plural of primus ver literally first spring;
see prime (adj.) + vernal. Related: Primaveral.


prime (adj.)

late 14c., first in order, from Latin primus first, the first, first part, figuratively chief,
principal; excellent, distinguished, noble (source also of Italian and Spanish primo), from pre-
Italic *prismos, superlative of PIE *preis- before, from root *per- (1) beyond, through (see per).
Meaning first in importance is from 1610s in English; that of first-rate is from 1620s. Arithmetical
sense (as in prime number) is from 1560s; prime meridian is from 1878. Prime time originally
(c.1500) meant spring time; broadcasting sense of peak tuning-in period is attested from 1961.


prime (n.)

earliest canonical hour (6 a.m.), Old English prim, from Medieval Latin prima the first service,
from Latin prima hora the first hour (of the Roman day). Meaning most vigorous stage first recorded
1530s; specifically springtime of human life (often meaning ages roughly 21 to 28) is from 1590s. In
classical Latin, noun uses of the adjective meant first part, beginning; leading place.


prime (v.)

to fill, charge, load (a weapon), 1510s, probably from prime (adj.). Meaning to cover with a first
coat of paint or dye is from c.1600. To prime a pump (c.1840) meant to pour water down the tube,
which saturated the sucking mechanism and made it draw up water more readily. Related: Primed;
priming.


prime minister

1640s, see prime (adj.) and minister (n.). Applied to the First Minister of State of Great Britain
since 1694.


primer (n.3)

first layer of dye or paint, 1680s, from prime (v.).


primer (n.1)

late 14c., prayer-book, also school book (senses not distinguished in Middle Ages, as reading was
taught from prayer books), from Medieval Latin primarius, from Latin primus first (see prime
(adj.)). The word also might be all or in part from prime (n.) on the same notion as a Book of
Hours. Meaning small introductory book on any topic is from 1807.


primer (n.2)

explosive cap, 1819, agent noun from prime (v.).


primeval (adj.)

also primaeval, 1650s, with -al (1) + Latin primaevus early in life, youthful, from primus first
(see prime (adj.)) + aevum an age (see eon).


primigravida

1879, from earlier use in German, from Modern Latin, from Latin primus first (see prime (adj.)) +
gravidus laden, full, swollen, pregnant with child (see gravid).


priming (n.)

first coat of paint, c.1600, verbal noun from prime (v.). Meaning gunpowder in the pan of a firearm
is from 1590s.


primipara (n.)

1842, Modern Latin, from Latin primus first (see prime (adj.)) + parus (see -parous).


primitive (adj.)

late 14c., of an original cause; of a thing from which something is derived; not secondary (a sense
now associated with primary), from Old French primitif very first, original (14c.) and directly from
Latin primitivus first or earliest of its kind, from primitus at first, from primus first (see prime
(adj.)).    Meaning of or belonging to the first age is from early 15c. Meaning having the style of
an early or ancient time is from 1680s. In Christian sense of adhering to the qualities of the early
Church it is recorded from 1680s. Of untrained artists from 1942. Related: Primitively.


primitive (n.)

c.1400, original ancestor, from Latin primitivus (see primitive (adj.)). Meaning aboriginal person
in a land visited by Europeans is from 1779, hence the sense uncivilized person.


primitivism (n.)

1861, from primitive + -ism. Related: Primitivist.


primo

1740, in music terms, from Italian primo first, chief, from Latin primus (see prime (adj.)). As
slang for excellent, first-class, perhaps an elaboration of prime. Of drugs, by 1990s, street slang.


primogenitor (n.)

an ancestor, late 15c., from Medieval Latin primogenitor, from Latin primo (adv.) first in order of
time; at first, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + genitor father, from genitus, past participle
of gignere to beget (see genus). Related: Primogenital; primogenitary. The fem. form is
primogenitrix (1875). The rights of a second son are secundogeniture.


primogeniture (n.)

right of succession of the first-born, c.1600, from French primogeniture and directly from Medieval
Latin primogenitura, from Late Latin primogenitus first-born, from Latin primo (adv.) first in order
of time, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + genitus, past participle of gignere to beget (see
genus). Earlier it meant simply fact of being first-born (1590s).


primordial (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin primordialis first of all, original, from Latin primordium a beginning,
the beginning, origin, commencement, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + stem of ordiri to begin
(see order (n.)). Related: Primordially.


primp (v.)

1801, probably an extension of prim (q.v.) in its verbal dress up sense; compare Scottish primpit
(c.1739) delicate, nice. Related: Primped; primping.


primrose (n.)

late 14c., prymrose, from Old French primerose, primerole (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
prima rosa, literally first rose, so called because it blooms early in spring (see prime (adj.)). As
the name of a pale yellow color, by 1844.    Parallel name primula (c.1100) is from Old French
primerole, from Medieval Latin primula primrose, shortened from primula veris firstling of spring,
thus properly fem. of Latin primulus, diminutive of primus; but primerole was used in Old French and
Middle English of other flowers (cowslips, field daisies). The primrose path is from Hamlet I, iii.


primum mobile (n.)

the first source of motion, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin (11c.), literally the first movable thing;
see prime (adj.) + mobile. A translation of Arabic al-muharrik al-awwal the first moving (Avicenna).


primus

Latin for first, the first (see prime (adj.)).


prince (n.)

c.1200, ruler of a principality (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French prince prince, noble lord
(12c.), from Latin princeps (genitive principis) first man, chief leader; ruler, sovereign, noun use
of adjective meaning that takes first, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + root of capere to take
(see capable). German cognate f&uuml;rst, from Old High German furist first, is apparently an
imitation of the Latin formation. Colloquial meaning admirable or generous person is from 1911,
American English. Prince Regent was the title of George, Prince of Wales (later George VI) during
the mental incapacity of George III (1811-1820).


Prince Albert

piercing that consists of a ring which goes through the urethra and out behind the glans, mid-20c.,
supposedly so-called from the modern legend that Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha (1819-1861), prince
consort of Queen Victoria, had one.    But the term seems to be not older than bodyart maven Doug
Malloy and his circle, and the stories about the prince may be fantastical inventions. Perhaps there
is some connection with Albert underworld/pawnshop slang for gold watch chain (1861), which probably
is from the common portraits of the prince in which he is shown with a conspicuous gold watch chain.
Many fashions in male dress made popular by him bore his name late 19c.


Prince Charming

1837, from French Roi Charmant, name of the hero of Comtesse d'Aulnoy's L'Oiseau Bleu (1697). In
English he was adopted into native fairy tales including Sleeping Beauty and Cinderella.    As for
me, I have always agreed with the fairy books that the moment when Prince Charming arrives is the
perfect climax. Everything that goes before in the life of a girl simply leads up to that moment,
and everything that comes after dates from it; and while the girl of the twentieth century, sallying
forth in search of adventure, may not hope to meet at the next turn a knight in shining armor, or a
sighing troubadour, she does hope, if she is normal and has the normal dreams of a girl, to find her
hero in some of the men who pass her way. [Temple Bailey, Adventures in Girlhood, Philadelphia,
1919]


princeling (n.)

1610s, from prince + -ling.


princely (adj.)

c.1500, of a prince, from prince + -ly (2). Meaning sumptuous, magnificent is from 1530s.


princess (n.)

late 14c., woman of royal or noble birth; daughter or wife of a ruler or prince; female ruler, a
native formation, or else from Old French princesse, fem. of prince (see prince). Compare Medieval
Latin principissa, Italian principessa. As a colloquial form of address to a woman or girl, it is
recorded from 1924 (as a term of address to a lover, early 15c.).


principal (adj.)

c.1300, main, principal, chief, dominant, most important; also great, large, from Old French
principal main, most important, of persons, princely, high-ranking (11c.), from Latin principalis
first in importance; original, primitive, from princeps (see prince).


principal (n.)

c.1300, ruler, governor; also main part; from principal (adj.) or from or influenced by noun uses in
Old French and Latin. From mid-14c. in the sense of money on which interest is paid; 1827 as person
in charge of a public school, though meaning head of a college or hall was in English from mid-15c.


principality (n.)

c.1300, position of a prince, from Old French principalite principal matter; power, sovereignty
(12c., Modern French principaut&eacute;), from Late Latin principalitatem (nominative
principalitas), from principalis (see principal (adj.)). Meaning region or state ruled by a prince
is attested from c.1400.


principally (adv.)

mid-14c., mostly, mainly; most importantly, from principal (adj.) + -ly (2). Late 14c. as first of
all. Meaning for the most part attested by 1832.


principia (n.)

fundamental principles, plural of Latin principium beginning, origin (see principle (n.)).
Especially as the short form of the title of Newton's book (published 1687).


principle (n.)

late 14c., origin, source, beginning; rule of conduct; axiom, basic assumption; elemental aspect of
a craft or discipline, from Anglo-French principle, Old French principe origin, cause, principle,
from Latin principium (plural principia) a beginning, commencement, origin, first part, in plural
foundation, elements, from princeps (see prince). Used absolutely for (good or moral) principle from
1650s.It is often easier to fight for principles than to live up to them. [Adlai Stevenson, speech,
New York City, Aug. 27, 1952]  Scientific sense of general law of nature is recorded from 1802. The
English -l- apparently is by analogy of participle, etc.


principled (adj.)

honorable, moral, 1690s, from principle, which was used as a verb 17c.-18c. meaning to ground in
principles.


print (n.)

c.1300, impression, mark (as by a stamp or seal), from Old French preinte impression, noun use of
fem. past participle of preindre to press, crush, altered from prembre, from Latin premere to press
(see press (v.1)). The Old French word also was borrowed into Middle Dutch (prente, Dutch prent) and
other Germanic languages.    Meaning printed lettering is from 1620s; print-hand print-like
handwriting is from 1658. Sense of picture or design from a block or plate is first attested 1660s.
Meaning piece of printed cloth is from 1756. In Middle English, stigmata were called precious
prentes of crist; to perceiven the print of sight was to feel (someone's) gaze. Out of print no
longer to be had from the publisher is from 1670s (to be in print is recorded from late 15c.). Print
journalism attested from 1962.


print (v.)

mid-14c., prenten to make an impression (as with a seal, stamp, etc.), from print (n.). Meaning to
set a mark on any surface (including by writing) is attested from late 14c. Meaning to run off on a
press is recorded from 1510s (Caxton, 1474, used enprynte in this sense). In reference to textiles,
1580s. The photography sense is recorded from 1851 (the noun in this sense is from 1853). Meaning to
write in imitation of typography is from 1801.    He always prints, I know, 'cos he learnt writin'
from the large bills in the bookin' offices. [Charles Dickens, Pickwick Papers, 1837]    The meaning
to record (someone's) fingerprints is from 1952. Related: Printed; printing.


print-out (n.)

1899, from print (v.) + out (adv.).


printable (adj.)

1820 as capable of being printed; 1838 as suitable to be published in print, from print (v.) +
-able. Related: Printability.


printer (n.)

c.1500, person who prints books, etc., agent noun from print (v.). As a mechanical device from 1859,
originally in telegraphy. In the computer sense, from 1946. Printer's bible (c.1702) so called from
mistaken substitution of printers for princes in Psalm cxix:161, which led to the
misreading:Printers have persecuted me without a cause.


printing (adj.)

present participle adjective from print (v.). Printing press is from 1580s.


prion (n.)

petrel-like bird, 1848, from Greek prion a saw, related to priein, prizein to saw, to be cut in
pieces. So called for its bill.


prior (adj.)

earlier, 1714, from Latin prior former, previous, first; figuratively superior, better; as a noun
forefather; superior rank; comparative of Old Latin pri before, from PIE *prai-, *prei-, from root
*per- (1) forward, through (see per).


prior (n.)

superior officer of a religious house or order, late Old English, from Medieval Latin prior superior
officer, noun use of Latin adjective meaning former, superior (see prior (adj.)). As short for prior
arrest, by 1990, American English.


prioress (n.)

c.1300, from Medieval Latin priorissa, from prior head of a priory of men (see prior (n.)).


prioritise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of prioritize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Prioritised;
prioritising; prioritisation.


prioritization (n.)

1973, from prioritize + -ation.


prioritize (v.)

1972, apparently coined during the U.S. presidential contest that year, from root of priority +
-ize. Related: Prioritized; prioritizing.


priority (n.)

late 14c., state of being earlier, from Old French priorite (14c.), from Medieval Latin prioritatem
(nominative prioritas) fact or condition of being prior, from Latin prior (see prior (adj.)). From
c.1400 as precedence in right or rank.


priory (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French priorie (mid-13c.), from Medieval Latin prioria monastery governed by a
prior, from Latin prior (see prior (n.)).


Priscian (n.)

Latin Priscianus, name of a celebrated Roman grammarian (c.500-530); hence to break Priscian's head
(1520s) to violate rules of grammar (Latin diminuere Prisciani caput). See Priscilla.


Priscilla

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of Priscillus, diminutive of Priscus, from priscus antique, old-
fashioned, old, ancient, primitive, venerable; related to prior (see prior (adj.)).


prism (n.)

1560s, a type of solid figure, from Late Latin prisma, from Greek prisma (Euclid), literally
something sawed, from prizein to saw (see prion). Meaning in optics is first attested 1610s.


prismatic (adj.)

1709, from Greek prismat-, stem of prisma (see prism) + -ic. Related: Prismatical (1650s).


prison (n.)

early 12c., from Old French prisoun captivity, imprisonment; prison; prisoner, captive (11c., Modern
French prison), altered (by influence of pris taken; see prize (n.2)) from earlier preson, from
Vulgar Latin *presionem, from Latin prensionem (nominative prensio), shortening of prehensionem
(nominative *prehensio) a taking, noun of action from past participle stem of prehendere to take
(see prehensile). Captivity, hence by extension a place for captives, the main modern sense.


prison (v.)

to imprison, early 14c., from prison (n.) or Old French prisoner (v.). Related: Prisoned; prisoning.


prisoner (n.)

person in prison, captive person, late 14c. (earlier a jailer, mid-13c., but this did not survive
Middle English), from Old French prisonier captive, hostage (12c., Modern French prisonnier), from
prisoun (see prison (n.)). Captives taken in war have been called prisoners since mid-14c.; phrase
prisoner of war dates from 1670s (see also POW). Prisoner's dilemma attested from 1957.


priss (n.)

1914, Southern U.S., back-formation from prissy.


prissy (adj.)

1895, probably Southern U.S. dialect, first attested in Joel Chandler Harris, perhaps an alteration
of precise (q.v.), or a merger of prim and sissy [OED]. Related: Prissily; prissiness.    []Then Mrs
Blue Hen rumpled up her feathers and got mad with herself, and went to setting. I reckon that's what
you call it. I've heard some call it 'setting' and others 'sitting.' Once, when I was courting, I
spoke of a sitting hen, but the young lady said I was too prissy for anything.    What is prissy?
asked Sweetest Susan.    Mr. Rabbit shut his eyes and scratched his ear. Then he shook his head
slowly.    It's nothing but a girl's word, remarked Mrs. Meadows by way of explanation. It means
that somebody's trying hard to show off.    I reckon that's so, said Mr. Rabbit, opening his eyes.
He appeared to be much relieved.  [Joel Chandler Harris, Mr. Rabbit at Home]


pristine (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the earliest period, primitive, ancient, from Middle French pristin or directly
from Latin pristinus former, early, original, from Old Latin pri before (see prime (adj.)). Meaning
unspoiled, untouched, pure is from 1899 (implied in a use of pristinely) but according to OED 2nd
ed. print still regarded as ignorant by many educated speakers.


prithee

1570s, altered from phrase (I) pray thee (14c.; see pray).


prius (n.)

that which takes precedence, noun use of Latin neuter of prior former, earlier (see prior (adj.)).
The hybrid car (with a capital P- ) debuted in 1997 in Japan, 2001 in U.S. and Europe. Name
supposedly chosen because the car is a predecessor of new types. Proper plural is said to be Priora,
but that is for the adjective.


privacy (n.)

1590s, a private matter, a secret; c.1600 as seclusion, from private (adj.) + -cy. Meaning state of
freedom from intrusion is from 1814. Earlier was privatie (late 14c. as secret, mystery; c.1400 as a
secret, secret deed; solitude, privacy), from Old French privaut&#233;.


private (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining or belonging to oneself, not shared, individual; not open to the public; of a
religious rule, not shared by Christians generally, distinctive; from Latin privatus set apart,
belonging to oneself (not to the state), peculiar, personal, used in contrast to publicus, communis;
past participle of privare to separate, deprive, from privus one's own, individual, from PIE *prei-
wo-, from PIE *prai-, *prei-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Old English in this
sense had syndrig. Private grew popular 17c. as an alternative to common (adj.), which had overtones
of condescention. Of persons, not holding public office, recorded from early 15c. In private privily
is from 1580s. Related: Privately. Private school is from 1650s. Private parts the pudenda is from
1785. Private enterprise first recorded 1797; private property by 1680s; private sector is from
1948. Private eye private detective is recorded from 1938, American English.


private (n.)

1590s, private citizen, short for private person individual not involved in government (early 15c.),
or from Latin privatus man in private life, noun use of the adjective; 1781 in the military sense,
short for Private soldier one below the rank of a non-commissioned officer (1570s), from private
(adj.).


privateer (n.)

1660s, private man of war, from private (adj.), probably on model of volunteer, buccaneer.


privation (n.)

mid-14c., action of depriving, from Old French privacion and directly from Latin privationem
(nominative privatio) a taking away, noun of action from past participle stem of privare deprive
(see private (adj.)). Meaning want of life's comforts or of some necessity is attested from 1790.


privatisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of privatization. For spelling, see -ize.


privative (adj.)

1580s, expressing negation (as do the prefixes un-, a- (2), etc.), from Latin privativus denoting
privation, negative, from privatus, past participle of privare (see private).


privatization (n.)

1959, from privatize + -ation.


privatize (v.)

1968, from private (adj.) + -ize. Related: Privatized; privatizing.


privet (n.)

type of evergreen shrub, 1540s, of unknown origin. Early forms primet, primprint perhaps suggest
some connection with prime [Klein].


privilege (n.)

mid-12c. grant, commission (recorded earlier in Old English, but as a Latin word), from Old French
privilege right, priority, privilege (12c.) and directly from Latin privilegium law applying to one
person, bill of law in favor of or against an individual, later privilege, from privus individual
(see private (adj.)) + lex (genitive legis) law (see legal (adj.)). Meaning advantage granted is
from mid-14c. in English.


privilege (v.)

early 14c., privilegen, to invest with a privilege, from privilege (n.) and from Old French
privilegier (13c.), from Medieval Latin privilegare, from Latin privilegium. Related: Privileged;
priviledging.


privileged (adj.)

late 14c. of things; mid-15c. of persons, past participle adjective from privilege (v.).


privity (n.)

early 13c., from Old French privit&eacute;, privet&eacute; privacy; a secret, private matter
(c.1200), from prive private, from Latin privus (see private (adj.)).


privy (adj.)

private, early 13c., from Old French priv&eacute; friendly, intimate; a private place, from Latin
privatus private, personal (see private (adj.)). Meaning participating in (a secret) (usually with
to) is attested from late 14c. Related: Privily. Privy Council is from c.1300 in a general sense;
specifically of the British government, first attested late 14c., as consaile priue. Privy member
organ of sex is from late 13c.


privy (n.)

toilet, c.1200, from Old French priv&eacute;, privee latrine, literally private place, from noun use
of adjective priv&eacute; (see privy (adj.)).


prix fixe

meal served at a fixed price, 1883, French, literally fixed price (see price (n.) and fix (v.)).


prize (n.1)

reward, prise (c.1300 in this sense), from Old French pris price, value, worth; reward (see price
(n.)). As an adjective, worthy of a prize, from 1803. The spelling with -z- is from late 16c. Prize-
fighter is from 1703; prize-fight from 1730 (prize-fighter from 1785).


prize (n.2)

something taken by force, mid-13c., prise a taking, holding, from Old French prise a taking,
seizing, holding, noun use of fem. past participle of prendre to take, seize, from Latin prendere,
contraction of prehendere lay hold of, grasp, seize, catch (see prehensile). Especially of ships
captured at sea (1510s). The spelling with -z- is from late 16c.


prize (v.)

to estimate, 1580s, alteration of Middle English prisen to prize, value (late 14c.), from stem of
Old French preisier to praise (see praise (v.)). Related: Prized; prizing.


prized (adj.)

highly esteemed, 1530s, adjective from prize (n.1.), or from past participle of Middle English
prisen to prize, value (late 14c.), from stem of Old French preisier to praise (see praise (v.)).


pro (n.1)

1866, shortening of professional (n.). The adjective is first recorded 1915 (in golfing's pro shop).


pro (n.2)

a consideration or argument in favor, c.1400, from Latin pro (see pro-). Pro and con is attested
from c.1400, short for pro and contra for and against (Latin pro et contra).


pro bono

short for Medieval Latin pro bono publico for the public good; see pro- + bene-.


pro forma

also proforma, Latin, literally for form's sake, by way of formality; see pro- + form (n.).


pro rata

1570s, from Latin pro rata (parte) according to the calculated (share), from pro for (see pro-) +
rata, ablative singular of ratus, past participle of reri to count, reckon (see rate (n.)).


pro tanto

Latin, literally for so much; to such an extent; see pro- + tantamount.


pro tem

1828, short for pro tempore.


pro tempore

Latin, literally for the time (being). Abbreviated form pro tem is attested by 1828.


pro-

word-forming element meaning forward, forth, toward the front (as in proclaim, proceed); beforehand,
in advance (prohibit, provide); taking care of (procure); in place of, on behalf of (proconsul,
pronoun); from Latin pro on behalf of, in place of, before, for, in exchange for, just as, which
also was used as a prefix.    Also in some cases from cognate Greek pro before, in front of, sooner,
which also was used in Greek as a prefix (as in problem). Both the Latin and Greek words are from
PIE *pro- (cognates: Sanskrit pra- before, forward, forth; Gothic faura before, Old English fore
before, for, on account of, fram forward, from; Old Irish roar enough), extended form of root *per-
(1) forward, through (see per).    The common modern sense in favor of, favoring (pro-independence,
pro-fluoridation, pro-Soviet, etc.) was not in classical Latin and is attested in English from early
19c.


pro-am (adj.)

including professional and amateur players, 1949.


pro-choice (adj.)

favoring a right to abortion, 1975, from pro- + choice.


pro-life (adj.)

opposed to abortion, first attested 1976, from pro- + life. Hostile alternative anti-choice attested
1978 in Ms. magazine (see pro-choice).    What hypocrisy to call such anti-humanitarian people 'pro-
life.' Call them what they are -- antichoice. [Ms., Oct. 8, 1978]


pro-slavery (adj.)

1825, from pro- + slavery.


proactive (adj.)

also pro-active, of persons or policies, as an opposition to reactive, 1921, from pro- + active.
From 1933, in psychology (learning theory). Related: Proactively; proactiveness; proactivity.


probabilistic (adj.)

1855, in a theological sense, from probabilist (1650s, from French probabiliste, 17c., from Latin
probabilis, see probable) + -ic. Meaning pertaining to probability is from 1951. Related:
Probabilism.


probability (n.)

mid-15c., quality of being probable, from Old French probabilite (14c.) and directly from Latin
probabilitatem (nominative probabilitas) credibility, probability, from probabilis (see probable).
Meaning something likely to be true is from 1570s; mathematical sense is from 1718.


probable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French probable provable, demonstrable (14c.), from Latin probabilis worthy of
approval, pleasing, agreeable, acceptable; provable, that may be assumed to be believed, credible,
from probare to try, to test (see prove). Probable cause as a legal term is attested from 1670s.


probably (adv.)

mid-15c., plausibly, from probable + -ly (2). As a general purpose qualifier, 1610s.


proband (n.)

1929, from Latin probandus, gerundive of probare to make good, esteem good; make credible, show,
prove, demonstrate (see prove).


probate (n.)

official proving of a will, c.1400, from Latin probatum a thing proved, neuter of probatus tried,
tested, proved, past participle of probare to try, test, prove (see prove).


probate (v.)

1560s, to prove, from probate (n.) or from Latin probatus, past participle of probare. Specific
sense of prove the genuineness of a will is from 1792. Related: Probated; probating.


probation (n.)

early 15c., trial, experiment, test, from Old French probacion proof, evidence (14c., Modern French
probation) and directly from Latin probationem (nominative probatio) approval, assent; a proving,
trial, inspection, examination, noun of action from past participle stem of probare to test (see
prove). Meaning testing of a person's conduct (especially as a trial period for membership) is from
early 15c.; theological sense first recorded 1520s; criminal justice sense is recorded by 1866. As a
verb from 1640s. Related: Probationer; probationary.


probative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin probativus belonging to proof, from probat-, past participle stem of probare
(see prove).


probe (n.)

early 15c., instrument for exploring wounds, etc., also an examination, from Medieval Latin proba
examination, in Late Latin a test, proof, from Latin probare (see prove). Meaning act of probing is
1890, from the verb; figurative sense of penetrating investigation is from 1903. Meaning small,
unmanned exploratory craft is attested from 1953.


probe (v.)

1640s, originally figurative; to search thoroughly, interrogate; from probe (n.) and partly from
Latin probare. Literal sense of to examine with a probe is from 1680s. Related: Probed; probing;
probingly.


probity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French probit&eacute;, from Latin probitatem (nominative probitas)
uprightness, honesty, from probus worthy, good (see prove).


problem (n.)

late 14c., a difficult question proposed for solution, from Old French probl&egrave;me (14c.) and
directly from Latin problema, from Greek problema a task, that which is proposed, a question; also
anything projecting, headland, promontory; fence, barrier; also a problem in geometry, literally
thing put forward, from proballein propose, from pro forward (see pro-) + ballein to throw (see
ballistics).    Meaning a difficulty is mid-15c. Mathematical sense is from 1560s in English.
Problem child first recorded 1920. Phrase _______ problem in reference to a persistent and seemingly
insoluble difficulty is attested at least from 1882, in Jewish problem. Response no problem that is
acceptable; that can be done without difficulty is recorded from 1968.


problematic (adj.)

c.1600, doubtful, questionable, from French problematique (15c.), from Late Latin problematicus,
from Greek problematikos pertaining to a problem, from problematos, genitive of problema (see
problem). Specific sense in logic, differentiating what is possible from what is necessarily true,
is from 1610s. Related: Problematical (1560s); problematically.


proboscis (n.)

c.1600, elephant's trunk, from Latin proboscis (Pliny), from Greek proboskis elephant's trunk,
literally means for taking food, from pro forward (see pro-) + boskein to nourish, feed, from
boskesthai graze, be fed, from stem *bot- (source of botane grass, fodder; see botanic).


procaine (n.)

1918, from pro- + cocaine.


procedural (adj.)

1876, from procedure + -al (1). Related: Procedurally.


procedure (n.)

1610s, fact or manner of proceeding, from French proc&eacute;dure manner of proceeding (c.1200),
from Old French proceder to proceed (see proceed). Meaning method of conducting business in
Parliament is from 1839.


proceed (v.)

late 14c., to go on, also to emanate from, result from, from Old French proceder (13c., Modern
French proc&#233;der) and directly from Latin procedere (past participle processus) go before, go
forward, advance, make progress; come forward, from pro- forward (see pro-) + cedere to go (see
cede). Related: Proceeded; proceeding.


proceeding (n.)

1510s, action of going forward, verbal noun from proceed (v.). From 1550s as what is done, conduct.
Proceedings records of the doings of a society is attested by 1824.


proceedings (n.)

records of the doings of a society, by 1824; see proceeding.


proceeds (n.)

results, profits, 1660s, from proceed (v.) on the notion of that which proceeds from some event or
activity.


procerity (n.)

tallness, 1540s, from Latin proceritas, from procerus high, tall, from pro- (see pro-) + -cerus,
from stem of crescere to grow (see crescent).


process (v.1)

1530s, begin legal action against, from Middle French processer to prosecute, from proces (see
process (n.)). Meaning prepare by special process is from 1881, from the noun in English. Of
persons, to register and examine, by 1935. Related: Processed; processing.


process (n.)

early 14c., fact of being carried on (as in in process), from Old French proces a journey;
continuation, development; legal trial (13c.) and directly from Latin processus a going forward,
advance, progress, from past participle stem of procedere go forward (see proceed).    Meaning
course or method of action is from mid-14c.; sense of continuous series of actions meant to
accomplish some result (the main modern sense) is from 1620s. Legal sense of course of action of a
suit at law is attested from early 14c.


process (v.2)

to go in procession, 1814, A colloquial or humorous back-formation from procession [OED]. Accent on
second syllable.


procession (n.)

late Old English, act of marching or proceeding, from Old French procession procession (religious or
secular), 11c., and directly from Late Latin processionem (nominative processio) religious
procession, in classical Latin a marching onward, a going forward, advance, noun of action from past
participle stem of procedere (see proceed).


processional (n.)

book of hymns for use in processions, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin processionale, from noun use of
neuter of processionalis pertaining to a procession, from Late Latin processio (see procession).


processional (adj.)

pertaining to a procession or processions, 1610s, from procession (n.) + -al (1).


processor (n.)

1909, agent noun in Latin form from process (v.). Data processor is from 1957; word processor is
from 1973; food processor in the kitchen appliance sense also is from 1973.


proclaim (v.)

late 14c., proclamen, from Latin proclamare cry or call out, from pro- forth (see pro-) + clamare to
cry out (see claim (v.)). Spelling altered by influence of claim. Related: Proclaimed; proclaiming;
proclaimer.


proclamation (n.)

late 14c., act of making public, also that which is proclaimed; from Old French proclamacion (14c.,
Modern French proclamation) and directly from Latin proclamationem (nominative proclamatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of proclamare (see proclaim).


proclitic (adj.)

1846, from Medieval Latin procliticus, formed on analogy of encliticus from Greek proklinein to lean
forward, from pro- forward (see pro-) + klinein to lean (see lean (v.)).


proclivity (n.)

1590s, from Middle French proclivit&#233; or directly from Latin proclivitatem (nominative
proclivitas) a tendency, predisposition, propensity, from proclivis prone to, literally sloping,
inclined, from pro- forward (see pro-) + clivus a slope, from PIE *klei-wo-, suffixed form of *klei
to lean (see lean (v.)).


proconsul (n.)

late 14c., governor or military commander of an ancient Roman province, from Latin proconsul
governor of a province; military commander, from phrase pro consule (acting) in place of a consul,
from pro- in place of (see pro-) + ablative of consul. In modern use usually rhetorical, but it was
a title of certain commissioners in the French Revolution, was used in English for deputy consul,
and was used again of U.S. administrators in Iraq during the occupation. Related: Proconsular.


procrastinate (v.)

1580s, a back formation from procrastination or else from Latin procrastinatus, past participle of
procrastinare to put off till tomorrow; defer, delay (see procrastination). Related: Procrastinated;
procrastinating. Earlier verb was procrastine (1540s), from French.


procrastination (n.)

1540s, from Middle French procrastination and directly from Latin procrastinationem (nominative
procrastinatio) a putting off from day to day, noun of action from past participle stem of
procrastinare put off till tomorrow, defer, delay, from pro- forward (see pro-) + crastinus
belonging to tomorrow, from cras tomorrow, of unknown origin.


procrastinator (n.)

c.1600, agent noun in Latin form from procrastinate (v.).


procreant (adj.)

fruitful, 1580s, from Latin procreantem (nominative procreans), present participle of procreare to
beget (see procreation). As a noun from c.1600.


procreate (v.)

1530s, a back formation from procreation or else from Latin procreatus, past participle of procreare
to beget, bring forth (see procreation). Related: Procreated; procreating.


procreation (n.)

late 14c., process of begetting offspring, from Old French procreacion (14c., Modern French
pr&#243;creation) and directly from Latin procreationem (nominative procreatio) a begetting,
generation, noun of action from past participle stem of procreare bring forth (offspring), beget,
generate, produce, from pro- forth (see pro-) + creare create (see create).


Procrustean (adj.)

1846 in figurative sense, violently making conformable to standard, from Procrustes, mythical robber
of Attica who seized travelers, tied them to his bed, and either stretched their limbs or lopped of
their legs to make them fit it. The name is Greek Prokroustes one who stretches, from prokrouein to
beat out, stretch out, from pro- before (see pro-) + krouein to strike.


proctalgia (n.)

pain in the ass, 1811, from medical Latin proct-, Latinized form of Greek comb. form of proktos anus
(see proctology) + -algia.


proctology (n.)

1896, from Greek proktos anus, from PIE *prokto- + -logy study of. Related: Proctologist (1897).


proctor (n.)

late 14c., contraction of procurator (c.1300) steward or manager of a household; also a provider
(see procurator). From late 14c. as one who acts or speaks for another; spokesman, advocate; early
15c. as business manager or financial administrator of a church, college, holy order, etc.


proctor (v.)

1670s, from proctor (n.). Related: Proctored; proctoring.


procumbent (adj.)

leaning forward, 1660s, from Latin procumbentem (nominative procumbens), present participle of
procumbere to fall forward, fall prostrate, from pro forward (see pro-) + -cumbere to lie down (see
succumb). Related: Procumbently.


procurable (adj.)

mid-15c., from procure + -able. Related: Procurability.


procurator (n.)

(c.1300) steward or manager of a household; also a provider (late 13c. as a surname), from Old
French procuratour attorney, agent, proxy, spokesman (13c., Modern French procurateur) or directly
from Latin procurator  manager, overseer, agent, deputy, agent noun from past participle stem of
procurare (see procure). Related: Procuracy; procuration; procuratory.


procure (v.)

c.1300, bring about, cause, effect, from Old French procurer care for, be occupied with; bring
about, cause; acquire, provide (13c.) and directly from Late Latin procurare manage, take care of;
from pro- in behalf of (see pro-) + curare care for (see cure (v.)). Main modern sense obtain;
recruit (late 14c.) is via take pains to get (mid-14c.). Meaning to obtain (women) for sexual
gratification is attested from c.1600. Related: Procured; procuring.


procurement (n.)

c.1300, use of improper influence, from Old French procurement management, stewardship (13c.), from
procurer (see procure). Meaning process of bringing something about (by the action of another) is
from c.1400. Military use by 1949, American English.


procurer (n.)

late 14c., advocate, spokesman, from Anglo-French procurour, Old French procureur (13c., Modern
French procureur), from Latin procuratorem (see procurator). Meaning contriver is from mid-15c.
Specifically of one who supplies women to gratify the lusts of another from 1630s. Fem. form
procuress is shortened from Old French procureresse.


Procyon (n.)

bright star in constellation Canis Minoris, 1650s, from Latin, from Greek prokyon, from pro before
(see pro-) + kyon dog (see canine (n.)); so called from its rising just before the Dog Star, Sirius.
By Roman astronomers, sometimes Latinized as Antecanis.


prod (v.)

1530s, to poke with a stick, of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart] a variant of brod, from Middle
English brodden to goad, from Old Norse broddr shaft, spike (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED].
Figurative sense is recorded from 1871. Related: Prodded; prodding.


prod (n.)

1787, pointed instrument used in prodding; 1802, act of prodding; from prod (v.).


prodigal (adj.)

mid-15c., a back-formation from prodigality, or else from Middle French prodigal and directly from
Late Latin prodigalis, from Latin prodigus wasteful, from prodigere drive away, waste, from pro-
forth (see pro-) + agere to drive (see act (v.)). First reference is to prodigial son, from Vulgate
Latin filius prodigus (Luke xv:11-32). As a noun, prodigal person, 1590s, from the adjective (the
Latin adjective also was used as a noun).


prodigality (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French prodigalite (13c., Modern French prodigalit&eacute;) and directly from
Medieval Latin prodigalitatem (nominative prodigalitas) wastefulness, from Latin prodigialis, from
prodigus wasteful (see prodigal).


prodigious (adj.)

1550s, ominous, from Middle French prodigieux and directly from Latin prodigiosus strange,
wonderful, marvelous, unnatural, from prodigium (see prodigy). Meaning vast, enormous is from
c.1600. Related: Prodigiously; prodigiosity.


prodigy (n.)

late 15c., sign, portent, something extraordinary from which omens are drawn, from Latin prodigium
prophetic sign, omen, portent, prodigy, from pro- forth (see pro-) + -igium, a suffix or word of
unknown origin, perhaps from *agi-, root of aio I say (see adage). Meaning child with exceptional
abilities first recorded 1650s.


prodromal (adj.)

1717, from Modern Latin prodromus a running forward (see prodrome) + -al (1).


prodrome (n.)

1640s, from French prodrome (16c.), from Modern Latin prodromus, from Greek prodromos a running
forward, a sally, sudden attack, from pro- forward (see pro-) + dromos a running (see dromedary).


produce (v.)

early 15c., develop, proceed, extend, from Latin producere lead or bring forth, draw out,
figuratively to promote, empower; stretch out, extend, from pro- forth (see pro-) + ducere to bring,
lead (see duke). Sense of bring into being is first recorded 1510s; that of put (a play) on stage is
from 1580s. Related: Produced; producing.


produce (n.)

thing or things produced, 1690s, from produce (v.), and originally accented like it. Specific sense
of agricultural productions (as distinguished from manufactured goods) is from 1745.


producer (n.)

1510s, one who produces; agent noun from produce (v.). Of entertainments, from 1891; in political
economy, opposed to consumer, from 1784 (Adam Smith).


product (n.)

early 15c., mathematical quantity obtained by multiplication, from Medieval Latin productum, in
classical Latin something produced, noun use of neuter past participle of producere bring forth (see
produce (v.)). General sense of anything produced is attested in English from 1570s.


production (n.)

c.1400, a coming into being, from Old French production production, exhibition (13c.) and directly
from Medieval Latin productionem (nominative productio), from past participle stem of Latin
producere bring forth (see produce (v.)). Meaning that which is produced is mid-15c. Colloquial
sense of fuss, commotion is from 1941, transferred from meaning theatrical performance (1894).


productive (adj.)

1610s, from French productif (16c.) and directly from Medieval Latin productivus fit for production,
from Latin product-, past participle stem of producere (see produce (v.)). Related: Productively;
productiveness.


productivity (n.)

1809, quality of being productive, from productive + -ity. An earlier word for this was
productiveness (1727). Economic sense of rate of output per unit is from 1899.


proem (n.)

late 14c., proheme brief introduction, prelude, from Old French proheme (14c., Modern French
pro&#232;me), from Latin prooemium, from Greek prooimion prelude to anything, especially music and
poetry, from pro- before (see pro-) + oimos way or oime song.


prof (n.)

colloquial shortening of professor, attested by 1838.


profanation (n.)

1550s, from Old French prophanation (15c., Modern French profanation) or directly from Late Latin
profanationem (nominative profanatio), noun of action from past participle stem of profanare (see
profane (adj.)).


profane (v.)

late 14c., from Old French profaner, prophaner (13c.) and directly from Latin profanare to
desecrate, render unholy, violate, from profanus unholy, not consecrated (see profane (adj.)).
Related: Profaned; profaning.


profane (adj.)

mid-15c., un-ecclesiastical, secular, from Old French profane (12c.) and directly from Latin
profanus unholy, not consecrated, according to Barnhart from pro fano not admitted into the temple
(with the initiates), literally out in front of the temple, from pro- before (see pro-) + fano,
ablative of fanum temple (see feast (n.)). Sense of unholy, polluted is recorded from c.1500.
Related: Profanely.


profanity (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin profanitas, from Latin profanus (see profane (adj.)). Extended sense of foul
language is from Old Testament commandment against profaning the name of the Lord.


profer (v.)

c.1300, to utter, express, from Old French proferer (13c.) utter, present verbally, pronounce, from
Latin proferre to bring forth, produce, figuratively make known, publish, quote, utter. Sense
confused with proffer. Related: Profered; profering.


profess (v.)

early 14c., to take a vow (in a religious order), a back-formation from profession or else from Old
French profes, from Medieval Latin professus avowed, literally having declared publicly, past
participle of Latin profiteri declare openly, testify voluntarily, acknowledge, make public
statement of, from pro- forth (see pro-) + fateri (past participle fassus) acknowledge, confess,
akin to fari speak (see fame (n.)). Meaning declare openly first recorded 1520s, a direct borrowing
of the sense from Latin [Barnhart]. Related: Professed; professing.


professed (adj.)

openly declared, 1560s, past participle adjective from profess. Earlier in a more specific sense of
having taken vows of a religious order (late 14c.). Related: Professedly.


profession (n.)

c.1200, vows taken upon entering a religious order, from Old French profession (12c.), from Latin
professionem (nominative professio) public declaration, from past participle stem of profiteri
declare openly (see profess). Meaning any solemn declaration is from mid-14c. Meaning occupation one
professes to be skilled in is from early 15c.; meaning body of persons engaged in some occupation is
from 1610; as a euphemism for prostitution (compare oldest profession) it is recorded from 1888.


professional (adj.)

early 15c., of religious orders; 1747 of careers (especially of the skilled or learned trades from
c.1793); see profession. In sports, opposed to amateur, from 1846. Related: Professionally.


professional (n.)

one who does it for a living, 1798, from professional (adj.).


professionalism (n.)

1846, from professional (adj.) + -ism.


professionalize (v.)

1833, from professional (adj.) + -ize. Related: Professionalized; professionalizing.


professor (n.)

late 14c., one who teaches a branch of knowledge, from Old French professeur (14c.) and directly
from Latin professor person who professes to be an expert in some art or science; teacher of highest
rank, agent noun from profiteri lay claim to, declare openly (see profess). As a title prefixed to a
name, it dates from 1706. Short form prof is recorded from 1838.   <b>Professor</b>. One professing
religion. This canting use of the word comes down from the Elizabethan period, but is obsolete in
England. [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]


professorial (adj.)

1713, from professor + -ial.


professorship (n.)

1640s, from professor + -ship.


proffer (v.)

to offer, late 13c., from Anglo-French profrier (mid-13c.), Old French poroffrir (11c.), from por-
forth (from Latin pro-; see pro-) + offrir to offer, from Latin offerre (see offer (v.)). Related:
Proffered; proffering. As a noun from late 14c.


proficiency (n.)

1540s, probably from -cy + Latin proficientem (nominative proficiens), present participle of
proficere accomplish, make progress; be useful, do good; have success, profit, from pro- forward
(see pro-) + root of facere to make (see factitious).


proficient (adj.)

1580s, back-formation from proficiency or else from Old French proficient (15c.), from Latin
proficientem (nominative proficiens), present participle of proficere to make progress, go forward,
effect, accomplish, be useful (see proficiency). Related: Proficiently.


profile (n.)

1650s, a drawing of the outline of anything, from older Italian profilo a drawing in outline, from
profilare to draw in outline, from pro- forth (see pro-) + filare draw out, spin, from Late Latin
filare to spin, draw out a line, from filum thread (see file (v.)). Meaning a side view is from
1660s. Meaning biographical sketch, character study is from 1734.


profile (v.)

1715, to represent in profile, from profile (n.) or Italian profilare. Meaning to summarize a person
in writing is from 1948. Related: Profiled; profiling.


profiling (n.)

by 1852 as a term in field engineering, verbal noun from profile (v.). The racial/ethnic
stereotyping sense is attested from c.1991, American English.


profit (v.)

early 14c., to advance, benefit, gain, from profit (n.) and from Old French prufiter, porfiter to
benefit, from prufit (see profit (n.)). Related: Profited; profiting.


profit (n.)

mid-13c., income; c.1300, benefit, advantage;from Old French prufit, porfit profit, gain (mid-12c.),
from Latin profectus profit, advance, increase, success, progress, noun use of past participle of
proficere (see proficiency). As the opposite of loss, it replaced Old English gewinn. Profit margin
attested from 1853.


profitability (n.)

mid-14c., from profitable + -ity.


profitable (adj.)

c.1300, yielding benefit, useful, from profit (v.) + -able or from Old French profitable,
porfitable. Specific sense of money-making is attested from 1758. Related: Profitably.


profiteer (v.)

1797, but dormant in English until it was revived in World War I, from profit + -eer. From 1912 as a
noun. Related: Profiteering (1814).    Or is it simply hysteria which produces what is to-day termed
the profiteer? It is probable that the modern profiteer is the same person whom we formerly called
the grafter, the extortioner, the robber, the gouger. [Legal Aid Review, April 1920]


profitless (adj.)

1590s, from profit (n.) + -less.


profligacy (n.)

1670s, from profligate + -cy.


profligate (adj.)

1520s, overthrown, routed (now obsolete in this sense), from Latin profligatus destroyed, ruined,
corrupt, abandoned, dissolute, past participle of profligare to cast down, defeat, ruin, from pro-
down, forth (see pro-) + fligere to strike (see afflict). Main modern meaning recklessly extravagant
is 1779, via notion of ruined by vice (1640s, implied in a use of profligation). Related:
Profligately. As a noun from 1709.


profound (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by intellectual depth, from Old French profund (12c., Modern French profond),
from Latin profundus deep, bottomless, vast, also obscure; profound; immoderate, from pro- forth
(see pro-) + fundus bottom (see fund (n.)). The literal and figurative senses both were in Latin,
but English, having already deep, employed this word primarily in its figurative sense. Related:
Profoundly.


profundity (n.)

early 15c., bottom of the sea, from Old French profundite (Modern French profondit&eacute;) and
directly from Late Latin profunditatem (nominative profunditas) depth, intensity, immensity, from
profundus deep, vast (see profound). Meaning depth of intellect in English is from c.1500.


profuse (adj.)

early 15c., lavish, extravagant, from Latin profusus spread out, lavish, extravagant, literally
poured forth, noun use of past participle of profundere pour forth, from pro- forth (see pro-) +
fundere to pour (see found (v.2)). Meaning bountiful is from c.1600. Related: Profusely;
profuseness.


profusion (n.)

1540s, from Middle French profusion (16c.) and directly from Late Latin profusionem (nominative
profusio) a pouring out, noun of action from past participle stem of profundere (see profuse).


profusive (adj.)

1630s, from profuse + -ive. Related: Profusively; profusiveness.


prog

1958, colloquial shortening of progressive (q.v.). Earlier it was British student slang for proctor
(1890) and earlier still a cant word for food, provisions (1650s), perhaps from verb prog to poke
about (1610s), of unknown origin, perhaps related to prod (v.). Related: Progged; progging.


progenitor (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French progenitour (mid-14c.), Old French progeniteur (14c.) and directly from
Latin progenitor ancestor, the founder of a family, agent noun from progenitus, past participle of
progignere (see progeny). Related: Progenitive; progenital; progenitrix (c.1600).


progeny (n.)

early 14c., from Old French progenie (13c.) and directly from Latin progenies descendants,
offspring, lineage, race, family, from stem of progignere beget, from pro- forth (see pro-) +
gignere to produce, beget (see genus).


progeria (n.)

1902, Modern Latin, from Greek progeros prematurely old; from pro- (see pro-) + geras old man (see
geriatric).


progesterone (n.)

female steroid sex hormone which prepares the uterus for child-bearing, 1935, from German
Progesteron, from progestin (from which substance it was obtained), which had been coined 1930 from
pro- (see pro-) + Latin gestare, literally to carry about (see gestation), on notion of substance
which favors gestation. Also see -one.


prognathous (adj.)

1836, from pro- + Greek gnathos jaw (see gnathic) + -ous. Related: Prognathic.


prognosis (n.)

1650s, forecast of the probable course of a disease, from Late Latin prognosis, from Greek prognosis
foreknowledge, also, in medicine, predicted course of a disease, from stem of progignoskein come to
know beforehand, from pro- before (see pro-) + gignoskein come to know (see gnostic). General (non-
medical) use in English from 1706. A back-formed verb prognose is attested from 1837. Related:
Prognosed; prognosing.


prognostic (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin prognosticus, from Greek prognostikos foreknowing, from progignoskein
(see prognosis). Related: Prognostical (1580s).


prognosticate (v.)

early 15c., a back-formation from prognostication and also from Medieval Latin prognosticatus, past
participle of prognosticare (see prognostication). Related: Prognosticated; prognosticating.


prognostication (n.)

late 14c., from Old French pronosticacion (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin *prognosticationem
(nominative prognosticatio), noun of action from past participle stem of prognosticare foretell,
from Latin prognostica sign to forecast weather, from neuter plural of Greek prognostikos
foreknowing, from progignoskein (see prognosis).


prognosticator (n.)

1550s, agent noun in Latin form from prognosticate.


program (n.)

1630s, public notice, from Late Latin programma proclamation, edict, from Greek programma a written
public notice, from stem of prographein to write publicly, from pro- forth (see pro-) + graphein to
write (see -graphy).    General sense of a definite plan or scheme is recorded from 1837. Meaning
list of pieces at a concert, playbill first recorded 1805 and retains the original sense. That of
objects or events suggested by music is from 1854. Sense of broadcasting presentation is from 1923.
Computer sense (noun and verb) is from 1945. Spelling programme, established in Britain, is from
French in modern use and began to be used early 19c., originally especially in the playbill sense.
Program music attested from 1877.


program (v.)

1889, write program notes; 1896, arrange according to program, from program (n.). Of computers from
1945. From 1963 in the figurative sense of to train to behave in a predetermined way. Related:
Programmed; programming.


programmable (adj.)

1959, from program (v.) + -able.


programmatic (adj.)

1847, from Greek programma (genitive programmatos; see program (n.)) + -ic. Related:
Programmatically.


programme

see program.


programmer (n.)

1890, event planner, agent noun from program (v.). Meaning person who programs computers is attested
from 1948.


progress (v.)

1590s in the literal sense; c.1600 in the figurative sense, from progress (n.). OED says the verb
was obsolete in English 18c. but was reformed or retained in America and subsequently long regarded
in Britain as an Americanism. Related: Progressed; progressing.


progress (n.)

late 14c., a going on, action of walking forward, from Old French progres (Modern French
progr&#232;s), from Latin progressus a going forward, from past participle of progredi (see
progression).    In early use in English especially a state journey by royalty. Figurative sense of
growth, development, advancement to higher stages is from c.1600. To be in progress underway is
attested by 1849. Progress report attested by 1865.


progression (n.)

late 14c., action of moving from one condition to another, from Old French progression and directly
from Latin progressionem (nominative progressio) a going forward, advancement, growth, increase,
noun of action from past participle stem of progredi go forward, from pro- forward (see pro-) +
gradi to step, walk, from gradus step (see grade (n.)).


progressive (adj.)

c.1600, characterized by advancement (in action, character, etc.), from progress (n.) + -ive, or
else from French progressif, from past participle stem of Latin progredi. Of taxation, from 1889; of
jazz, from 1947. Meaning characterized by striving for change and innovation, avant-garde, liberal
is from 1908.    In the socio-political sense favoring reform; radically liberal, it emerged in
various British contexts from the 1880s; in the U.S. it was active as a movement in the 1890s and a
generation thereafter, the name being taken again from time to time, most recently by some more
liberal Democrats and other social activists, by c.2000. The noun in the sense one who favors social
and political change in the name of progress is first attested 1865 (originally in Christianity).
Earlier in a like sense were progressionist (1849, adjective; 1884, noun), progressist (1848).
Related: Progressively; progressiveness.


progressivism (n.)

1855 (from 1892 in the political sense), from progressive + -ism.


prohibit (v.)

early 15c., from Latin prohibitus, past participle of prohibere to hold back, restrain (see
prohibition). Related: Prohibited; prohibiting.


prohibition (n.)

late 14c., act of prohibiting, a forbidding by authority, from Anglo-French and Old French
prohibition (early 13c.), from Latin prohibitionem (nominative prohibitio) a hindering, forbidding;
legal prohibition, noun of action from past participle stem of prohibere hold back, restrain,
hinder, prevent, from pro- away, forth (see pro-) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Meaning forced
alcohol abstinence is 1851, American English; in effect nationwide in U.S. as law 1920-1933 under
the Volstead Act.    People whose youth did not coincide with the twenties never had our reverence
for strong drink. Older men knew liquor before it became the symbol of a sacred cause. Kids who
began drinking after 1933 take it as a matter of course. ... Drinking, we proved to ourselves our
freedom as individuals and flouted Congress. We conformed to a popular type of dissent -- dissent
from a minority. It was the only period during which a fellow could be smug and slopped
concurrently. [A.J. Liebling, Between Meals, 1959]    Related: Prohibitionist.


prohibitive (adj.)

c.1600, having the quality of prohibiting, from prohibit + -ive, or else from French prohibitif
(16c.), from Late Latin prohibit-, past participle stem of prohibere. Of prices, rates, etc., so
high as to prevent use, it is from 1886. Related: Prohibitively.


project (n.)

c.1400, a plan, draft, scheme, from Latin proiectum something thrown forth, noun use of neuter of
proiectus, past participle of proicere stretch out, throw forth, from pro- forward (see pro-) +
combining form of iacere (past participle iactus) to throw (see jet (v.)).    Meaning scheme,
proposal, mental plan is from c.1600. Meaning group of low-rent apartment buildings first recorded
1935, American English, short for housing project (1932). Related: Projects. Project manager
attested from 1913.


project (v.)

late 15c., to plan, from Latin proiectus, past participle of proicere (see project (n.)). Sense of
to stick out is from 1718. Meaning to cast an image on a screen is recorded from 1865.
Psychoanalytical sense, attribute to another (unconsciously) is from 1895 (implied in a use of
projective). Meaning convey to others by one's manner is recorded by 1955. Related: Projected;
projecting.


projected (adj.)

planned, put forth as a project, 1706, past participle adjective from project (v.).


projectile (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin projectilis, from Latin proiectus, past participle of proicere (see project
(n.)). Projectile vomiting attested from 1985.


projection (n.)

late 15c., in alchemy, transmutation by casting a powder on molten metal; 1550s in the
cartographical sense drawing of a map or chart according to scale, from Middle French projection,
from Latin proiectionem (nominative proiectio), from past participle stem of proicere (see project
(n.)). From 1590s as action of projecting.


projectionist (n.)

1916, from projection + -ist.


projector (n.)

1590s, one who forms a project, agent noun in Latin form from project (v.). In the optical, camera
sense it is from 1884.


prokaryote (n.)

1963, from French procaryote (1925), from Greek pro- (see pro-) + karyon nut, kernel (see karyo-).


prokaryotic (adj.)

1957, from prokaryote + -ic. Related: Prokaryon.


prolactin (n.)

1932, from pro- + stem of lactation + chemical suffix -in (2).


prolapse (v.)

1736, from Latin prolapsus, past participle of prolabi glide fdorward, slide along, slip forward or
down; see pro- + lapse (n.). As a noun from 1808.


prole (n.)

short for proletarian (n.), 1887 (G.B. Shaw); popularized by George Orwell's 1949 novel Nineteen
Eighty-Four. As an adjective from 1938. Related: Proly (adj.); prolier-than-thou.


prolegomenon (n.)

1650s, learned preamble to a book, from Greek prolegomenon, noun use of neuter passive present
participle of prolegein to say beforehand, from pro- before (see pro-) + legein to speak (see
lecture (n.)) + suffix -menos (as in alumnus). The same sense is in preface (n.). Related:
Prolegomenary; prolegomenous.


prolepsis (n.)

1570s, the taking of something anticipated as already done or existing, from Latin prolepsis, from
Greek prolepsis an anticipating, literally a taking beforehand, from prolambanein to take before,
from pro- before (see pro-) + lambanein to take (see analemma). Related: Proleptic; proleptical;
proleptically.


proles (n.)

offspring, 1670s, from Latin proles offspring, progeny (see prolific).


proletarian

1650s (n.) member of the lowest class; 1660s (adj.) of the lowest class of people; with -ian + Latin
proletarius citizen of the lowest class (as an adjective, relating to offspring), in ancient Rome,
propertyless people, exempted from taxes and military service, who served the state only by having
children; from proles offspring, progeny (see prolific).


proletarianism (n.)

1844, from proletarian + -ism.


proletariat (n.)

also proletariate, the lowest class, 1853, from French prol&eacute;tariat, from Latin proletarius
(see proletarian). In political economics, indigent wage-earners, from 1856. Leninist phrase
dictatorship of the proletariat attested from 1918.


prolicide (n.)

killing of one's child or children, 1824, introduced by Dr. John Gordon Smith in the 2nd edition of
his Principles of Forensic Medicine; from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + -cide.    It is
hoped that this word will be considered entitled to reception, on the score of analogy. We have long
had parricide, fratricide, and infanticide, all (if I may use the figure of speech,) of the same
family; and recently the very appropriate term foeticide has been introduced into Forensic Medicine.
In both these last crimes there is a peculiarity arising from the person accused being, in almost
every instance, the parent .... In this relation to the beings destroyed, the general term of
murderer, or murder of offspring seems to be the fair converse of parricide; and will suit well the
purpose of the Medico-legal writer, who considers the two cases as parts of one subject, for the
designation of which collectively a proper term was wanting. [Smith]


proliferate (v.)

1857 as a term in biology; see proliferation. General sense from 1961. Related: Proliferated;
proliferating.


proliferation (n.)

1859, formation or development of cells, from French prolif&#233;ration, from prolif&#232;re
producing offspring, from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + ferre to bear (see infer). Meaning
enlargement, extension, increase is from 1920; especially of nuclear weapons (1966).


proliferative (adj.)

1868, from proliferate + -ive.


prolific (adj.)

1640s, from French prolifique (16c.), from Medieval Latin prolificus, from Latin proles offspring +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Latin proles is contracted from *pro-oles, from PIE *pro-
al-, from *pro- forth (see pro-) + *al- to grow, nourish (see old). Related: Prolifical (c.1600).
<b>Prolific</b> is in common use, but to make a satisfactory noun from it has passed the wit of man.
[Fowler]


prolix (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French prolixe (13c.) and directly from Latin prolixus extended, literally
poured out, from pro- forth (see pro-) + base of liquere to flow (see liquid (adj.)).


prolixity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French prolixit&#233; verbosity (13c.), from Latin prolixitatem (nominative
prolixitas), from prolixus (see prolix).


prologue (n.)

early 14c., from Old French prologue (12c.) and directly from Latin prologus, from Greek prologos
preface to a play, speaker of a prologue, literally a speech beforehand, from pro- before (see pro-)
+ logos discourse, speech, from legein to speak (see lecture (n.)).


prolong (v.)

early 15c., back-formation from prolongation or else from Old French prolonguer, porloignier (13c.),
from Late Latin prolongare to prolong, extend, from Latin pro- forth (see pro-) + longus long
(adj.); see long (adj.). Related: Prolonged; prolonging; prolongable.


prolongation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French prolongation (14c.), from Late Lation prolongationem (nominative
prolongatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin prolongare (see prolong).


prom (n.)

student formal dance in celebration of graduation, 1894, American English shortened form of
promenade (n.). Prom dress attested from 1975.


promenade (n.)

1560s, leisurely walk, from Middle French promenade (16c.), from se promener go for a walk, from
Late Latin prominare to drive (animals) onward, from pro- forth (see pro-) + minare to drive
(animals) with shouts, from minari to threaten (see menace (n.)).    Meaning place for walking is
1640s; specifically walkway by the sea late 18c.; British sense of music hall favored by 'loose
women and the simpletons who run after them' is attested from 1863. Sense of dance given by a school
is from 1887.


promenade (v.)

to make a promenade, 1580s, from promenade (n.). Related: Promenaded; promenading.


Promethean (adj.)

1580s, from Prometheus + -an. Before the introduction of modern matches (see lucifer), promethean
was the name given (early 19c.) to small glass tubes full of sulphuric acid, surrounded by an
inflammable mixture, which ignited when pressed and gave off light.


Prometheus

demigod (son of the Titan Iapetus) who made man from clay and stole fire from heaven and taught
mankind its use, for which he was punished by Zeus by being chained to a rock in the Caucasus, where
a vulture came every day and preyed on his liver. The name is Greek, and anciently was interpreted
as literally forethinker, foreseer, from promethes thinking before, from pro- before (see pro-) +
*methos, related to mathein to learn, from enlargement of PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).
However Watkins suggests the second element is possibly from a base meaning to steal, also found in
Sanskrit mathnati he steals.


promethium (n.)

radioactive element, long one of the missing elements, 1948, so called by discoverers Jacob Marinsky
and Lawrence Glendenin, who detected it in 1945 in the fusion products of uranium while working on
the Manhattan Project. From Prometheus, who stole fire from the gods and was punished for it, +
element name ending -ium. The name not only symbolizes the dramatic way in which the element may be
produced in quantity as a result of man's harnessing of the energy of nuclear fission, but also
warns man of the impending danger of punishment by the vulture of war. [Marinsky and Glendenin]


prominence (n.)

1590s, projection, from obsolete French prominence (16c.), from Latin prominentia a jutting out (see
prominent). Meaning distinction, conspicuousness is attested by 1827. As a type of solar phenomenon,
from 1862.


prominent (adj.)

mid-15c., projecting, jutting out, from Latin prominentem (nominative prominens) prominent, present
participle of prominere jut or stand out, be prominent, overhang, from pro- before, forward (see
pro-) + minere to project, from minae projections, threats (see menace (n.)). Meaning conspicuous is
from 1759; that of notable, leading is from 1849. Related: Prominently.


promiscuity (n.)

1834, indiscriminate mixture, from French promiscuit&eacute; (1752), from Latin promiscuus mixed
(see promiscuous) + French -it&eacute; (see -ity). Sexual sense is from 1844. Earlier was
promiscuousness (by 1773 general; 1808 sexual).


promiscuous (adj.)

c.1600, people or things, mingled confusedly, grouped together without order, consisting of a
disorderly mix; indiscriminate, from Latin promiscuus mixed, indiscriminate, in common, without
distinction, from pro- forward (see pro-) + miscere to mix (see mix (v.)). Meaning indiscriminate in
sexual relations recorded by 1857, from promiscuity. The Latin adjective was used with conubia (such
as between patricians and plebeians). Related: Promiscuously.


promise (n.)

c.1400, a pledge, vow, from Old French promesse promise, guarantee, assurance (13c.) and directly
from Latin promissum a promise, noun use of neuter past participle of promittere send forth; let go;
foretell; assure beforehand, promise, from pro- before (see pro-) + mittere to put, send (see
mission). The ground sense is declaration made about the future, about some act to be done or not
done.


promise (v.)

c.1400, from promise (n.). Related: Promised; promising. Promised land (1530s) is a reference to the
land of Canaan promised to Abraham and his progeny (Hebrew xi:9, etc.; Greek ten ges tes
epangelias).


promising (adj.)

showing signs of future excellence, c.1600, present participle adjective from promise (v.). Related:
Promisingly.


promisor (n.)

1790, agent noun in Latin form from promise (v.). Apparently restricted to legal use.


promissory (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin promissorius, from Latin promissus, past participle of promittere (see
promise (n.)). Promissory note recorded by 1670s.


promnesia (n.)

scientific name for the phenomenon of d&eacute;j&agrave; vu, 1895, Modern Latin, from Greek pro-
before (see pro-) + -mnesia memory (see mind (n.)).


promo (n.)

1958 (in Billboard headlines), shortening of promotion in the sense advertising, publicity.


promontory (n.)

1540s, from Middle French promontoire (15c.) and directly from Medieval Latin promontorium, altered
(by influence of Latin mons mount, hill) from Latin promunturium mountain ridge, headland, probably
related to prominere jut out (see prominent).


promote (v.)

late 14c., to advance (someone) to a higher grade or office, from Old French promoter and directly
from Latin promotus, past participle of promovere move forward, advance; cause to advance, push
onward; bring to light, reveal, from pro- forward (see pro-) + movere to move (see move (v.)).
General sense of to further the growth or progress of (anything) is from 1510s. Related: Promoted;
promoting.


promoter (n.)

late 14c., one who promotes (the interest of someone), supporter, agent noun from promote, and also
from Old French promoteur and directly from Medieval Latin promotor. Specific financial sense of one
who leads in forming a company is from 1876; sense of one who organizes sporting or entertainment
events is attested from 1936.


promotion (n.)

c.1400, advancement in rank or position, from Old French promocion election, promotion (14c., Modern
French promotion) and directly from Latin promotionem (nominative promotio) a moving forward, noun
of action from past participle stem of promovere (see promote). Meaning advertising, publicity first
recorded 1925.


promotional (adj.)

1869, relating to promotion or advancement, from promotion + -al (1). From 1902 as relating to
advertising.


prompt (v.)

mid-14c., prompten, from Latin promptus, past participle of promere to bring forth, from pro-
forward (see pro-) + emere to take (see exempt (adj.)). Theatrical sense of to assist a speaker with
lines is first recorded early 15c. Related: Prompted; prompting.


prompt (n.)

early 15c., readiness, from Latin promptus (see prompt (v.)). Meaning hint, act of prompting is from
1590s. Computer sense attested by 1977.


prompt (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French prompt and directly from Latin promptus brought forth, hence visible,
apparent, evident, past participle of promere to take or bring out or forth (see prompt
(v.)).Related: Promptly; promptitude.


prompter (n.)

1540s, agent noun from prompt (v.)). Earlier was promptator (mid-15c.).


promptness (n.)

1520s, from prompt (adj.) + -ness.


promulgate (v.)

1520s, from Latin promulgatus, past participle of promulgare make publicly known, propose openly,
publish, perhaps altered from provulgare, from pro- forth (see pro-) + vulgare make public, publish.
Or the second element might be from mulgere to milk (see milk (n.)), used metaphorically for cause
to emerge. Related: Promulgated; promulgating. The earlier verb in English was promulge (late 15c.).


promulgation (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French promulgation (14c.), from Latin promulgationem (nominative promulgatio) a
public announcement, noun of action from past participle stem of promulgare (see promulgate).


pronate

1848 (adj.); 1819 (v.), from Late Latin pronatus, past participle of pronare to bend forward, from
pronus prone (see prone). Related: Pronated; pronating.


pronation (n.)

1660s, from French pronation, from Medieval Latin pronationem (nominative pronatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of Late Latin pronare (see pronate).


prone (adj.)

c.1400, naturally inclined to something, apt, liable, from Latin pronus bent forward, leaning
forward, bent over, figuratively inclined to, disposed, perhaps from adverbial form of pro- before,
for, instead of (see pro-) + ending as in infernus, externus. Meaning lying face-down is first
recorded 1570s. Literal and figurative senses both were in Latin; figurative is older in English.
Related: Proneness.


prong (n.)

early 15c., prange pointed instrument; mid-15c., pronge pain, from Anglo-Latin pronga prong, pointed
tool, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle Low German prange stick, restraining device,
prangen to press, pinch. See also prod, which might be related. Prong-horned antelope is from 1815
(short form pronghorn attested from 1826).


pronomial (adj.)

1670s, from Late Latin pronomialis (Priscian) pertaining to a pronoun, from Latin pronomen (see
pronoun). As a noun from 1871.


pronoun (n.)

mid-15c., from pro- and noun; modeled on Middle French pronom, from Latin pronomen, from pro- in
place of + nomen name, noun (see name (n.)). A loan-translation of Greek antonymia.


pronounce (v.)

early 14c., to declare officially; late 14c., to speak, utter, from Old French prononcier declare,
speak out, pronounce (late 13c., Modern French prononcer), from Late Latin pronunciare, from Latin
pronuntiare to proclaim, announce; pronounce, utter, from pro- forth, out, in public (see pro-) +
nuntiare announce, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). With reference to the mode of sounding words
or languages, it is attested from 1620s (but see pronunciation in this sense from early 15c.).
Related: Pronounced; pronouncing.


pronounceable (adj.)

1610s, from pronounce (v.) + -able.


pronounced (adj.)

spoken, 1570s, past participle adjective from pronounce (v.). Sense of emphatic is a figurative
meaning first attested c.1730.


pronouncement (n.)

1590s, from pronounce + -ment.


pronto (adv.)

1850, from Spanish pronto, perhaps influenced by Italian pronto (borrowed by English 1740), both
from Latin promptus (see prompt).


pronunciation (n.)

early 15c., mode in which a word is pronounced, from Middle French prononciation and directly from
Latin pronuntiationem (nominative pronuntiatio) act of speaking, utterance, delivery, also
proclamation, public declaration, noun of action from past participle stem of pronuntiare announce
(see pronounce).


proof (n.)

early 13c., preove evidence to establish the fact of (something), from Anglo-French preove, Old
French prueve proof, test, experience (13c., Modern French preuve), from Late Latin proba a proof, a
back-formation from Latin probare to prove (see prove). The devocalization of v to f ensued upon the
loss of final e; cf. the relation of v and f in believe, belief, relieve, relief, behove, behoof,
etc. [OED].    Meaning act of proving is early 14c. Meaning act of testing or making trial of
anything is from late 14c., from influence of prove. Meaning standard of strength of distilled
liquor is from 1705. In photography from 1855. Typographical sense of trial impression to test type
is from c.1600. Numismatic sense of coin struck to test a die is from 1762; now mostly in reference
to coins struck from highly polished dies, mainly for collectors.    Adjectival sense (proof
against) is recorded from 1590s, from the noun in expressions such as proof of (mid-15c.), hence
extended senses involving tested power in compounds such as fireproof (1630s), waterproof (1725),
foolproof (1902), etc. Shakespeare has shame-proof.


proof (v.)

1834, to test, from proof (n.). From 1950 as short for proofread (v.). Related: Proofed; proofing.


proofread (v.)

also proof-read, 1878, back-formation from proofreader. Related: Proofread; Proofreading.


proofreader (n.)

also proof-reader, 1808, from proof (n.) in the typographical sense + reader.


prop (v.)

to support, mid-15c., probably from prop (n.1) or a related verb in Dutch. Related: Propped;
propping.


prop (n.1)

support, mid-15c., from Middle Dutch proppe vine prop, support, of unknown origin. Probably related
to Old High German pfropfo, German pfropfen to prop, perhaps from Latin propago a set, layer of a
plant (see propagation). Irish propa, Gaelic prop are from English.


prop (n.2)

object used in a play, 1898, from props (1841), shortened form of properties (which was in
theatrical use from early 15c.). Props as slang shortening for proper respects (or something
similar) appeared c.1999.


prop (n.3)

short for propeller, 1914.


propaedeutic (n.)

1798, from Greek propaideuein to teach beforehand, from pro- (see pro-) + paideuein to teach, which
is related to the root of pedagogue. From 1849 as an adjective.


propaganda (n.)

1718, committee of cardinals in charge of Catholic missionary work, short for Congregatio de
Propaganda Fide congregation for propagating the faith, a committee of cardinals established 1622 by
Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the ablative fem. gerundive of Latin
propagare (see propagation). Hence, any movement to propagate some practice or ideology (1790).
Modern political sense dates from World War I, not originally pejorative. Meaning material or
information propagated to advance a cause, etc. is from 1929.


propagandist (n.)

1797, from propaganda + -ist. Related: Propagandistic.


propagandize (v.)

1841, from propaganda + -ize. Related: Propagandized; propagandizing.


propagate (v.)

1560s, to cause to multiply, from Latin propagatus, past participle of propagare to set forward,
extend, procreate (see propagation). Intransitive sense reproduce one's kind is from c.1600.
Related: Propagated; propagating.


propagation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French propagacion offshoot, offspring (13c.) and directly from Latin
propagationem (nominative propagatio) a propagation, extension, enlargement, noun of action from
past participle stem of propagare set forward, extend, spread, increase; multiply plants by layers,
breed, from propago (genitive propaginis) that which propagates, offspring, from pro- forth (see
pro-) + *pag-, root of pangere to fasten (see pact).


propane (n.)

colorless gas occurring in petroleum, 1866, with chemical suffix -ane + prop(ionic acid) (1850),
from French propionique (1847), from Greek pro forward (see pro-) + pion fat (see fat (adj.)), in
reference to its being first in order of the fatty acids.


propel (v.)

mid-15c., to drive away, expel, from Latin propellere push forward, drive forward, drive forth;
move, impel, from pro- forward (see pro-) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to
drive onward, cause to move forward is from 1650s. Related: Propelled; propelling.


propellant (n.)

less-etymological, but more usual, spelling of propellent; 1881 as a firearm explosive; 1919 as fuel
for a rocket engine.


propellent (adj.)

1640s, from propel + -ent. As a noun from 1814.


propeller (n.)

1780, anything that propels, agent noun from propel. In mechanical sense, 1809, of ships; of flying
machines (in a broad, theoretical sense) 1842, in the specific modern sense 1853.


propensity (n.)

1560s, disposition to favor, with -ty + obsolete adjective propense inclined, prone (1520s), from
Latin propensus, past participle of propendere incline to, hang forward, hang down, weigh over, from
pro- forward (see pro-) + pendere hang (see pendant).


proper (adj.)

c.1300, adapted to some purpose, fit, apt; commendable, excellent (sometimes ironic), from Old
French propre own, particular; exact, neat, fitting, appropriate (11c.), from Latin proprius one's
own, particular to itself, from pro privo for the individual, in particular, from ablative of privus
one's own, individual (see private (adj.)) + pro for (see pro-). Related: Properly.    From early
14c. as belonging or pertaining to oneself; individual; intrinsic; from mid-14c. as pertaining to a
person or thing in particular, special, specific; distinctive, characteristic; also what is by the
rules, correct, appropriate, acceptable. From early 15c. as separate, distinct; itself. Meaning
socially appropriate, decent, respectable is first recorded 1704. Proper name name belonging to or
relating to the person or thing in question, is from late 13c., a sense also preserved in
astronomical proper motion (c.1300). Proper noun is from c.1500.


propertied (adj.)

holding property, 1760, from property (n.).


property (n.)

c.1300, properte, nature, quality, later possession, thing owned (early 14c., a sense rare before
17c.), from an Anglo-French modification of Old French propriete individuality, peculiarity;
property (12c., Modern French propret&eacute;; see propriety), from Latin proprietatem (nominative
proprietas) ownership, a property, propriety, quality, literally special character (a loan-
translation of Greek idioma), noun of quality from proprius one's own, special (see proper). For
possessions, private property Middle English sometimes used proper goods. Hot property sensation, a
success is from 1947 in Billboard stories.


prophase

1884, from German prophase (Strasburger, 1884); see pro- + phase.


prophecy (n.)

c.1200, prophecie, prophesie, function of a prophet, from Old French profecie (12c. Modern French
proph&#233;tie) and directly from Late Latin prophetia (source also of Spanish profecia, Italian
profezia), from Greek propheteia gift of interpreting the will of the gods, from prophetes (see
prophet). Meaning thing spoken or written by a prophet is from c.1300.


prophesy (v.)

mid-14c., prophecein, prophesein, from Old French prophecier (13c.), from prophecie (see prophecy).
The noun and verb spellings were not fully differentiated until 18c. Related: Prophesied;
prophesying.


prophet (n.)

late 12c., person who speaks for God; one who foretells, inspired preacher, from Old French
prophete, profete prophet, soothsayer (11c., Modern French proph&#232;te) and directly from Latin
propheta, from Greek prophetes (Doric prophatas) an interpreter, spokesman, especially of the gods,
inspired preacher or teacher, from pro- before (see pro-) + root of phanai to speak, from PIE *bha-
(2) speak (see fame (n.)).    The Greek word was used in Septuagint for Hebrew nabj soothsayer.
Early Latin writers translated Greek prophetes with Latin vates, but the Latinized form propheta
predominated in post-Classical times, chiefly due to Christian writers, probably because of pagan
associations of vates. In English, meaning prophetic writer of the Old Testament is from late 14c.
Non-religious sense is from 1848; used of Muhammad from 1610s (translating Arabic al-nabiy, and
sometimes also al-rasul, properly the messenger). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by witga.


prophetess (n.)

c.1300, from prophet + -ess.


prophetic (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French proph&eacute;tique (15c.) and directly from Late Latin propheticus,
from Greek prophetikos pertaining to a prophet, oracular, from prophetes (see prophet). Related:
Prophetical (mid-15c.); prophetically.


prophylactic (adj.)

1570s, originally of medicines, that tends to prevent disease, from Middle French prophylactique
(16c.) and directly as a Latinized borrowing of Greek prophylaktikos precautionary, from
prophylassein keep guard before, ward off, be on one's guard, from pro- before (see pro-) +
phylassein, Ionic variant of phylattein to watch over, to guard, but also cherish, keep, remain in,
preserve (see phylactery).    The noun is first recorded 1640s, a medicine or treatment to prevent
disease; meaning condom is from 1943, replacing earlier preventive (1822), preventative (1901).
Condoms originally were used more to thwart contagious disease than to prevent pregnancy.


prophylaxis (n.)

preventive treatment of disease, 1746, Modern Latin, from Greek pro (see pro-) + phylaxis a
watching, guarding (see prophylactic).


propinquity (n.)

late 14c., nearness in relation, kinship, later also physical nearness (early 15c.), from Old French
propinquite (13c.) and directly from Latin propinquitatem (nominative propinquitas) nearness,
vicinity; relationship, affinity, from propinquus near, neighboring, from prope near (enlarged from
PIE *pro before; see pro-) + suffix -inquus.    Nothing propinks like propinquity [Ian Fleming,
chapter heading, Diamonds are Forever, 1956; phrase popularized 1960s by U.S. diplomat George Ball]


propitiate (v.)

1580s, a back-formation from propritiation and in part from propitiate (adj.), from Latin
propitiatus, past participle of propitiare appease, propitiate (see propitiation). Related:
Propitiated; propitiating; propitiatingly; propitiable (1550s).


propitiation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin propitiationem (nominative propitiatio) an atonement, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin propitiare appease, propitiate, from propitius favorable, gracious,
kind, well-disposed, from pro- forward (see pro-) + stem related to petere to make for, go to; seek,
strive after; ask for, beg, beseech, request (see petition (n.)).    The sense in Latin is perhaps
because the word originally was religious, literally a falling or rushing toward, hence eager, and,
of the gods, well-disposed. Earliest recorded form of the word in English is propitiatorium the
mercy seat, place of atonement (c.1200), translating Greek hilasterion.


propitiatory

c.1300 (n.) the mercy seat, from Late Latin propitiatorium (translating Greek hilasterion in Bible);
noun use of neuter singular of propitiatorius atoning, reconciling, from propitiatus, past
participle of propitiare (see propitiation). As an adjective in English from 1550s.


propitious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French propicius, Old French propicius gracious, favorable, useful (12c.,
Modern French propice) and directly from Latin propitius favorable, kind, gracious, well-disposed
(see propitiation). Earlier English form was propice, from Old French propice. Related:
Propitiously.


propone (v.)

propose, late 14c., from Latin proponere to put forth (see propound). Related: Proponed; proponing;
proponement.


proponent (n.)

1580s, one who brings forth a proposition or argument, from Latin proponentem (nominative
proponens), present participle of proponere put forward (see propound). In part also a native
formation from propone. As an adjective from 1680s.


proport (v.)

late 14c., from Old French proporter (12c.), variant of porporter (see purport).


proportion (n.)

late 14c., due relation of one part to another, also size, extent; compartative relation in size,
degree, number, etc., from Old French proporcion measure, proportion (13c.), from Latin proportionem
(nominative proportio) comparative relation, analogy, from phrase pro portione according to the
relation (of parts to each other), from pro for (see pro-) + ablative of *partio division, related
to pars (see part (n.)). Phrase out of proportion attested by 1670s.My fortunes [are] as ill
proportioned as your legs. [John Marston, Antonio and Mellida, 1602]


proportion (v.)

to adjust or regulate the proportions of, late 14c., from proportion (n.) and in part from Middle
French proporcioner and directly from Medieval Latin proportionare. Related: Proportioned;
proportioning.


proportional (adj.)

late 14c. (implied in proportionally), from Late Latin proportionalis pertaining to proportions,
from proportio (see proportion). Related: Proportionally.


proportionality (n.)

1560s, from French proportionalit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin proportionalitas,
from proportio (see proportion).


proportionate (adj.)

late 14c., of proper proportion, from Medieval Latin proportionatus proportioned, past participle of
proportionare (see proportion (n.)). Related: Proportionately.


proposal (n.)

1650s, from propose + -al (2); specific sense of offer of marriage is from 1749.


propose (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French proposer propose, advance, suggest (12c.), from pro- forth (see pro-) +
poser put, place (see pose (v.1)). Meaning make an offer of marriage is  first recorded 1764.
Related: Proposed; proposing. See also propone, which coexisted with this word for a time.


proposition (n.)

mid-14c., a setting forth as a topic for discussion, from Old French proposicion proposal,
submission, (philosophical) proposition (12c.), from Latin propositionem (nominative propositio) a
setting forth, statement, a presentation, representation; fundamental assumption, noun of action
from past participle stem of proponere (see propound). Meaning action of proposing something to be
done is from late 14c. General sense of matter, problem, undertaking recorded by 1877. Related:
Propositional.


proposition (v.)

1914, from proposition (n.); specifically of sexual favors from 1936. Related: Propositioned;
propositioning.


propound (v.)

late 16c. variant of Middle English proponen to put forward (late 14c.), from Latin proponere put
forth, set forth, lay out, display, expose to view, figuratively set before the mind; resolve;
intend, design, from pro- before (see pro-) + ponere to put (see position (n.)). Perhaps influenced
in form by compound, expound. Related: Propounded; propounding.


proprietary (adj.)

mid-15c., possessing worldly goods in excess of a cleric's needs, from Medieval Latin proprietarius
owner of property, noun use of Late Latin adjective proprietarius of a property holder, from Latin
proprietas owner (see property). Meaning held in private ownership is first attested 1580s. The word
was used earlier in English as a noun meaning proprietor, also worldly person (c.1400), from a noun
use in French and Medieval Latin.


proprietor (n.)

1630s, owner, by royal grant, of an American colony, probably from proprietary (n.) in sense
property owner (late 15c., see proprietary). In general sense of one who holds something as property
it is attested from 1640s.


propriety (n.)

mid-15c., proper character, disposition, from Old French propriet&eacute; individuality,
peculiarity; property (12c.), from Latin proprietatem (nominative proprietas) appropriateness, also
ownership (see property). Meaning fitness, appropriateness is attested from 1610s; sense of
conformity to good manners is from 1782.


proprioception (n.)

1906, from proprioceptor, from Latin proprius own (see proper) + reception. Coined by English
neurophysiologist C.S. Sherrington (1857-1952). Related: Proprioceptive; proprioceptor.


propulsion (n.)

1610s, expulsion, noun of action formed from propuls-, past participle stem of Latin propellere to
propel (see propel). Meaning act of driving forward, propulsive force first attested 1799.


propulsive (adj.)

1640s, from propuls-, past participle stem of Latin propellere to propel (see propel) + -ive.


prorate (v.)

also pro-rate, divide proportionally, 1860, American English, verb derived from Latin pro rata
(parte) (see pro rata). Related: Prorated; prorating.


proration (n.)

1893, noun of action from prorate (v.).


prorogue (v.)

early 15c., to prolong, extend, from Old French proroger, proroguer (14c.), from Latin prorogare,
literally to ask publicly, from pro before (see pro-) + rogare to ask (see rogation). Perhaps the
original sense in Latin was to ask for public assent to extending someone's term in office.
Legislative meaning discontinue temporarily is attested from mid-15c. Related: Prorogation.


prosaic (adj.)

1650s, having to do with prose, from Middle French prosaique and directly from Medieval Latin
prosaicus in prose (16c.), from Latin prosa prose (see prose). Meaning having the character of prose
(in contrast to the feeling of poetry) is by 1746; extended sense of ordinary is by 1813, both from
French.


proscenium (n.)

c.1600, stage of an ancient theater, from Latin proscaenium, from Greek proskenion the space in
front of the scenery, also entrance of a tent, from pro in front (see pro-) + skene stage, tent,
booth (see scene). Modern sense of space between the curtain and the orchestra is attested from
1807.


prosciutto (n.)

Italian spiced ham, 1911, from Italian, alteration (probably by influence of prosciugato dried) of
presciutto, from pre-, intensive prefix + -sciutto, from Latin exsuctus lacking juice, dried up,
past participle of exsugere suck out, draw out moisture, from ex- out (see ex-) + sugere to suck
(see sup (v.2)).


proscribe (v.)

early 15c., write before, prefix, from Latin proscribere publish in writing (literally write in
front of), including senses of publish as having forfeited one's property, condemn, outlaw before
the world, from pro- before (see pro-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)). Meaning prohibit as
wrong or dangerous first recorded 1620s.


proscription (n.)

late 14c., decree of condemnation, outlawry, from Latin proscriptionem (nominative proscriptio) a
public notice (of sale); proscription, outlawry, confiscation, noun of action from past participle
stem of proscribere (see proscribe).


proscriptive (adj.)

1757, from Latin proscript-, past participle stem of proscribere (see proscribe) + -ive. Related:
Proscriptively.


prose (n.)

c.1300, story, narration, from Old French prose (13c.), from Latin prosa oratio straightforward or
direct speech (without the ornaments of verse), from prosa, fem. of prosus, earlier prorsus
straightforward, direct, from Old Latin provorsus (moving) straight ahead, from pro- forward (see
pro-) + vorsus turned, past participle of vertere to turn (see verse).    Good prose, to say nothing
of the original thoughts it conveys, may be infinitely varied in modulation. It is only an extension
of metres, an amplification of harmonies, of which even the best and most varied poetry admits but
few. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]    Meaning prose writing; non-poetry is from
mid-14c. The sense of dull or commonplace expression is from 1680s, out of earlier sense plain
expression (1560s). Those who lament the want of an English agent noun to correspond to poet might
try prosaist (1776), proser (1620s), or Frenchified prosateur (1880), though the first two in their
day also acquired in English the secondary sense dull writer.


prosecute (v.)

early 15c., follow up, pursue (some course or action), from Latin prosecutus, past participle of
prosequi follow after, accompany; chase, pursue; attack, assail, abuse (see pursue). Meaning bring
to a court of law is first recorded 1570s. Meaning go into detail is from 1530s.


prosecution (n.)

1560s, action of pursuing, from Middle French prosecution (late 13c.) and directly from Late Latin
prosecutionem (nominative prosecutio) a following, noun of action from past participle stem of
prosequi (see prosecute). Meaning legal action is from 1630s.


prosecutor (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin prosecutor, agent noun from prosequi (see prosecute). Specific legal
sense of one who brings a case in a court of law is from 1620s; earlier such a person was a promoter
(late 15c.). Related: Prosecutorial.


proselyte (n.)

late 14c., from Old French proselite (13c., Modern French pros&#233;lyte), from Late Latin
proselytus, from Greek proselytos convert (to Judaism), stranger, one who has come over, noun use of
adjective meaning having arrived, from second aorist stem of proserkhesthai to come or go;
surrender; associate with, from proti toward + root of eleusesthai to be going to come, from PIE
*elu-to-, from root *leudh- to go. Originally in English a Gentile converted to Judaism (late 14c.).


proselytise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of proselytize (q.v.). For suffix, see -ize. Related: Proselytised;
proselytising.


proselytism (n.)

1650s, from proselyte + -ism.


proselytization (n.)

1846, from proselytize + -ation.


proselytize (v.)

1670s, to make proselytes, from proselyte + -ize. Related: Proselytized; proselytizing.


proselytizer (n.)

1811, agent noun from proselytize.


Proserpina

daughter of Ceres and wife of Pluto, Latin (or Etruscan) modification of Greek Persephone, perhaps
influenced by Latin proserpere to creep forth on notion of the germination of plants.


prosify (v.)

1774, from prose + -ify. Related: Prosified; prosifying.


prosiness (n.)

1814, from prosy + -ness.


prosit (interj.)

1846, toast or expression wishing good health (from 16c., famously a drinking pledge by German
students), Latin, literally may it advantage (you), third person singular present subjunctive of
prodesse to do good, be profitable (see proud).


prosodemic (adj.)

1964, with -ic + prosodeme (1940), from Greek proso-, probably related to pros toward, to, at,
against, near.


prosody (n.)

late 15c., from Latin prosodia accent of a syllable, from Greek prosoidia song sung to music, also
accent, modulation, literally a singing in addition to, from pros to, forward, near + oide song,
poem (see ode). Related: Prosodiacal; prosodist.


prosopagnosia (n.)

1950, Medical Latin from German prosopagnosie (1948), from Greek prosopon face (see prosopopeia) +
agnosia ignorance (see agnostic).


prosopopeia (n.)

also prosopopoeia, 1560s, from Latin prosopopoeia, from Greek prosopopoiia the putting of speeches
into the mouths of others, from prosopon person, face (literally that which is toward the eyes, from
pros to + ops eye, face; see eye (n.)) + poiein make (see poet). Generally, a rhetorical figure in
which an imaginary or absent person is made to speak or act.


prospect (n.)

early 15c., act of looking into the distance, from Latin prospectus distant view, look out; sight,
faculty of sight, noun use of past participle of prospicere look out on, look forward, from pro-
forward (see pro-) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Meaning extensive view of the landscape is
from 1530s; transferred sense of mental view or survey is from 1620s. Sense of person or thing
considered promising is from 1922. Prospects expectations, things looked forward to is from 1660s.


prospect (v.)

explore for gold, examine land with a view to a mining claim, 1841, from prospect (n.) in
specialized sense of spot giving prospects of ore (1832). Earlier in a sense look forth, look out
over (1550s), from Latin prospectare. Related: Prospected; prospecting.


prospective (adj.)

1580s, from obsolete French prospectif and directly from Medieval Latin prospectivus affording a
prospect; pertaining to a prospect, from Latin prospect-, past participle stem of prospicere (see
prospect (n.)). In 17c. also as a noun, spy glass, telescope. Related: Prospectively.


prospector (n.)

also prospecter, 1846 in the mining sense; agent noun from prospect (v.).


prospectus (n.)

1765, from French prospectus (1723) and directly from Latin prospectus view (see prospect (n.)).


prosper (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French prosperer (14c.) and directly from Latin prosperare cause to succeed,
render happy, from prosperus favorable, fortunate, prosperous, perhaps literally agreeable to one's
wishes, traditionally regarded as from Old Latin pro spere according to expectation, according to
one's hope, from pro for + ablative of spes hope, from PIE root *spe- to flourish, succeed, thrive,
prosper (see speed (n.)).


prosperity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French prosprete (12c., Modern French prosp&#233;rit&#233;) and directly from Latin
prosperitatem (nominative prosperitas) good fortune, from prosperus (see prosper).


prosperous (adj.)

early 15c., tending to bring success, from prosper + -ous, or else from obsolete Middle French
prospereus (15c.), from prosperer. The sense of flourishing is first recorded late 15c.


prostaglandin (n.)

1936, from German (1935); see prostate + gland + chemical suffix -in (2).


prostate (n.)

1640s, from Middle French prostate, from Medieval Latin prostata the prostate, from Greek prostates
(aden) prostate (gland), from prostates leader, ruler, guardian; one standing in front, from
proistanai set before, from pro- before (see pro-) + histanai cause to stand from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). So called from its position at the base of the bladder.


prostatitis (n.)

1844, from prostate + -itis.


prosthesis (n.)

1550s, addition of a letter or syllable to a word, from Late Latin, from Greek prosthesis addition,
from prostithenai add to, from pros to + tithenai to put, place (see theme). Meaning artificial body
part is first recorded c.1900, from earlier use to describe the medical art of making artificial
limbs (1706), on notion of that which is added to the injured body.


prosthetic (adj.)

1837 in grammar; 1902 in the surgical sense, from Latinized form of Greek prosthetikos disposed to
add, from prosthetas added, verbal adjective of prostithenai to put to, add to (see prosthesis).
Related: Prosthetically.


prosthetics (n.)

1894, from prosthetic; also see -ics.


prostitute (v.)

1520s, to offer to indiscriminate sexual intercourse (usually in exchange for money), from Latin
prostitutus, past participle of prostituere to expose to prostitution, expose publicly, from pro-
before (see pro-) + statuere cause to stand, establish, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with
derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Prostituted; prostituting.
The notion of sex for hire is not inherent in the etymology, which rather suggests one exposed to
lust or sex indiscriminately offered. However, this is now almost the official European term for the
institution: German prostituierte, Russian prostitutka, etc. Figurative sense (of abilities, etc.)
is from 1570s. Of men, in reference to homosexual acts, from 1886 (in form prostitution); phrase
male prostitute attested by 1948.


prostitute (n.)

harlot, woman who offers her body indiscriminately (usually for money), 1610s, from Latin prostituta
prostitute, fem. of prostitutus, past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (v.)).


prostitution (n.)

1530s, from Middle French prostitution and directly from Late Latin prostitutionem (nominative
prostitutio), noun of action from past participle stem of prostituere (see prostitute).


prostomium (n.)

1870, Latinized form of Greek prostomion fore-mouth, something before the mouth, from pro before
(see pro-) + stoma mouth (see stoma).


prostrate (adj.)

mid-14c., lying face-down (in submission, worship, etc.), from Latin prostratus, past participle of
prosternere strew in front, throw down, from pro- forth (see pro-) + sternere to spread out, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Figurative use from 1590s.
General sense of laid out, knocked flat is from 1670s.


prostrate (v.)

early 15c., prostraten, prostrate oneself, from prostrate (adj.). Related: Prostrated; prostrating.


prostration (n.)

c.1400, action of prostrating oneself, from Old French prostracion (14c.) or directly from Late
Latin prostrationem (nominative prostratio), noun of action from past participle stem of prosternere
(see prostrate (v.)); or else a native formation from prostrate (v.). Meaning weakness, exhaustion,
dejection is from 1650s.


prosy (adj.)

1814 (Jane Austen), from prose + -y (2). Related: Prosiness.


Prot (n.)

colloquial shortening of Protestant (n.), used by Catholics, often contemptuous.


protagonist (n.)

1670s, principal character in a story, drama, etc., from Greek protagonistes actor who plays the
chief or first part, from protos first (see proto-) + agonistes actor, competitor, from agon contest
(see act (n.)). Meaning leading person in any cause or contest is from 1889. Mistaken sense of
advocate, supporter (1935) is from misreading of Greek protos as Latin pro- for.


Protean (adj.)

1590s, from Greek Proteus, sea god (son of Oceanus and Tethys) who could change his form; his name
is literally first, from protos first (see proto-).


protease (n.)

1903, from protein + -ase. Related: Proteolysis.


protect (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin protectus, past participle of protegere to protect, cover in front (see
protection). International economics sense from 1789. Related: Protected; protecting.


protectant (adj.)

1660s, irregularly formed from protect + -ant. As a noun from 1935.


protection (n.)

mid-14c., shelter, defense; keeping, guardianship; late 14c. as that which protects, from Old French
proteccion protection, shield (12c.) and directly from Late Latin protectionem (nominative
protectio) a covering over, noun of action from past participle stem of protegere protect, cover in
front, from pro- in front + tegere to cover (see stegosaurus).    A common Old English word for
protect was beorgan. International economic sense is from 1789. In gangster sense, freedom from
molestation in exchange for money, it is attested from 1860. Ecological sense of attempted
preservation by laws is from 1880 (originally of wild birds in Britain). Also in medieval England,
the protection or maintenance of a lord or patron; sponsorship. To put (someone) out of protection
meant to deprive him or her of the security of the protection of the kingdom's laws.


protectionism (n.)

1846, from protectionist + -ism.


protectionist (n.)

in the economics sense, 1841, from French protectionniste (in political economy sense, protection is
attested from 1789). As an adjective by 1843.


protective (adj.)

1660s, from protect + -ive. As a noun from 1875. Related: Protectively; protectiveness. Protective
custody is from 1933, translating German Schutzhaft, used cynically by the Nazis.


protector (n.)

late 14c., from Old French protector (14c., Modern French protecteur) and directly from Late Latin
protector, agent noun from protegere (see protection). Related: Protectoral.


protectorate (n.)

1690s in reference to the government by the Cromwells; 1795 as occupied territory of another nation,
from protector + -ate (1). Meaning state or territory (usually tribal) placed under the protection
of a major power is from 1860.


protege (n.)

1778, from French prot&eacute;g&eacute; (fem. prot&eacute;g&eacute;e) one who is protected, noun use
of past participle of Middle French prot&eacute;ger protect, from Latin protegere (see protect; also
see protection).


protein (n.)

1844, from French prot&eacute;ine, coined 1838 by Dutch chemist Gerhard Johan Mulder (1802-1880),
perhaps on suggestion of Berzelius, from Greek proteios the first quality, from protos first (see
proto-) + -ine (2).    Originally a theoretical substance thought to be essential to life, further
studies of the substances he was working with overthrew this, but the words protein and proteid
continued to be used in international work on the matter and also for other organic compounds; the
modern use as a general name for a class of bodies arose in German. The confusion became so great a
committee was set up in 1907 to sort out the nomenclature, which it did, giving protein its modern
meaning and banishing proteid.


proteinuria

1911, Modern Latin, from French prot&eacute;inurie; see protein + urine.


protero-

before vowels proter-, word-forming element meaning former, earlier, from comb. form of Greek
proteros before, former, anterior, from PIE *pro-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).


Proterozoic (adj.)

1880, from protero- + zoic.


protest (n.)

c.1400, avowal, pledge, solemn declaration, from Old French protest (Modern French pr&#244;tet),
from preotester, and directly from Latin protestari declare publicly, testify, protest, from pro-
forth, before (see pro-) + testari testify, from testis witness (see testament).    Meaning
statement of disapproval first recorded 1751; adjectival sense of expressing of dissent from, or
rejection of, prevailing mores is from 1953, in reference to U.S. civil rights movement. First
record of protest march is from 1959.


protest (v.)

mid-15c., to declare or state formally or solemnly, from Old French protester, from Latin protestari
declare publicly, testify, protest (see protest (n.)). Original sense preserved in to protest one's
innocence. Related: Protested; protesting.


Protestant (n., adj.)

1539, from German or French protestant, from Latin protestantem (nominative protestans), present
participle of protestari (see protest (n.)). Originally used of German princes and free cities who
declared their dissent from (protested) the decision of the Diet of Speyer (1529), which reversed
the liberal terms allowed Lutherans in 1526.    When forced to make their choice between obedience
to God and obedience to the Emperor, they were compelled to choose the former. [Thomas M. Lindsay, A
History of the Reformation, New York, 1910]  The word was taken up by the Lutherans in Germany
(Swiss and French preferred Reformed). It became the general word for adherents of the Reformation
in Germany, then member of any Western church outside the Roman communion; a sense first attested in
English in 1553.In the 17c., 'protestant' was primarily opposed to 'papist,' and thus accepted by
English Churchmen generally; in more recent times, being generally opposed to 'Roman Catholic,' or
... to 'Catholic,' ... it is viewed with disfavour by those who lay stress on the claim of the
Anglican Church to be equally Catholic with the Roman. [OED]Often contemptuous shortened form Prot
is from 1725, in Irish English. Protestant (work) ethic (1926) is taken from Max Weber's work Die
protestantische Ethik und der 'Geist' des Kapitalismus (1904). Protestant Reformation attested by
1680s.


Protestantism (n.)

1640s, from French protestantisme or else formed from Protestant + -ism.


protestation (n.)

mid-14c., affirmation; late 14c., avowal, declaration, assertion, from Old French protestacion
protest, protestation (13c.) and directly from Latin protestationem (nominative protestatio) a
declaration, protestation, noun of action from past participle stem of  protestari (see protest
(n.)).


protester (n.)

also protestor, 1540s, one who makes solemn affirmation; agent noun from protest (v.). From 1960 as
demonstrator, public opponent of the established order.


Proteus

c.1400, from Greek Proteus (see Protean).


prothalamion (n.)

song sung before a wedding, 1590s, coined as a poem title by Edmund Spenser (based on epithalamion)
from Greek pro- before (see pro-) + thalamos bridal chamber (see thalamus). Sometimes Latinized as
prothalamium.


prothesis (n.)

from Greek prothesis a placing before, a placing in public, from pro (see pro-) + thesis (see
thesis). In ecclesiastical sense from 1670s; grammatical from 1870. Related: Prothetic (1835 in
grammar); prothetical; prothetically.


prothonotary (n.)

also protonotary, mid-15c., principal clerk of a court, from Late Latin prothonotarius, from Greek
protonotarios first scribe, originally the recorder of the court of the Byzantine empire, from
protos first (see proto-) + Latin notarius (see notary). The -h- appeared in Medieval Latin


protist (n.)

1869, from Modern Latin Protista (German Protisten, Haeckel, 1868), from Greek neuter plural of
protistos the very first, superlative of protos first (see proto-).


proto-

before vowels prot-, word-forming element meaning first, source, parent, preceding, earliest form,
original, basic, from Greek proto-, comb. form of protos first, from PIE *pre-, from root *per- (1)
forward, through (see per).


proto-language (n.)

1948, from proto- + language.


protocol (n.)

1540s, as prothogall draft of a document, from Middle French prothocole (c.1200, Modern French
protocole), from Medieval Latin protocollum draft, literally the first sheet of a volume (on which
contents and errata were written), from Greek protokollon first sheet glued onto a manuscript, from
protos first (see proto-) + kolla glue.    Sense developed in Medieval Latin and French from
official account to official record of a transaction, to diplomatic document, and finally, in
French, to formula of diplomatic etiquette. Meaning diplomatic rules of etiquette in English first
recorded 1896, from French; general sense of conventional proper conduct is from 1952. Protocols of
the (Learned) Elders of Zion, Russian anti-Semitic forgery purporting to reveal Jewish plan for
world domination, first published in English 1920 under title The Jewish Peril.


proton (n.)

1920 in physics, coined by English physicist Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937) from noun use of Greek
proton, neuter of protos first (see proto-), on analogy of electron; supposedly because hydrogen was
hypothesized as a constituent of all the elements. The word was used earlier in embryology (1893) as
a translation of German anlage (fundamental thing) based on Aristotle's phrase he prote ousia to
proton.


protoplanet (n.)

1949, from proto- + planet.


protoplasm (n.)

1848, from German Protoplasma (1846), used by German botanist Hugo von Mohl (1805-1872), on notion
of first-formed, from Greek proto- first (see proto-) + plasma something molded (see -plasm).    The
word was in Late Latin with a sense of first created thing, and it might have existed in
ecclesiastical Greek in a different sense. It was used 1839 by Czech physiologist Johannes
Evangelista Purkinje (1787-1869) to denote the gelatinous fluid found in living tissue. The modern
meaning is a refinement of this. This word prevailed, though German language purists preferred
Urschleim.


protostar (n.)

1954, from proto- + star (n.).


prototype (n.)

c.1600, from French prototype (16c.) and directly from Medieval Latin prototypus original,
primitive, from Greek prototypon a first or primitive form, noun use of neuter singular of
prototypos original, primitive, from protos first (see proto-) + typos impression, mold, pattern
(see type (n.)). In English from 1590s as prototypon.


prototypical (adj.)

1640s, from prototype + -ical.


Protozoa (n.)

1828, from Modern Latin Protozoa, coined 1818 by German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss (1782-1848)
from Greek protos first (see proto-) + zoia, plural of zoion animal (see zoo). Originally including
sponges and corals; current sense is from 1845. Related: Protozoon (aingular); Protozoan.


protozoic (adj.)

1838, from proto- + Greek zoe life (see zoo) + -ic.


protract (v.)

1530s, a back-formation from protraction and in part from Latin protractus, past participle of
protrahere to draw forth, prolong. Etymologically identical with portray, which was altered in
French. Related: Protracted; protracting.


protraction (n.)

mid-15c., drawing or writing of numbers, from Middle French protraction (15c.) and directly from
Late Latin protractionem (nominative protractio) a drawing out or lengthening, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin protrahere to draw forward, draw out, bring forth; figuratively bring
to light, reveal, expose, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning
act of drawing out or prolonging is from 1530s.


protractor (n.)

1610s, one who lengthens (an action), from Medieval Latin protractor, agent noun from Latin
protrahere to draw forward (see protraction); sense of instrument for drawing angles first recorded
1650s.


protrude (v.)

1610s, to thrust forward or onward, to drive along; 1640s, to cause to stick out, from Latin
protrudere thrust forward; push out, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trudere to thrust (see
extrusion). Intransitive meaning jut out, bulge forth recorded from 1620s. Related: Protruded;
protruding.


protrusion (n.)

1640s, from French protrusion, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin protrudere to push
out (see protrude), or from a similar formation in English.


protuberance (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin protuberantem (nominative protuberans), present participle of protuberare to
swell, bulge, grow forth, from Latin pro- forward (see pro-) + tuber lump, swelling (see tuber).


protuberant (adj.)

1640s, from French protub&#233;rant (16c.) and directly from Late Latin protuberantem (moninative
protuberans), present participle of protuberare to swell, bulge out (see protuberance). Related:
Protuberantly.


proud (adj.)

late Old English  prud, prute excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, probably from Old French prud,
oblique case of adjective prouz brave, valiant (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme brave
man), from Late Latin prode advantageous, profitable (source also of Italian prode valiant), a back-
formation from Latin prodesse be useful, from pro- before, for, instead of (see pro-) + esse to be
(see essence). Also see pride (n.), prowess.    Meaning elated by some act, fact, or thing is from
mid-13c. To do (someone) proud attested by 1819. Related: Proudness. The -d- in prodesse is probably
due to the influence of forms like red-eo-, 'I go back,' red-imo- 'I buy back,' etc. [OED]. The Old
English form with -te probably is from or influenced by pride.    The sense of have a high opinion
of oneself, not found in Old French, might reflect the Anglo-Saxons' opinion of the Norman knights
who called themselves proud. Old Norse pru&eth;r, probably from the same French source, had only the
sense brave, gallant, magnificent, stately (compare Icelandic pru&eth;ur, Middle Swedish prudh,
Middle Danish prud). Likewise a group of pride words in the Romance languages -- such as French
orgueil, Italian orgoglio, Spanish orgullo -- are borrowings from Germanic, where they had positive
senses (Old High German urgol distinguished).    Most Indo-European languages use the same word for
proud in its good and bad senses, but in many the bad sense seems to be the earlier one. The usual
way to form the word is by some compound of terms for over or high and words for heart, mood,
thought, or appearance; such as Greek hyperephanos, literally over-appearing; Gothic
hauh&thorn;uhts, literally high-conscience. Old English had ofermodig over-moody (mood in Anglo-
Saxon was a much more potent word than presently) and heahheort high-heart. Words for proud in other
Indo-European languages sometimes reflect a physical sense of being swollen or puffed up; such as
Welsh balch, probably from a root meaning to swell, and Modern Greek kamari, from ancient Greek
kamarou furnish with a vault or arched cover, with a sense evolution via make an arch, to puff out
the chest, to be puffed up (compare English slang chesty).


proudly (adv.)

late Old English prutlice arrogantly; from proud + -ly (2). Meaning with conscious honor attested by
1753.


provable (adj.)

late 14c., approvable; c.1400, that can be proved, from Old French provable, from prover (see prove
(v.)).


prove (v.)

late 12c., pruven, proven to try, test; evaluate; demonstrate, from Old French prover, pruver show;
convince; put to the test (11c., Modern French prouver), from Latin probare to make good; esteem,
represent as good; make credible, show, demonstrate; test, inspect; judge by trial (source also of
Spanish probar, Italian probare), from probus worthy, good, upright, virtuous, from PIE *pro-bhwo-
being in front, from *pro-, extended form of root *per- (1) forward, through (see per), + root *bhu-
to be (cognates: Latin fui I have been, futurus about to be; Old English beon to be; see be).
Related: Proved; proven; proving.


provection (n.)

1650s, advancement (obs.); 1868 in the sense carrying of the final letter of a word into the next
one (as in newt), from Late Latin provectionem (nominative provectio) advancement, noun of action
from past participle stem provehere to carry forward, from pro- toward, ahead (see pro-) + vehere to
carry (see vehicle).


provedore

also providore, 1570s, from Portuguese provedor, Spanish proveedor, perhaps via Venetian dialect,
from an agent noun from verbs rooted in Latin providere (see provide).


proven (adj.)

1650s, past participle adjective from alternative past participle (originally in Scottish legal use)
of prove (v).


provenance (n.)

1785, from French provenance origin, production, from provenant, present participle of Middle French
provenir come forth, arise, originate, from Latin provenire come forth, originate, appear, arise,
from pro- forth (see pro-) + venire come (see venue).


Provencal (adj.)

1580s, from French Proven&ccedil;al, from Provence (see Provence). As a name of a language from
1640s. In reference to a style of cooking, attested from 1841.


Provence

from French Provence, from Latin provincia province (see province); the southern part of ancient
Gaul technically was the province of Gallia Narbonensis, but it came under Roman rule long before
the rest of Gaul and as the Romans considered it the province par excellence they familiarly called
it (nostra) provincia our province.


provender (n.)

c.1300, allowance paid each chapter member of a cathedral, from Anglo-French provendir, Old French
provendier provider; recipient, beneficiary, from Gallo-Roman *provenda, altered (by influence of
Latin providere supply) from Late Latin praebenda allowance, subsistence, from Latin praebenda
(things) to be furnished, neuter plural gerundive of praebere to furnish, offer, from prae before
(see pre-) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Meaning food, provisions, etc. (especially dry food
for horses) is recorded from mid-14c.


provenience (n.)

1881, a Latinization of provenance, or else from Latin provenientem (nominative proveniens), present
participle of provenire come forth (see provenance). Preferred to PROVENANCE by those who object to
the French form of the latter [OED].


proverb (n.)

c.1300, in boke of Prouerbyys, the Old Testament work, from Old French proverbe (12c.) and directly
from Latin proverbium a common saying, old adage, maxim, literally words put forward, from pro-
forth (see pro-) + verbum word (see verb). Used generally from late 14c. The Book of Proverbs in Old
English was cwidboc, from cwide speech, saying, proverb, homily, related to cwiddian to talk, speak,
say, discuss; cwiddung speech, saying, report.


proverbial (adj.)

early 15c. (implied in proverbially.), from Late Latin proverbialis pertaining to a proverb, from
proverbium (see proverb).


provide (v.)

early 15c., from Latin providere look ahead, prepare, supply, act with foresight, from pro- ahead
(see pro-) + videre to see (see vision). Related: Provided; providing. Earlier in same sense was
purvey, which is the same word as deformed in Old French.


provided

with condition that, early 15c., conjunction use of past participle of provide. As an adjective,
prepared, ready, 1570s; furnished 1878.


providence (n.)

late 14c., foresight, prudent anticipation, from Old French providence divine providence, foresight
(12c.) and directly from Latin providentia foresight, precaution, foreknowledge, from providentem
(nominative providens), present participle of providere (see provide).   Providence (usually
capitalized) God as beneficent caretaker, first recorded c.1600, from earlier use of the word for
God's beneficient care or guidance (14c.), short for divine providence, etc. The noun in Latin
occasionally had a similar sense.


provident (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin providentem (nominative providens) foreseeing, prudent, present participle of
providere to foresee (see provide).


providential (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to foresifght (implied in providentially); 1640s as pertaining to divine
providence, from Latin providentia (see providence) + -al (1). Meaning by divine interposition is
recorded from 1719.


provider (n.)

1520s, agent noun from provide.


province (n.)

early 14c., country, territory, region, from Old French province province, part of a country;
administrative region for friars (13c.) and directly from Latin provincia territory outside Italy
under Roman domination, also a public office; public duty, of uncertain origin, usually explained as
pro- before + vincere to conquer (see victor); but this does not suit the earliest Latin usages.
Meaning one's particular business or expertise is from 1620s.


provincial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a province, from Old French provincial belonging to a particular province
(of friars) (13c.), from Latin provincialis of a province, from provincia (see province).    Meaning
of the small towns and countryside (as opposed to the capital and urban center) is from 1630s, a
borrowed idiom from French, transferred from sense of particular to the province, hence local.
Suggestive of rude, petty, or narrow society by 1755. Classical Latin provincialis seems not to have
had this tinge. In British use, with reference to the American colonies, from 1680s.


provincial (n.)

late 14c., ecclesiastical head of a province, from provincial (adj.). From c.1600 as native or
inhabitant of a province; from 1711 as country person.


provincialism (n.)

1820 in the political sense, local attachment as opposed to national unity, from provincial + -ism.
Meaning manners or modes of a certain province or of provinces generally (as opposed to the big city
or capital) is from 1836. Sense of a local word or usage or expression is from 1770.
PROVINCIALISM consists in:  (a) An ignorance of the manners, customs and nature of people living
outside one's own village, parish, or nation.  (b) A desire to coerce others into uniformity.  [Ezra
Pound, Provincialism the Enemy, 1917]


provinciality (n.)

quality or condition of being provincial, 1759, from provincial + -ity.


provision (n.)

late 14c., a providing beforehand, action of arranging in advance (originally in reference to
ecclesiastical appointments made before the position was vacant), from Old French provision
precaution, care (early 14c.), from Latin provisionem (nominative provisio) a foreseeing, foresight,
preparation, prevention, noun of action from past participle stem of providere look ahead (see
provide). Meaning something provided is attested from late 15c.; specific sense of supply of food is
from c.1600.


provision (v.)

to supply with provisions, 1787, from provision (n.). Related: Provisioned; provisioning.


provisional (adj.)

as a temporary arrangement for the present, c.1600, from provision (n.) + -al (1), or else from
Middle French provisionnal (15c.), from Old French provision. The notion is of something that will
provide for present needs. Related: Provisionally.


provisioner (n.)

1814, agent noun from provision (v.).


provisions (n.)

supply of food, c.1600; see provision.


proviso (n.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin proviso (quod) provided (that), phrase at the beginning of clauses in
legal documents (mid-14c.), from Latin proviso it being provided, ablative neuter of provisus, past
participle of providere (see provide). Related: Provisory.


provocate (v.)

to provoke, call forth, mid-15c., rare then and now obsolete, from Latin provocatus, past participle
of provocare to call out (see provoke). Related: Provocated; provocating.


provocateur (n.)

1915 (Emma Goldman), shortened form of agent provocateur person hired to make trouble (1845), from
French provocateur, from Latin provocator challenger, from provocare to call out (see provoke).


provocation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French provocacion (12c.) and directly from Latin provocationem (nominative
provocatio) a calling forth, a summoning, a challenge, noun of action from past participle stem of
provocare to call out (see provoke).


provocative (adj.)

mid-15c., eliciting, from Middle French provocatif (15c.) and directly from Late Latin provocativus
calling forth, from provocat-, past participle stem of Latin provocare (see provoke). Specifically
of sexual desire from 1620s. Related: Provocatively; provocativeness. The earliest appearance of the
word in English is as a noun meaning an aphrodisiac (early 15c.).


provoke (v.)

late 14c., from Old French provoker, provochier (12c., Modern French provoquer) and directly from
Latin provocare call forth, challenge, from pro- forth (see pro-) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)).
Related: Provoked; provoking.


provoking (adj.)

1520s, that incites or instigates, present participle adjective from provoke. Meaning irritating,
frustrating is attested from 1640s. Related: Provokingly.


provolone (n.)

1946, from Italian, augmentative of provola cheese made from buffalo milk, from Medieval Latin
probula, of uncertain origin.Il nome non ha una derivazione precisa. L'etimologia, secondo alcuni,
fa pensare alla parola napoletana prova-provola con cui in Campania viene indicato il classico
latticino di bufala a pasta filata, da consumarsi fresco. [Dieta Mediterranea]


provost (n.)

Old English profost, reinforced by Old French cognate provost, both from Late Latin propositus
(reinforced by Old French cognate provost), from Latin propositus/praepositus a chief, prefect
(source of Old Proven&ccedil;al probost, Old High German probost, German Propst), literally placed
before, in charge of, from past participle of praeponere put before (see preposition). Provost
marshal first recorded 1510s.


prow (n.)

forepart of a ship, 1550s, from Middle French proue, from Italian (Genoese) prua, from Vulgar Latin
*proda, by dissimilation from Latin prora prow, from Greek proira, related to pro before, forward,
proi early in the morning, from PIE *pre-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Middle
English and early Modern English (and Scott) had prore in same sense, from Latin. Modern Italian has
proda only in sense shore, bank. Prow and poop meant the whole ship, hence 16c.-17c. figurative use
of the expression for the whole (of anything).


prowess (n.)

late 13c., prouesse, from Old French proece prowess, courage, brave deed (Modern French prouesse),
from prou, later variant of prud brave, valiant, from Vulgar Latin *prodem (source also of Spanish
proeza, Italian prodezza; see proud). Prow was in Middle English as a noun meaning advantage,
profit, also as a related adjective (valiant, brave), but it has become obsolete. In 15-17th c.
often a monosyllable [OED].


prowl (v.)

late 14c., prollen, move about in search of something, of unknown origin, with no known cognates.
Spelling with -w- is from 1500s (compare bowls), but pronounced pr&#244;ll till late 18c. Meaning go
stealthily in search of prey is first recorded 1580s. Related: Prowled; prowling. The noun, in on
the prowl, is attested from 1803.


prowler (n.)

1510s, proller, agent noun from prowl (v.).


prowling (n.)

mid-15c., verbal noun from prowl (v.).


proxemics (n.)

1963, coined from proximity + -emics.


proximal (adj.)

1727, from Latin proximus nearest, next (see proximity) + -al (1). Related: Proximally.


proximate (adj.)

neighboring, 1590s (implied in proximately), from Late Latin proximatus, past participle of
proximare to draw near, from proximus nearest, next (see proximity).


proximity (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French proximit&eacute; nearness (14c.), from Latin proximitatem (nominative
proximitas) nearness, vicinity, from proximus nearest, next; most direct; adjoining, figuratively
latest, most recent; next, following; most faithful, superlative of prope near (see propinquity).


proxy (n.)

early 15c., proccy, prokecye, agency of one who acts instead of another; letter of power of
attorney, contraction of Anglo-French procuracie (c.1300), from Medieval Latin procuratia
administration, from Latin procuratio a caring for, management, from procurare manage (see procure).
Also compare proctor (n.). Meaning person who acts in place of another is from 1610s.


Prozac (n.)

1985, proprietary name for fluoxetine hydrochloride, developed early 1970s by Lilly Industries.


prude (n.)

1704, woman who affects or upholds modesty in a degree considered excessive, from French prude
excessively prim or demure woman, first recorded in Moli&egrave;re. Perhaps a false back-formation
or an ellipsis of preudefemme a discreet, modest woman, from Old French prodefame noblewoman,
gentlewoman; wife, consort, fem. equivalent of prudhomme a brave man (see proud); or perhaps a
direct noun use of the French adjective prude prudish, from Old French prude, prode, preude good,
virtuous, modest, a feminine form of the adjective preux. Also occasionally as an adjective in
English 18c.


prudence (n.)

mid-14c. (c.1200 as a surname), mid-14c., intelligence; discretion, foresight; wisdom to see what is
suitable or profitable; also one of the four cardinal virtues, wisdom to see what is virtuous; from
Old French prudence (13c.) and directly from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight, sagacity,
practical judgment, contraction of providentia foresight (see providence). Secondary sense of wisdom
(late 14c.) is preserved in jurisprudence.


Prudence

fem. proper name; see prudence.


prudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French prudent with knowledge, deliberate (c.1300), from Latin prudentem
(nominative prudens) knowing, skilled, sagacious, circumspect; rarely in literal sense foreseeing;
contraction of providens, present participle of providere to foresee (see provide). Related:
Prudently.


prudential (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin prudentialis, from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight (see
prudence). Related: Prudentially. Prudential, the U.S. insurance company, dates to the 1870s; its
logo featuring the Rock of Gibraltar dates from c.1900 and was widely known 20c.


prudery (n.)

1709, from prude + -ery and in part from French pruderie.  The peculiarity of prudery is to multiply
sentinels, in proportion as the fortress is less threatened. [Victor Hugo, Les Mis&#233;rables]
Some 20c. writers in English used extended form prudibundery, in many cases likely for contemptuous
emphasis, from French prudibonderie prudery.


prudish (adj.)

1717, from prude (adj.) + -ish. Related: Prudishly; prudishness.


prune (n.)

mid-14c., a plum, also a dried plum (c.1200 in place name Prunhill), from Old French pronne plum
(13c.), from Vulgar Latin *pruna, fem. singular formed from Latin pruna, neuter plural of prunum a
plum, by dissimilation from Greek proumnon, from a language of Asia Minor. Slang meaning
disagreeable or disliked person is from 1895. Prune juice is from 1807.


prune (v.)

early 15c., prouyne, from Old French proignier cut back (vines), prune (Modern French provigner), of
unknown origin. Perhaps [Watkins] from Gallo-Roman *pro-retundiare cut in a rounded shape in front,
from pro- forth (see pro-) + *retundiare round off, from Latin rotundus (see round (adj.)). Klein
suggests the Old French word is from provain layer of a vine, from Latin propago (see prop (n.1)).
Or the Middle English word might be identical with the falconry term proinen, proynen trim the
feather with the beak (late 14c.), source of preen [Barnhart]. Related: Pruned; pruning. Pruning
hook is from 1610s; pruning knife from 1580s.


prunella (n.)

stout textile used for men's robes and gowns, 1650s, from French prunelle, noun use of adjective
meaning plum-colored, from prunelle, diminutive of prune plum (see prune (n.)).


prurience (n.)

1680s, from prurient + -ence. Related: Pruriency (1660s).


prurient (adj.)

1630s, itching, later, and now exclusively, having an itching desire (1650s), especially lascivious,
lewd, (1746), from Latin prurientem (nominative pruriens), present participle of prurire to itch; to
long for, be wanton, perhaps related to pruna glowing coals, from PIE root *preus- to freeze; burn
(see freeze (v.)). Related: Pruriently.


pruritus (n.)

itching of the skin without visible eruption [Klein], 1650s, from Latin pruritus, past participle of
prurire to itch (see prurient). Earlier via Old French in form prurite (early 15c.). Related:
Pruritic.


prushun (n.)

1893, boy who travels with a tramp and begs for him, of unknown origin; his protector/owner was a
jocker.


Prussia (n.)

from Medieval Latin Borussi, Prusi, Latinized forms of the native name of the Lithuanian people who
lived in the bend of the Baltic before being conquered 12c. and exterminated by (mostly) German
crusaders who replaced them as the inhabitants. Perhaps from Slavic *Po-Rus (The Land) Near the Rusi
(Russians). The duchy of Prussia after union with the Mark of Brandenberg, became the core of the
Prussian monarchy and later the chief state in the German Empire.


Prussian

1550s (n.), 1560s (adj.), from Prussia + -an. Prussian blue pigment (1724) came to English from
French bleu de Prusse, so called for being discovered in Berlin, the Prussian capital.    All in
all, it seems that Prussian blue was synthesised for the first time around 1706 by the Swiss
immigrant Johann Jacob Diesbach in Berlin. [Jens Bartoll and B&auml;rbel Jackisch, Prussian Blue: A
Chronology of the Early Years, Zeitschrift f&uuml;r Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 24, No. 1,
2010]    Early German sources refer to it as Preu&szlig;isches Ultra-Marin and berliner blau.
Prussic acid (1790), is from French acide prussique, so called in reference to prussian blue
pigment, to which it is chemically related.


pry (v.1)

look inquisitively, c.1300, from prien to peer in, of unknown origin, perhaps related to late Old
English bepriwan to wink. Related: Pried; prying. As a noun, act of prying, from 1750; meaning
inquisitive person is from 1845.


pry (v.2)

raise by force, 1823, from a noun meaning instrument for prying, crowbar; alteration of prize (as
though it were a plural) in obsolete sense of lever (c.1300), from Old French prise a taking hold,
grasp (see prize (n.2)).


psalm (n.)

Old English psealm, salm, partly from Old French psaume, saume, partly from Church Latin psalmus,
from Greek psalmos song sung to a harp, originally performance on stringed instrument; a plucking of
the harp (compare psaltes harper), from psallein play on a stringed instrument, pull, twitch (see
feel (v.)).    Used in Septuagint for Hebrew mizmor song, especially the sort sung by David to the
harp. Related: Psalmodize; psalmody. After some hesitation, the pedantic ps- spelling prevailed in
English, as it was in many neighboring languages (German, French, etc.), but English is almost alone
in not pronouncing the p-.


psalmist (n.)

late 15c. (replacing psalmistre, late 14c.), from Middle French psalmiste and directly from Church
Latin psalmista, from Ecclesiastical Greek psalmistes, from psalmizein to sing psalms, from psalmos
(see psalm).


psalter (n.)

the Book of Psalms, Old English saltere, psaltere, from Church Latin psalterium the songs of David,
in secular Latin, stringed instrument played by twanging, from Greek psalterion stringed instrument,
psaltery, harp, from psallein to pluck, play on a stringed instrument (see psalm).


psaltery (n.)

ancient stringed instrument, c.1300, from Old French psalterie (12c.), from Latin psalterium
stringed instrument, from Greek psalterion stringed instrument, from psallein play on a stringed
instrument, pull, pluck (see psalm).


psammo-

word-forming element meaning sand, from comb. form of Greek psammos sand, related to psamathos (see
sand (n.)). Related: Psammic; psammite.


psephocracy (n.)

government formed by election by ballot, from Greek psephizein to vote (properly to vote with
pebbles, from psephos pebble) + -cracy.


psephology (n.)

study of elections, 1952, from Greek psephizein to vote (properly to vote with pebbles, from psephos
pebble) + -logy.


psephomancy (n.)

divination by pebbles drawn from a heap, 1727, from Greek psephos pebble + -mancy.


pseudepigraphy (n.)

ascription of false authorship to a book, 1842, probably via German or French, from pseudo- +
epigraph + -y (1). Related: Pseudepigrapha; pseudepigraphic (1830); pseudepigraphical (1838);
pseudepigraphal (1630s).


pseudo (n.)

late 14c., false or spurious thing; see pseudo-. As an adjective in this sense from mid-15c. In
modern use, of persons, pretentious, insincere, from 1945; as a noun from 1959. Related: Pseudish.


pseudo-

often before vowels pseud-, word-forming element meaning false; feigned; erroneous; in appearance
only; resembling, from Greek pseudo-, comb. form of pseudes false, lying; falsely; deceived, or
pseudos falsehood, untruth, a lie, both from pseudein to deceive, cheat by lies.    Productive in
compound formation in ancient Greek (such as pseudodidaskalos false teacher, pseudokyon a sham
cynic, pseudologia a false speech, pseudoparthenos pretended virgin), it began to be used with
native words in Middle English.


pseudo-science (n.)

also pseudoscience, a pretended or mistaken science, 1796 (the earliest reference is to alchemy),
from pseudo- + science.    The term pseudo-science is hybrid, and therefore objectionable.
Pseudognosy would be better etymology, but the unlearned might be apt to association with it the
idea of a dog's nose, and thus, instead of taking the eel of science by the tail, take the cur of
science by the snout; so that all things considered we had better adopt the current term pseudo-
sciences [The Pseudo-Sciences, in The St. James Magazine, January 1842]


pseudo-scientific (adj.)

also pseudoscientific, 1816; see pseudo- + scientific; also compare pseudo-science.


pseudocide (n.)

pretended suicide attempt, 1959, from pseudo- + ending abstracted from suicide.


pseudograph (n.)

writing falsely ascribed to someone, 1828 (in German from 1809), from Late Latin pseudographus, from
Greek pseudographos writer of falsehoods, from pseudo- (see pseudo-) + graphos (something) drawn or
written (see -graphy). Pseudography was in English from 1570s with a sense misspelling.


pseudomorph (n.)

irregular form, 1838, earlier in German and French, from pseudo- + Greek morphe form (see Morpheus).
Related: Pseudomorphic.


pseudonym (n.)

1828, in part a back-formation from pseudonymous, in part from German pseudonym and French
pseudonyme (adj.), from Greek pseudonymos having a false name, under a false name, from pseudes
false (see pseudo-) + onyma, Aeolic dialectal variant of onoma name (see name (n.)).    Possibly a
dictionary word at first [Barnhart]. Fowler calls it a queer out-of-the-way term for an everyday
thing. Properly in reference to made-up names; the name of an actual author or person of reputation
affixed to a work he or she did not write is an allonym. An author's actual name affixed to his or
her own work is an autonym (1867).


pseudonymous (adj.)

1766, from Modern Latin pseudonymus, from Greek pseudonymos (see pseudonym). Related:
Pseudonymously.


pseudopod (n.)

1862, from Modern Latin pseudopodium (itself in English from 1854), from Latinized form of Greek
pseudo- (see pseudo-) + podion, diminutive of pous foot (see foot (n.)). Related: Pseudopodal.


pshaw (interj.)

exclamation of contempt or rejection, by 1670s.


psi (n.)

23rd letter of the Greek alphabet. Use for psychic force, paranormal phenomenon dates from 1942
(probably from psychic (adj.)).


psilanthropism (n.)

the teaching that Jesus was entirely human, 1817 (Coleridge; Biographia Literaria), from Greek
psilanthropos merely human, from psilos naked, bare, mere (see psilo-) + anthropos man (see
anthropo-). Related: Psilanthropy; psilanthropic; psilanthropist.


psilo-

before vowels psil-, word-forming element meaning stripped, bare, from Greek psilos bare, naked;
mere, perhaps akin to psen to rub, and both or either perhaps from PIE root *bhes- to rub (source
also of Greek psamathos sand; see sand (n.)).


psilocybin (n.)

1958, from Modern Latin psilocybe, name of a Central American species of mushroom, from Greek psilos
bare (see psilo-) + kybe head.


psilosis (n.)

loss of hair through disease, 1837, medical Latin, from Greek psilosis a stripping of hair, from
psiloun to strip of hair, from psilos bare (see psilo-).


psionic (adj.)

1952, from psi + ending from electronic, etc.


psittacine (adj.)

pertaining to parrots, 1826, from Latin psittacinus, from psittacus parrot, from Greek psittakos a
parrot, said to be a foreign word.


psittacism (n.)

mere parroting, parrotry, repetition without reasoning, 1884, from French psittacisme (Liebnitz,
1765) or German psittazismus, from Latin psittacus parrot (see psittacine) + -ism.


psoas (n.)

1680s, from Greek psoa (plural psoai) muscles of the loins. Related: Psoitis.    Gk. [psoas], the
gen. of the feminine noun [psoa], was mistaken by the French anatomist Jean Riolan (1577-1657) for
the nom. of a (nonexistent) masculine noun. It was he who introduced this erroneous form into
anatomy. [Klein]


psoriasis (n.)

1680s, from medical Latin psoriasis, in Late Latin mange, scurvy, from Greek psoriasis being itchy,
from psorian to have the itch, from psora itch, mange, scab, related to psen to rub (see psilo-).
Related: Psoriatic.


psych

as a noun, short for psychology in various senses (e.g. as an academic study, in student slang by
1895). As a verb, first attested 1917 as to subject to psychoanalysis, short for psychoanalyze. From
1934 as to outsmart (also psych out); from 1963 as to unnerve. However to psych (oneself) up is from
1972; to be psyched up is attested from 1968.


psyche (n.)

1640s, animating spirit, from Latin psyche, from Greek psykhe the soul, mind, spirit; breath; life,
one's life, the invisible animating principle or entity which occupies and directs the physical
body; understanding (personified as Psykhe, the beloved of Eros), akin to psykhein to blow, cool,
from PIE root *bhes- to blow, to breathe (source also of Sanskrit bhas-), Probably imitative
[Watkins].    Also in ancient Greek, departed soul, spirit, ghost, and often represented
symbolically as a butterfly or moth. The word had extensive sense development in Platonic philosophy
and Jewish-influenced theological writing of St. Paul (compare spirit (n.)). Meaning human soul is
from 1650s. In English, psychological sense mind, is attested by 1910.


psychedelia (n.)

1967, from psychedelic + -ia.


psychedelic (adj.)

occasionally psychodelic, 1956, of drugs, suggested by British-born Canadian psychiatrist Humphry
Osmond (1917-2004) in a letter to Aldous Huxley and used by Osmond in a scientific paper published
the next year; from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + deloun make visible, reveal, from delos
visible, clear, from PIE root *dyeu- to shine (see diurnal). In popular use from 1965 with reference
to anything producing effects similar to that of a psychedelic drug or enhancing the effects of such
a drug. As a noun from 1956.


psychedelicize (v.)

1966, from psychedelic + -ize. Related: Psychedelicized; psychedelicizing.


psychiatric (adj.)

1847, from French psychiatrique or else coined in English from psychiatry + -ic.


psychiatrist (n.)

1875, from psychiatry + -ist.A psychiatrist is a man who goes to the Folies Berg&egrave;re and looks
at the audience. [Anglican Bishop Mervyn Stockwood, 1961]  An older name was mad-doctor (1703); also
psychiater expert in mental diseases (1852), from Greek psyche + iatros. Also see alienist.


psychiatry (n.)

1846, from French psychiatrie, from Medieval Latin psychiatria, literally a healing of the soul,
from Latinized form of Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + iatreia healing, care (see -iatric).


psychic (adj.)

1872, of or pertaining to the human soul (earlier psychical, 1640s), from Greek psykhikos of the
soul, spirit, or mind (opposed to somatikos), also (New Testament) concerned with the life only,
animal, natural, from psykhe soul, mind, life (see psyche). Meaning characterized by psychic gifts
first recorded 1871.


psychic (n.)

a medium; 1870; see psychic (adj.).


psycho (adj.)

1927, shortening of psychological; 1936 (Raymond Chandler) as shortening of psychopathic (adj.).


psycho (n.)

1925, short for psychologist; as short for psychopath from 1942.


psycho-

word-forming element meaning mind, mental; spirit, unconscious, from Greek psykho-, combining form
of psykhe (see psyche). It also was used to form compounds in Greek, such as psychopates soul-
beguiling.


psycho-history (n.)

1934, from psycho- + history.


psychoactive (adj.)

also psycho-active, 1959, from psycho- + active.


psychoanalysis (n.)

1906, from Psychoanalyse, coined 1896 in French by Freud from Latinized form of Greek psykhe- mental
(see psyche) + German Analyse, from Greek analysis (see analysis). Freud earlier used psychische
analyse (1894).


psychoanalyst (n.)

also psycho-analyst, 1910; see psycho- + analyst.


psychoanalytic (adj.)

1902, from psychoanalysis + -ic.


psychoanalyze (v.)

also psycho-analyse, psychoanalyse, 1911; see psycho- + analyze. Related: Psychoanalyzed;
psychoanalyzing. Earlier was psychologize (1830).


psychobabble (n.)

1976, from psycho- (representing psychology) + babble (n.). Earlier was psychologese (1961).


psychodrama (n.)

also psycho-drama, 1937 (in writing of U.S. psychiatrist Jacob L. Moreno (1889-1974)), from psycho-
+ drama. Related: Psychodramatic.


psychodynamic (adj.)

also psycho-dynamic, 1856, from psycho- + dynamic (adj.).


psychogenesis (n.)

also psycho-genesis, 1838, origin of the soul or mind, from psycho- + genesis. Related:
Psychogenetic; psychogenetical.


psychogenic (adj.)

1884, from psycho- + -genic.


psychographic (adj.)

also psycho-graphic, 1856, from psychograph supernatural photographic image, from psycho- + -graph.
Related: Psychographics.


psychography (n.)

1883, history of an individual soul; the natural history of the phenomenon of mind, from psycho- +
-graphy. Meaning spirit-writing is from 1876.


psychokinesis (n.)

1914 [Henry Holt, On the Cosmic Relations], from psycho- + kinesis. Related: Psychokinetic (1904).


psychological (adj.)

1680s; see psychology + -ical. Related: Psychologically. Psychological warfare recorded from 1940.
Psychological moment was in vogue from 1871, from French moment psychologique moment of immediate
expectation of something about to happen.    The original German phrase, misinterpreted by the
French &amp; imported together with its false sense into English, meant the psychic factor, the
mental effect, the influence exerted by a state of mind, &amp; not a point of time at all, das
Moment in German corresponding to our momentum, not our moment. [Fowler]


psychologist (n.)

1727; see psychology + -ist.


psychology (n.)

1650s, study of the soul, from Modern Latin psychologia, probably coined mid-16c. in Germany by
Melanchthon from Latinized form of Greek psykhe- breath, spirit, soul (see psyche) + logia study of
(see -logy). Meaning study of the mind first recorded 1748, from Christian Wolff's Psychologia
empirica (1732); main modern behavioral sense is from early 1890s.


psychometric (adj.)

also psycho-metric, 1854, from psychometry (1854), the alleged power of reading the history of an
object by handling it, + -ic. In reference to the measurement of the duration of mental states, from
1879, from psycho- + -metric.


psychometrics (n.)

science of measuring mental processes, 1917, from psychometric; also see -ics.


psychomotor (adj.)

also psycho-motor, 1873, from psycho- + motor (adj.).


psychopath (n.)

1885, in the criminal psychology sense, a back-formation from psychopathic.    The Daily Telegraph
had, the other day, a long article commenting on a Russian woman who had murdered a little girl. A
Dr. Balinsky prevailed upon the jury to give a verdict of acquittal, because she was a psychopath.
The Daily Telegraph regards this term as a new coinage, but it has been long known amongst
Spiritualists, yet in another sense. [The Medium and Daybreak, Jan. 16, 1885]    The case alluded
to, and the means of acquittal, were briefly notorious in England and brought the word into currency
in the modern sense.


psychopathic (adj.)

1847, from psychopathy on model of German psychopatisch, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) +
pathos suffering (see pathos).


psychopathology (n.)

1847, from psycho- + pathology, on model of German psychopathologie.


psychopathy (n.)

1847, from psycho- + -pathy, on model of German psychopathie.


psychopharmacology (n.)

also psycho-pharmacology, 1919, from psycho- + pharmacology. Related: Psychopharmacological.


psychopomp (n.)

1835, from Greek psykhopompos spirit-guide, a term applied to Charon, Hermes Trismegistos, Apollo;
from psykhe (see psyche) + pompos guide, conductor.


psychosexual (adj.)

also psycho-sexual, 1891, from psycho- + sexual. Related: Psychosexually.


psychosis (n.)

1847, mental derangement, Modern Latin, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + -osis abnormal
condition. Greek psykhosis meant a giving of life; animation; principle of life.


psychosocial (adj.)

also psycho-social, 1891, from psycho- + social (adj.).


psychosomatic (adj.)

1847, pertaining to the relation between mind and body, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) +
somatikos, from soma (genitive somatos) body (see somato-). Applied from 1938 to physical disorders
with psychological causes. Etymologically it could as easily apply to emotional disorders with
physical causes, but it is rarely used as such.


psychotherapist (n.)

1894, from psychotherapy + -ist.


psychotherapy (n.)

1892 in modern sense, from psycho- + therapy, in model of French psychoth&#233;rapie (1889). In
early use also of hypnotism. Related: Psychotherapeutic.


psychotic (adj.)

1889, coined from psychosis, on the model of neurotic/neurosis, from Greek psykhe- mind, soul (see
psyche).


psychotic (n.)

a psychotic person, 1901, from psychotic (adj.).


psychotropic (adj.)

1956, from psycho- + Greek -tropos turning, from trepein (see trope). Hence, what turns the mind.


psychro-

word-forming element meaning cold, from Latinized form of Greek psykhros cold, from psykhrein blow,
make cool or cold, from the same root as psyche.


psychrometer (n.)

instrument to measure moisture in the atmosphere, 1749, from Latinized form of Greek psykhros cold +
-meter.


psychrophobia (n.)

1727, from psychro- cold + -phobia fear.


pt-

An initial consonant combination common in Greek; the p- is typically silent in English words that
have it but pronounced in French, German, etc.


ptarmic (n.)

substance which causes sneezing, 1680s, from noun use of Latin ptarmicus, from Greek ptarmikos
causing sneezing, from ptarmos sneeze.


ptarmigan (n.)

bird of the grouse family, 1590s, from Gaelic tarmachan, of unknown origin. The pt- spelling (1680s)
is a mistaken Greek construction (perhaps based on pteron wing).


ptero-

before vowels pter-, word-forming element in science meaning feather; wing, from comb. form of Greek
pteron wing, from PIE *pt-ero- (cognates: Sanskrit patram wing, feather, Old Church Slavonic pero
pen, Old Norse fj&ouml;&eth;r, Old English fe&eth;er), from root *pet- to rush; to fly (see petition
(n.))


pterodactyl (n.)

extinct flying reptile, 1830, from French pt&eacute;rodactyle (1821), from Modern Latin genus name
Pterodactylus, from Greek pteron wing (see ptero-) + daktylos finger (see dactyl).


Ptolemaic (adj.)

1670s, of Ptolemy, Alexandrian astronomer (2c.) whose geocentric model of the universe was accepted
until the time of Copernicus and Kepler. Also (1771) of the Ptolemies, Macedonian Greek dynasty that
ruled Egypt from the death of Alexander to Cleopatra. Earlier form was Ptolemaean (1640s).


Ptolemy

ancient masc. proper name, from Greek Ptolemaios, literally warlike, from ptolemos, collateral form
of polemos war. Also see Ptolemaic.


ptomaine (n.)

1880, from Italian ptomaina, coined by Professor Francesco Selmi of Bologna, 1878, from Greek ptoma
corpse, on notion of poison produced in decaying matter. Greek ptoma is literally a fall, a falling,
via the notion of fallen thing, fallen body; nominal derivative of piptein to fall (see symptom).
Incorrectly formed, and Selmi is roundly scolded for it in OED, which says proper Greek would be
*ptomatine.


ptosis (n.)

1743, from Greek ptosis, literally falling, a fall, also the case of a noun, nominal derivative of
piptein to fall (see symptom). In English, especially of the eyelid. Related: Ptotic.


pub (n.)

1859, slang shortening of public house (see public (adj.)), which originally meant any building open
to the public (1570s), then inn that provides food and is licensed to sell ale, wine, and spirits
(1660s), and finally tavern (1768). Pub crawl first attested 1910 in British slang.


puberty (n.)

the time of life in which the two sexes begin first to be acquainted [Johnson], late 14c., from Old
French pubert&eacute; and directly from Latin pubertatem (nominative pubertas) age of maturity,
manhood, from pubes (genitive pubertis) adult, full-grown, manly. Related: Puberal; pubertal.


pubes (n.)

1560s, pubic hair, from Latin pubes pubescent, arrived at the age of puberty, of ripe years, grown
up, also, as a noun, a sign of puberty (such as pubic hair), also young men of the age of puberty
(see puberty). In 19c. also pubic bone, and earlier part of either hip bone that forms the front of
the pelvis, from Latin os pubis, from pubes genital area. In modern slang, monosyllable, a familiar
shortening of pubic hairs (see pubic).


pubescence (n.)

early 15c., Middle French pubescence, from Medieval Latin pubescentia, noun of state from Latin
pubescentem (nominative pubescens), present participle of pubescere grow up; ripen, come to
maturity; reach the age of puberty, arrive at puberty, from pubes adult, full-grown (see puberty).


pubescent (adj.)

1610s, a back-formation from pubescence, or else from French pubescent (early 16c.) or directly from
Latin pubescentem (nominative pubescens), present participle of pubescere to reach puberty (see
pubescence).


pubic (adj.)

1811, with -ic + medical Latin pubis bone of the groin (1590s), short for Latin os pubis, from Latin
pubes (genitive pubis) genital area, groin, related to pubes (adj.) full-grown (see puberty).


public (adj.)

late 14c., open to general observation, from Old French public (c.1300) and directly from Latin
publicus of the people; of the state; done for the state, also common, general, public; ordinary,
vulgar, and as a noun, a commonwealth; public property, altered (probably by influence of Latin
pubes adult population, adult) from Old Latin poplicus pertaining to the people, from populus people
(see people (n.)).    Early 15c. as pertaining to the people. From late 15c. as pertaining to public
affairs; meaning open to all in the community is from 1540s in English. An Old English adjective in
this sense was folclic. Public relations first recorded 1913 (after an isolated use by Thomas
Jefferson in 1807).   Public office position held by a public official is from 1821; public service
is from 1570s; public interest from 1670s.   Public-spirited is from 1670s. Public enemy is attested
from 1756. Public sector attested from 1949.   Public school is from 1570s, originally, in Britain,
a grammar school endowed for the benefit of the public, but most have evolved into boarding-schools
for the well-to-do. The main modern meaning in U.S., school (usually free) provided at public
expense and run by local authorities, is attested from 1640s. For public house, see pub.


public (n.)

the community, 1610s, from public (adj.); meaning people in general is from 1660s. In public in
public view, publicly is attested from c.1500.


publican (n.)

c.1200, tax-gatherer, from Old French publician (12c.), from Latin publicanus a tax collector, noun
use of an adjective, pertaining to public revenue, from publicum public revenue, noun use of neuter
of publicus (see public (adj.)). Original sense in Matt. xviii:17, etc.; meaning keeper of a pub
first recorded 1728, from public (house) + -an.


publication (n.)

late 14c., the act of making publicly known, from Old French publicacion (14c.) and directly from
Latin publicationem (nominative publicatio) a making public, noun of action from past participle
stem of publicare make public, from publicus (see public (adj.)). Meaning the issuing of a written
or printed work is first recorded 1570s; as the word for the thing so issued, from 1650s. Parallel
publishment had a shadowy existence alongside this word, in local and specialized use, into the 18c.


publicise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of publicize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Publicised;
publicising.


publicist (n.)

1792, person learned in public law or the law of nations, from public (adj.) + -ist. Also from 1795
in English as writer on current topics, from French publiciste; in either case a hybrid.    Then
crept in the loose usage. Anybody who wrote or spoke about public affairs came to be dubbed a
publicist. It was only a question of time when the dam would give way and the word flow in all
directions and be made to cover every kind of talent, or lack of it. [The Nation, Nov. 22, 1917]
Meaning press agent is from 1925 (publicity agent attested by 1900); publicitor also was tried in
this sense.


publicity (n.)

1791, condition of being public, from French publicit&eacute; (1690s), from Medieval Latin
publicitatem (nominative publicitas), from Latin publicus (see public (adj.)). Sense of a making
(something) known, an exposure to the public is from 1826, shading by c.1900 into advertising,
business of promotion. Publicity stunt first recorded 1908.


publicization (n.)

act of publicizing, 1962, noun of action from publicize. There is a 1907 use in the sense a making
public (of bridges built privately, etc.).


publicize (n.)

1902; see public (adj.) + -ize. Related: Publicized; publicizing.


publicly (adv.)

1560s, in public, from public (adj.) + -ly (2). From 1580s as by the public. Variant publically is
attested from 1812, perhaps based on the fact that publicly is the only exception in this class of
words, which as a rule are spelled -ically though often they are pronounced otherwise.


publish (v.)

mid-14c., make publicly known, reveal, divulge, announce; alteration of publicen (early 14c.) by
influence of banish, finish, etc.; from extended stem of Old French publier make public, spread
abroad, communicate, from Latin publicare make public, from publicus public (see public). Meaning
issue (a book, etc.) to the public is from late 14c., also to disgrace, put to shame; denounce
publicly. Related: Published; publishing. In Middle English the verb also meant to people, populate;
to multiply, breed (late 14c.), for example ben published of be descended from.


publishable (adj.)

1803, from publish + -able.


publisher (n.)

mid-15c., one who announces in public, agent noun from publish (v.). Meaning one whose business is
bringing out for sale books, periodicals, engravings, etc. is from 1740.


publishing (n.)

mid-15c., act of announcing or declaring, also the issuing of copies of a book for public sale,
verbal noun from publish (v.).


puce (n.)

brownish-purple, 1787, from French puce flea-color; flea, from Latin pucilem (nominative pulex)
flea, from PIE *plou- flea (cognates: Sanskrit plusih, Greek psylla, Old Church Slavonic blucha,
Lithuanian blusa, Armenian lu flea). That it could be generally recognized as a color seems a
testimony to our ancestors' intimacy with vermin.


pucelle (n.)

maid, mid-15c., especially in reference to Joan of Arc (called in Old French la pucelle from
c.1423), according to French sources from Vulgar Latin *pulicella maid (source also of Italian
pulcella), diminutive of Latin pulla, fem. of pullus young animal, especially a chicken (see foal
(n.)), but there are difficulties with this derivation. Also, in 16c. English, a drab, a slut.


puck (n.)

ice hockey disk, 1891, possibly from puck (v.) to hit, strike (1861), which perhaps is related to
poke (v.) via notion of push. Another suggestion traces the noun to Irish poc bag.


Puck

mischievous fairy (in A Midsummer Night's Dream), probably from pouke devil, evil spirit (c.1300),
from Old English puca, pucel goblin, cognate with Old Norse puki devil, fiend, of unknown origin
(compare pug). Celtic origins also have been proposed. Capitalized since 16c. His disguised name was
Robin Goodfellow.


pucker (v.)

1590s, prob. earlier in colloquial use [OED], possibly a frequentative form of pock, dialectal
variant of poke bag, sack (see poke (n.1)), which would give it the same notion as in purse (v.).
Verbs of this type often shorten or obscure the original vowel; compare clutter, flutter, putter,
etc. [Barnhart]. Related: Puckered; puckering.


pucker (n.)

1726, literal; 1741, figurative; from pucker (v.).


puckish (adj.)

1867, from Puck + -ish. Related: Puckishly; puckishness.


puckster (n.)

 headlinese for ice hockey player, 1939, from puck (n.) + -ster.


pud (n.)

slang for penis, 1939 (in James Joyce), according to OED and DAS from pudding in the same slang
sense (1719); from the original sausage sense of pudding (q.v.).


pudding (n.)

c.1300, a kind of sausage: the stomach or one of the entrails of a pig, sheep, etc., stuffed with
minced meat, suet, seasoning, boiled and kept till needed, perhaps from a West Germanic stem *pud-
to swell (cognates: Old English puduc a wen, Westphalian dialect puddek lump, pudding, Low German
pudde-wurst black pudding, English dialectal pod belly; also see pudgy).    Other possibility is the
traditional one that it is from Old French boudin sausage, from Vulgar Latin *botellinus, from Latin
botellus sausage (change of French b- to English p- presents difficulties, but compare purse (n.)).
The modern sense had emerged by 1670, from extension to other foods boiled or steamed in a bag or
sack (16c.). German pudding, French pouding, Swedish pudding, Irish putog are from English. Pudding-
pie attested from 1590s.


puddinghead (n.)

amiable stupid person, 1851, from pudding + head (n.).


puddle (n.)

early 14c., small pool of dirty water, frequentative or diminutive of Old English pudd ditch,
related to German pudeln to splash in water (compare poodle). Originally used of pools and ponds as
well.


puddle (v.)

to dabble in water, poke in mud, mid-15c., from puddle (n.); extended sense in iron manufacture is
turn and stir (molten iron) in a furnace. Related: Puddled; puddling.


pudendum (n.)

external genitals, late 14c. (pudenda), from Latin pudendum (plural pudenda), literally thing to be
ashamed of, neuter gerundive of pudere make ashamed; be ashamed, from PIE root *(s)peud- to punish,
repulse. Translated into Old English as scamlim (shame-limb); in Middle English also anglicized as
pudende (early 15c.). Related: Pudendal.


pudeur (n.)

modesty, especially in sexual matters, 1937, from French pudeur modesty, from Latin pudor shame,
modesty, from pudere make ashamed (see pudendum). The same word had been borrowed into English
directly from Latin as pudor (1620s), but this became obsolete.


pudge (n.)

short, thick-set person, 1808 [Jamieson]; see pudgy.


pudgy (adj.)

also podgy, 1824, from colloquial pudge anything short and thick + -y (2). Perhaps related to pudsy
plump (1754), possibly a diminutive of nursery word pud hand, forepaw (from 17c.). A connection with
pudding also has been conjectured. In late 19c. often on lists of English local or dialectal words;
sources also mention puddy, punchy, pluggy, pudget as relatives or variants. Related: Pudginess.


pueblo (n.)

Indian village, 1808, from Spanish pueblo village, small town; people, population, from Latin
populum, accusative of populus people (see people (n.)).


puericulture (n.)

science of bringing up healthy children, including prenatal care, 1887, from French
pu&#233;riculture (A. Caron, 1866), from Latin puer boy, child (see puerility) + cultura cultivation
(see culture).


puerile (adj.)

1660s, youthful, boyish, a back-formation from puerility, or else from French pu&#233;ril (15c.),
from Latin puerilis boyish; childish, from puer boy, child (see puerility). Disparaging sense,
juvenile, immature, is from 1680s.


puerility (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French pu&eacute;rilit&eacute; (15c.), from Latin puerilitatem (nominative
puerilitas) childishness, from puerilis boyish, youthful; childish, trivial, silly, from puer child,
boy, from PIE *pau- (1) few, little, with sense extended to small, young (cognates: Latin putus boy,
Sanskrit putrah son, boy, Avestan puthra- son, child; see few (adj.)).


puerperal (adj.)

1768, with -al (1) + Latin puerperus bringing forth children; bearing a child (as a noun, woman in
labor), from puer child, boy (see puerility) + parere to bear (see pare). Earlier puerperial
(1620s).


puerperium (n.)

confinement during and after childbirth, 1863, from Latin puerperus (see puerperal).


Puerto Rican

1873 (n.), 1874 (adj.), from Puerto Rico + -an. Earlier was Porto Rican (1842).


Puerto Rico

Spanish, literally rich harbor; Caribbean island, name given in 1493 by Christopher Columbus to the
large bay on the north side of the island; he called the island itself San Juan. Over time the name
of the bay became the name of the island and the name of the island was taken by the town that grew
up at the bay. Often spelled Porto Rico in 19c.; name officially changed 1932.


puff (n.)

c.1200, perhaps Old English, puf, puffe short, quick blast; act of puffing, from puff (v.). Meaning
type of light pastry is recorded from late 14c.; that of small pad for applying powder to skin or
hair is from 1650s. Figurative sense of flattery, inflated praise is first recorded 1732. Derogatory
use for homosexual male is recorded by 1902.


puff (v.)

Old English pyffan to blow with the mouth, of imitative origin. Meaning pant, breathe hard and fast
is from late 14c. Used of small swellings and round protuberances since 1530s. Transitive figurative
sense of exalt is from 1530s; shading by early 18c. into meaning praise with self-interest. Related:
Puffed; puffing.


puff-adder (n.)

1789 of a South African snake that is venomous; 1882 of a western U.S. snake that is not; from puff
(v.) + adder.


puff-ball (n.)

type of fungus, 1640s, from puff + ball (n.1).


puffer (n.)

1620s, agent noun from puff (v.). As one who praises or extols, from 1736. As a type of fish that
inflates itself in defense, from 1814.


puffery (n.)

inflated laudation [OED], 1782, from puff (v.) in its figurative sense + -ery.


puffin (n.)

North Atlantic seabird, mid-14c., perhaps connected with puff on notion of appearance, or from some
Celtic word (earliest association is with Cornwall and Scilly), and altered by influence of puff.


puffy (adj.)

1610s, of wind, gusty, from puff + -y (2). Of other things, swollen, from 1660s. Earliest attested
use is figurative, bombastic (1590s). Related: Puffily; puffiness.


pug (n.)

1560s, general term of endearment (also puggy), probably related to puck (n.2); one of the earliest
senses is sprite, imp (1610s). The sense of miniature dog is from 1749 (pug-dog); that of monkey is
1660s. The word at various times meant a bargeman (1590s), a harlot (c.1600), and an upper servant
in a great house (1847).


pug-nose (n.)

1778, from pug (n.) based on fancied similarity to the nose of either the monkey or the dog.
Related: Pug-nosed.


pugilism (n.)

1789, from Latin pugil boxer, fist-fighter, related to pugnus fist (see pugnacious) + -ism.
Pugilation fighting with fists, now obsolete, is recorded from 1650s.


pugilist (n.)

1789, from Latin pugil boxer, fist-fighter, related to pugnus a fist (see pugnacious) + -ist.
Related: Pugilistic (1789); pugilistically. Pugil occasionally turns up in English as boxer, fist-
fighter (from 1640s), but it has not caught on. Pugil stick (1962) was introduced by U.S. military
as a substitute for rifles in bayonet drills.


pugnacious (adj.)

1640s, a back-formation from pugnacity or else from Latin pugnacis, genitive of pugnax combative,
fond of fighting, from pugnare to fight, especially with the fists, contend against, from pugnus a
fist, from PIE *pung-, nasalized form of root *peuk-, *peug- to stick, stab, to prick (cognates:
Greek pyx with clenched fist, pygme fist, boxing, pyktes boxer; Latin pungere to pierce, prick).


pugnacity (n.)

c.1600, from Latin pugnacitas fondness for fighting, from pugnax (genitive pugnacis) combative (see
pugnacious).


puisne (adj.)

junior, c.1300 in Anglo-Latin, from Old French puisn&eacute; born later, younger, youngest (see
puny).


puissance (n.)

early 15c., power, strength, authority, from Old French puissance, poissance power, might (12c.),
from puissant (see puissant).


puissant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French puissant strong, mighty, powerful, earlier poissant (12c.), from stem
of Old French poeir to be able (see power (n.)). Related: Puissantly.


puka

type of necklace made from small shell fragments (or plastic imitations), by 1974, from Hawaiian
puka, said to mean literally hole, in references to small shell fragments with naturally occurring
holes through them, suitable for stringing, found on beaches.


puke (v.)

1600, probably of imitative origin (compare German spucken to spit, Latin spuere); first recorded in
the Seven Ages of Man speech in Shakespeare's As You Like It. Related: Puked; puking.


puke (n.)

1737, a medicine which excites vomiting; 1966 as material thrown up in vomiting, from puke (v.).
U.S. colloquial meaning native of Missouri (1835) might be a different word, of unknown origin.
It is well known, that the inhabitants of the several western States are called by certain
nicknames. Those of Michigan are called wolverines; of Indiana, hooshers; of Illinois, suckers; of
Ohio, buckeyes; of Kentucky, corn-crackers; of Missouri pukes, &amp;c.; To call a person by his
right nickname, is always taken in good part, and gives no offence; but nothing is more offensive
than to mis-nickname--that is, were you to call a hoosher a wolverine, his blood would be up in a
moment, and he would immediately show fight. [A.A. Parker, Trip to the West and Texas, Concord,
N.H., 1835]    Bartlett (1859) has A nickname for a native of Missouri as the second sense of puke
(n.), the first being A mean, contemptible fellow. The association of the state nickname with the
vomit word is at least from 1858, and folk etymology talks of the old state literally vomiting forth
immigrants to California.


pulchritude (n.)

beauty, c.1400, from Latin pulchritudo beauty; excellence, attractiveness, from pulcher beautiful,
of unknown origin.


pulchritudinous (adj.)

1877, American English, from pulchritude (from Latin pulchritudino beauty, genitive pulchritudinis)
+ -ous.


pule (v.)

cry in a thin, weak voice, 1530s, from French piauler (16c.) to cheep, chirp, echoic (compare
Italian pigolare to cheep as a chicken). Related: Puled; puling.


Pulitzer (n.)

annual awards for distinguished work in U.S. journalism, letters, music, etc., 1918, named for U.S.
journalist Joseph Pulitzer (1847-1911), publisher of the New York Globe, who established the awards
in 1917 through an endowment to Columbia University.


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


pull (n.)

c.1300, a fishing net; mid-14c., a turn at pulling, from pull (v.). From mid-15c. as an act of
pulling. Meaning personal or private influence is by 1889, American English, from earlier sense
power to pull (and not be pulled by) a rival or competitor (1580s).


pullet (n.)

late 14c., young fowl (late 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French pullet, Old French poulette,
poilette, diminutive of poule, poille hen, from Vulgar Latin *pulla, fem. of Latin pullus young
animal, especially young fowl (source also of Spanish pollo chicken, Italian pollo fowl; see foal
(n.)). Technically, a young hen from the time she begins to lay until the first molt.


pulley (n.)

late 13c., from Old French polie, pulie pulley, windlass (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
poliva, puliva, probably from Medieval Greek *polidia, plural of *polidion little pivot, diminutive
of Greek polos pivot, axis (see pole (n.2)). As a verb from 1590s.


Pullman (n.)

sleeping car on a passenger train, 1867, Pullman car, in recognition of U.S. inventor George M.
Pullman (1831-1897) of Chicago, who designed a railroad car with folding berths.    The Pullman
Sleeping Car.--The Western World. This splendid specimen of car architecture, being one of a number
of sleeping-cars to be completed   for the Michigan Central road, by Mr. Pullman, has created a
great sensation among railway circles east. ... The car itself is admitted by all who have seen it
to be, in the matter of sleeping and cooking accessories, and superb finish, the ne plus ultra of
perfection. Nothing before has been seen to equal, much less surpass it. [Western Railroad Gazette,
Chicago, quoted in Appleton's Illustrated Railway and Steam Navigation Guide, New York, June, 1867]


pullout (n.)

also pull-out, 1825, withdrawal, from pull (v.) + out (adv.). As detachable section or page of a
newspaper, magazine, etc. from 1952.


pullover (adj.)

1871, originally of shoes, from pull (v.) + over (adv.). As a noun, from 1875 as a kind of hat
cover; 1925 as a type of sweater (short for pullover sweater, 1912), so called in reference to the
method of putting it on.


pullulate (v.)

1610s, from Latin pullulatus, past participle of pullulare put forth, grow, sprout, shoot up, come
forth, from pullulus, diminutive of pullus young animal (see foal (n.)). Related: Pullulated;
pullulating.


pullulation (n.)

1640s, noun of action from pullulate.


pulmonary (adj.)

1704, from French pulmonaire and directly from Latin pulmonarius of the lungs, from pulmo (genitive
pulmonis) lung, cognate with Greek pleumon lung, Old Church Slavonic plusta, Lithuanian plauciai
lungs, all from PIE *pleu- to flow, to float, to swim (see pluvial).    The notion perhaps is from
the fact that, when thrown into a pot of water, lungs of a slaughtered animal float, while the
heart, liver, etc., do not (compare Middle English lights the lungs, literally the light (in weight)
organs). Also see pneumo-.


pulp (n.)

c.1400, fleshy part of a fruit or plant, from Latin pulpa animal or plant pulp; pith of wood,
earlier *pelpa, perhaps from the same root as pulvis dust, pollen fine flour (see pollen); extended
to other similar substances by early 15c. The adjective meaning sensational is from pulp magazine
(1931), so called from pulp in sense of type of rough paper used in cheaply made magazines and books
(1727). As a genre name, pulp fiction attested by 1943 (pulp writer writer of pulp fiction was in
use by 1939). The opposite adjective in reference to magazines was slick.


pulp (v.)

1660s reduce to pulp (implied in pulping), from pulp (n.). As to remove the pulp from, from 1791.
Related: Pulped.


pulpit (n.)

early 14c., from Late Latin pulpitum raised structure on which preachers stand, in classical Latin
scaffold; stage, platform for actors, of unknown origin. Also borrowed in Middle High German as
pulpit (German Pult desk). Sense of Christian preachers and ministers generally is from 1560s.
Pulpiteer, old contemptuous term for professional preacher, is recorded from 1640s.


pulpy (adj.)

1590s, from pulp (n.) + -y (2). Related: Pulpiness.


pulque (n.)

1690s, from American Spanish pulque, of unknown origin, said to be a word from Araucanian (native
language spoken in part of Chile), or else from some language of Mexico.


pulsar (n.)

1968, from pulse (n.1), the form on analogy of quasar. When discovered in 1967, they were thought
perhaps to be signals from alien civilizations and astronomers informally dubbed them LGM for Little
Green Men.


pulsate (v.)

1741, back-formation from pulsation, from Latin pulsatus, past participle of pulsare to beat
against, strike upon (see pulsation). Related: Pulsated; pulsating; pulsatile.


pulsation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French pulsation (14c.) and directly from Latin pulsationem (nominative
pulsatio) a beating or striking, noun of action from past participle stem of pulsare to beat,
strike, push against' hammer, keep hitting, figuratively drive forth, disturb, disquiet,
frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus) to beat, strike (see pulse (n.1)).


pulse (n.1)

a throb, a beat, early 14c., from Old French pous, pulse (late 12c., Modern French pouls) and
directly from Latin pulsus (in pulsus venarum beating from the blood in the veins), past participle
of pellere to push, drive, from PIE *pel- (6) to thrust, strike, drive (cognates: Greek pallein to
wield, brandish, swing, pelemizein to shake, cause to tremble). Extended usages from 16c. Figurative
use for life, vitality, essential energy is from 1530s.


pulse (v.)

to beat, throb, early 15c., from pulse (n.1) or else from Latin pulsare to beat, throb, and in part
from French. Related: Pulsed; pulsing.


pulse (n.2)

peas, beans, lentils, late 13c., from Old French pouls, pols and directly from Latin puls thick
gruel, porridge, mush, probably via Etruscan, from Greek poltos porridge made from flour, from PIE
*pel- (1) dust, flour (see pollen; also compare poultice).


pulverise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of pulverize (q.v.). Also see -ize. Related: Pulverised;
pulverising; pulverisation.


pulverization (n.)

1650s, noun of action from pulverize, or else from French pulv&#233;risation, from Middle French
pulveriser.


pulverize (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin pulverizare reduce to powder or dust, from Latin pulvis (genitive
pulveris) dust, powder (see pollen). Related: Pulverized; pulverizing.


puma (n.)

1777, from Spanish puma, from Quechua (Peru) puma.


pumice (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French and Old French pomis (13c.), from Late Latin pomicem (nominative pomex,
genitive pumicis), from Oscan *poimex or some other dialectal variant of Latin pumex pumice, from
PIE *(s)poi-mo-, a root with connotations of foam, froth (see foam (n.)). Old English had pumic-
stan. As a verb, early 15c., from the noun.


pumiceous (adj.)

1670s, from Latin pumiceus of pumice stone, from pumex (see pumice).


pummel (v.)

1540s, alteration of pommel in the verbal sense of to beat repeatedly. In early use pumble, poumle;
current spelling from c.1600. Related: Pummeled; pummeling.


pump (n.1)

apparatus for forcing liquid or air, early 15c., of uncertain origin, possibly from Middle Dutch
pompe water conduit, pipe, or Middle Low German pumpe pump (Modern German Pumpe), both from some
North Sea sailors' word, possibly of imitative origin.


pump (n.2)

low shoe without fasteners, 1550s, of unknown origin, perhaps echoic of the sound made when walking
in them, or perhaps from Dutch pampoesje, from Javanese pampoes, of Arabic origin. Klein's sources
propose a connection with pomp (n.). Related: pumps.


pump (v.)

c.1500, from pump (n.1). Metaphoric extension in pump (someone) for information is from 1630s. To
pump iron lift weights for fitness is from 1972. Related: Pumped; pumping.


pumper (n.)

1650s, agent noun from pump (v.). As fire engine that pumps water, by 1915.


pumpernickel (n.)

dark rye bread, 1756, pompernickel, from German (Westphalian dialect) Pumpernickel (1663),
originally an abusive nickname for a stupid person, from pumpern to break wind + Nickel goblin,
lout, rascal, from proper name Niklaus (see Nicholas). An earlier German name for it was krankbrot,
literally sick-bread.


pumpkin (n.)

1640s, alteration of pompone, pumpion melon, pumpkin (1540s), from Middle French pompon, from Latin
peponem (nominative pepo) melon, from Greek pepon melon, probably originally cooked (by the sun),
hence ripe; from peptein to cook (see cook (n.)). Pumpkin-pie is recorded from 1650s. Pumpkin-head,
American English colloquial for person with hair cut short all around is recorded from 1781. Vulgar
American English alternative spelling punkin attested by 1806.    America's a dandy place:  The
people are all brothers:  And when one's got a punkin pye,  He shares it with the others.    [from A
Song for the Fourth of July, 1806, in The Port Folio, Philadelphia, Aug. 30, 1806]


pun (n.)

1660s (first attested in Dryden), of uncertain origin, perhaps from pundigron, which is perhaps a
humorous alteration of Italian puntiglio equivocation, trivial objection, diminutive of Latin
punctum point. This is pure speculation. The verb also is attested from 1660s. Related: Punned;
punning.   Pun was prob. one of the clipped words, such as cit, mob, nob, snob, which came into
fashionable slang at or after the Restoration. [OED]


punch (v.)

to thrust, push; jostle; also, prod, to drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding, late 14c., from
Old French ponchonner to punch, prick, stamp, from ponchon pointed tool, piercing weapon (see punch
(n.1)). Meaning to pierce, emboss with a tool is from early 15c.; meaning to stab, puncture is from
mid-15c. To punch a ticket, etc., is from mid-15c. To punch the clock record one's arrival at or
departure from the workplace using an automated timing device is from 1900. Related: Punched;
punching.    Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say.  Who lords it o'er the
common herd who chance to come your way;  Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock,
When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK.  [from Punch the Clock, by The
Skipper, The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912]    Specialized sense to hit with the fist
first recorded 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare to fight with the fists, from a root meaning to pierce,
sting. In English this was probably influenced by punish; punch or punsch for punish is found in
documents from 14c.-15c.:    punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery
Plays, late 15c.]    To punch (someone) out beat up is from 1971.


punch (n.1)

pointed tool for making holes or embossing, late 14c., short for puncheon (mid-14c.), from Old
French ponchon, poinchon pointed tool, piercing weapon, from Vulgar Latin *punctionem (nominative
*punctio) pointed tool, from past participle stem of Latin pungere to prick (see pungent). From mid-
15c. as a stab, thrust; late 15c. as a dagger. Meaning machine for pressing or stamping a die is
from 1620s.


punch (n.2)

type of mixed drink, 1630s, traditionally since 17c. said to derive from Hindi panch five, in
reference to the number of original ingredients (spirits, water, lemon juice, sugar, spice), from
Sanskrit panchan-s, from pancha five (see five). But there are difficulties (see OED), and
connection to puncheon (n.1) is not impossible.


Punch (n.)

the puppet show star, 1709, shortening of Punchinello (1666), from Italian (Neapolitan)
Pollecinella, Pollecenella, diminutive of pollecena turkey pullet, probably in allusion to his big
nose. The phrase pleased as punch apparently refers to his unfailing triumph over enemies. The comic
weekly of this name was published in London from 1841.


punch (n.3)

a quick blow with the fist, by 1570s, probably from punch (v.). In early use also of blows with the
foot or jabs with a staff or club. Originally especially of blows that sink in to some degree (...
whom he unmercifully bruises and batters from head to foot: here a slap in the chaps, there a black
eye, now a punch in the stomach, and then a kick on the breech, Monthly Review, 1763). Figurative
sense of forceful, vigorous quality is recorded from 1911. To beat (someone) to the punch in the
figurative sense is from 1915, a metaphor from boxing (attested by 1913). Punch line (also punch-
line) is from 1915 (originally in popular-song writing); punch-drunk is from 1915 (alternative form
slug-nutty is from 1933).


punch-bowl (n.)

1690s, from punch (n.2) + bowl (n.).


puncheon (n.1)

barrel or cask for soap or liquor; iron vessel, c.1400, from Old French ponchon, ponson wine vessel
(13c.), of unknown origin. Uncertain connection with puncheon slab of timber, strut, wooden beam
used as a support in building (mid-14c.). Punch (n.2) in the drink sense is too late to be the
source of the cask sense.


puncheon (n.2)

pointed tool for punching or piercing used by masons, also die for coining or seal-making, mid-14c.;
see punch (n.1). Meaning stamp, die is from c.1500, a specialized use.


Punchinello (n.)

see Punch.


punching (n.)

c.1400, the cutting out of figures; early 15c. as a blow with the fist, verbal noun from punch (v.).
Related: Punching-bag (1889, figurative sense by 1903; also punch-bag).


punchless (adj.)

1950 of fighters and others lacking requisite power, from punch (n.1); 1853 of situations in which
one might seek a drink, from punch (n.2). Related: Punchlessly; punchlessness.


punchy (adj.1)

nervously anxious; irritable from fatigue, 1937, from punch (v.) + -y (2). Perhaps originally a
shortening of punch-drunk. Related: Punchily; punchiness.


punchy (adj.2)

full of vigor, 1926, from punch (n.3) + -y (2). Related: Punchily; punchiness.


punctate (adj.)

dotted, marked with dots, 1760, from Modern Latin punctuatus, from Latin punctum point (see point).
Related: Punctation.


punctilio (n.)

1590s, point, also detail of action, from Italian puntiglio or Spanish puntillo, diminutive of punto
point (see point (n.)).


punctilious (adj.)

1630s, probably from Italian puntiglioso, from puntiglio fine point, from Latin punctum prick (see
point (n.)). Related: Punctiliously; punctiliousness.


punctual (adj.)

c.1400, from Medieval Latin punctualis, from Latin punctus a pricking (see point (n.)). Originally
having a sharp point; of the nature of a point; meaning prompt first recorded 1670s, from notion of
insisting on fine points. Related: Punctually.


punctuality (n.)

exactness, 1610s; see punctual + -ity. Meaning promptness is from 1777.


punctuate (v.)

1630s, to point out, from Medieval Latin punctuatus, past participle of punctuare, from Latin
punctus (see point (n.)). Meaning in reference to text, to have pauses or stops indicated, is from
1818, probably a back-formation from punctuation. Hence, interrupted at intervals (1833). Related:
Punctuated; punctuating.


punctuation (n.)

1530s, pointing of the psalms, from Medieval Latin punctuationem (nominative punctuatio) a marking
with points, noun of action from past participle stem of punctuare to mark with points or dots, from
Latin punctus a prick (see point (n.)). Meaning system of inserting pauses in written matter is
recorded from 1660s.    [P]unctuation is cold notation; it is not frustrated speech; it is
typographic code. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, 2004]


puncture (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin punctura a pricking, from Latin punctus, past participle of pungere to
prick, pierce (see pungent).


puncture (v.)

1690s, from puncture (n.). Related: Punctured; puncturing.


pundit (n.)

1670s, learned Hindu, especially one versed in Sanskrit lore, from Hindi payndit a learned man,
master, teacher, from Sanskrit payndita-s a learned man, scholar, of uncertain origin. Broader
application in English is first recorded 1816. Related: Punditry.


pungency (n.)

1640s, from pungent + -cy.


pungent (adj.)

1590s, sharp, poignant (of pain or grief), from Latin pungentem (nominative pungens), present
participle of pungere to prick, pierce, sting, figuratively, to vex, grieve, trouble, afflict,
related to pugnus fist (see pugnacious). Meaning having powerful odor or taste first recorded 1660s.
Literal sense sharp, pointed (c.1600) is very rare in English, mostly limited to botany. Middle
English and early Modern English also had a now-obsolete verb punge to prick, pierce; to smart,
cause to sting, from Latin pungere. Related: Pungently.


Punic (adj.)

pertaining to Carthage, 1530s, from Latin Punicus, earlier Poenicus Carthaginian, originally
Phoenician (adj.), Carthage having been founded as a Phoenician colony, from Poenus (n.), from Greek
Phoinix Phoenician (see Phoenician). Carthaginians were proverbial among the Romans as treacherous
and perfidious. Punic Wars were three wars between the Romans and the Carthaginians fought 264-146
B.C.E. Related: Punical (early 15c.).


punish (v.)

c.1300, from Old French puniss-, extended present participle stem of punir to punish, from Latin
punire punish, correct, chastise; take vengeance for; inflict a penalty on, cause pain for some
offense, earlier poenire, from poena penalty, punishment (see penal). Colloquial meaning to inflict
heavy damage or loss is first recorded 1801, originally in boxing. Related: Punished; punishing.


punishable (adj.)

1530s, of persons; 1540s, of offenses, from punish + -able.


punisher (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from punish (v.).


punishing (adj.)

hard-hitting, 1811, present participle adjective from punish (v.). Related: Punishingly.


punishment (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French punisement (late 13c.), Old French punissement, from punir (see
punish). Meaning rough handling is from 1811.


punitive (adj.)

1620s, inflicting or involving punishment, from French punitif (16c.) or directly from Medieval
Latin punitivus, from Latin punitus, past participle of punire to punish, correct, chastise (see
punish).


Punjab

region on the Indian subcontinent, from Hindi Panjab, from Persian panj five (from PIE *penkwo-; see
five) + ab water, from Iranian *ap-, from PIE *ap- (2) water (see water (n.1)). So called for its
five rivers. Related: Punjabi.


punji (n.)

sharpened and often poisoned bamboo stake set in a hole as a trap for animals or enemies, 1872, of
unknown origin, probably from a Tibeto-Burman language (first recorded in a Bengal context).


punk (adj.)

inferior, bad, 1896, also as a noun, something worthless, earlier rotten wood used as tinder
(1680s), A word in common use in New England, as well as in the other Northern States and Canada
[Bartlett]; perhaps from Delaware (Algonquian) ponk, literally dust, powder, ashes; but Gaelic spong
tinder also has been suggested (compare spunk touchwood, tinder, 1580s).


punk (n.2)

worthless person (especially a young hoodlum), 1917, probably from punk kid criminal's apprentice,
underworld slang first attested 1904 (with overtones of catamite). Ultimately from punk (n.1) or
else from punk prostitute, harlot, strumpet, first recorded 1590s, of unknown origin.    For sense
shift from harlot to homosexual, compare gay. By 1923 used generally for young boy, inexperienced
person (originally in show business, as in punk day, circus slang from 1930, day when children are
admitted free). The verb meaning to back out of is from 1920.    The young criminal sense is no
doubt the inspiration in punk rock first attested 1971 (in a Dave Marsh article in Creem, referring
to Rudi Question Mark Martinez); popularized 1976.    If you looked different, people tried to
intimidate you all the time. It was the same kind of crap you had to put up with as a hippie, when
people started growing long hair. Only now it was the guys with the long hair yelling at you. You
think they would have learned something. I had this extreme parrot red hair and I got hassled so
much I carried a sign that said FUCK YOU ASSHOLE. I got so tired of yelling it, I would just hold up
the sign. [Bobby Startup, Philadelphia punk DJ, Philadelphia Weekly, Oct. 10, 2001]


punk (n.1)

Chinese incense, 1870, from punk (adj.).


punky (adj.)

1872, of wood, from punk (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Punkiness.


punnet (n.)

small, round chip basket, 1822, chiefly British, of obscure origin.


punster (n.)

c.1700, a low wit who endeavours at reputation by double meaning [Johnson], from pun + -ster.


punt (n.1)

kick, 1845; see punt (v.).


punt (n.2)

flat-bottomed river boat, late Old English punt, perhaps an ancient survival of British Latin ponto
flat-bottomed boat (see OED), a kind of Gallic transport (Caesar), also floating bridge (Gellius),
from Latin pontem (nominative pons) bridge (see pontoon). Or from or influenced by Old French
cognate pont large, flat boat.


punt (v.)

to kick a ball dropped from the hands before it hits the ground, 1845, first in a Rugby list of
football rules, perhaps from dialectal punt to push, strike, alteration of Midlands dialect bunt to
push, butt with the head, of unknown origin, perhaps echoic. Student slang meaning give up, drop a
course so as not to fail, 1970s, is because a U.S. football team punts when it cannot advance the
ball. Related: Punted; punting.


punter (n.)

1888 in football, agent noun from punt (v.).


punty (n.)

iron rod used in manipulating hot glass, 1660s, from French pontil, a diminutive form from Latin
punctum a point (see point (n.)).


puny (adj.)

1570s, inferior in rank (1540s as a noun, junior pupil, freshman), from Middle French puisn&eacute;
(Modern French pu&icirc;n&eacute;), from Old French puisne born later, younger, youngest (12c.,
contrasted with aisn&eacute; first-born), from puis nez, from puis afterward (from Vulgar Latin
*postius, from Latin postea after this, hereafter, from post after, see post-, + ea there) + Old
French n&eacute; born, from Latin natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old Latin gnasci; see
genus). Sense of small, weak, insignificant first recorded 1590s. Compare puisne. Related: Puniness.


pup (n.)

young dog, 1760, shortened form of puppy (q.v.). Used from 1580s for conceited person. Applied to
the young of the fur seal from 1815. Used for inexperienced person by 1890. Pup tent (also dog tent)
is from 1863. Sopwith pup, popular name of the Sopwith Scout Tractor airplane, is from 1917.


pupa (n.)

post-larval stage of an insect, 1773, special use by Linn&aelig;us (1758) of Latin pupa girl, doll,
puppet (see pupil (n.1)) on notion of undeveloped creature. Related: Pupal; pupiform.


pupate (v.)

1864, from pupa + -ate (2). Related: Pupated; pupating.


pupation (n.)

1837, noun of action from pupate (v.).


pupil (n.1)

student, late 14c., originally orphan child, ward, from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from
Latin pupillus (fem. pupilla) orphan child, ward, minor, diminutive of pupus boy (fem. pupa girl),
probably related to puer child, possibly from PIE *pup-, from root *pu- to swell, inflate. Meaning
disciple, student first recorded 1560s. Related: Pupillary.


pupil (n.2)

center of the eye, early 15c. (in English in Latin form from late 14c.), from Old French pupille
(14c.), from Latin pupilla, originally little girl-doll, diminutive of pupa girl; doll (see pupil
(n.1)), so called from the tiny image one sees of himself reflected in the eye of another. Greek
used the same word, kore (literally girl), to mean both doll and pupil of the eye; and compare
obsolete baby small image of oneself in another's pupil (1590s), source of 17c. colloquial
expression to look babies stare lovingly into another's eyes.Self-knowledge can be obtained only by
looking into the mind and virtue of the soul, which is the diviner part of a man, as we see our own
image in another's eye. [Plato, Alcibiades, I.133]


puppet (n.)

doll moved by strings or wires (later applied to puppets in glove form), 1530s, later form of Middle
English popet doll (c.1300; see poppet), from Old French popette little doll, puppet, diminutive of
popee doll, puppet (13c., Modern French poup&eacute;e), from Vulgar Latin *puppa, from Latin pupa
girl; doll (see pupil (n.1)).    Metaphoric extension to one whose actions are manipulated by
another first recorded 1540s (as poppet). Puppet show attested from 1650s, earlier puppet-play
(1550s). Puppet government is attested from 1884 (in reference to Egypt).


puppeteer (n.)

1917, from puppet + -eer.


puppetry (n.)

1520s; see puppet (n.) + -ry.


puppify (v.)

make a puppy of, befool [OED], 1640s, from puppy (n.) + -fy. Related: Puppified.


puppy (n.)

late 15c., woman's small pet dog, of uncertain origin but likely from Middle French poup&eacute;e
doll, toy (see puppet). Meaning shifted from toy dog to young dog (1590s), replacing Middle English
whelp. In early use in English puppet and puppy were not always distinct from each other. Also used
about that time in sense of vain young man. Puppy-dog first attested 1590s (in Shakespeare, puppi-
dogges). Puppy love is from 1823. Puppy fat is from 1937.


puppyish (adj.)

1775, from puppy + -ish.


pur-

Middle English and Anglo-French perfective prefix, corresponding to Old French por-, pur- (Modern
French pour), from Vulgar Latin *por-, variation of Latin pro- before, for (see pro-). This is the
earliest form of the prefix in English, and it is retained in some words, but in many others it has
reverted to Latinate pro-.


Purana

ancient Sanskrit writings of a legendary character, 1690s, from Sanskrit puranah, literally ancient,
former, from pura formerly, before, cognate with Greek paros before, pro before, Avestan paro
before, Old English fore, from PIE *pre-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per). Related:
Puranic.


purblind (adj.)

c.1300, pur blind entirely blind, as a noun, a blind person, later partially blind, blind in one eye
(late 14c.), the main modern sense, from blind (adj.). The first element is sometimes explained as
pure (adj.), or as the Anglo-French perfective prefix pur- (see pur-). Sense of dull first recorded
1530s.


purchase (v.)

c.1300, acquire, obtain; get, receive; procure, provide, also accomplish or bring about; instigate;
cause, contrive, plot; recruit, hire, from Anglo-French purchaser go after, Old French porchacier
search for, procure; purchase; aim at, strive for, pursue eagerly (11c., Modern French pourchasser),
from pur- forth (possibly used here as an intensive prefix; see pur-) + Old French chacier run
after, to hunt, chase (see chase (v.)).    Originally to obtain or receive as due in any way,
including through merit or suffering; specific sense of acquire for money, pay money for, buy is
from mid-14c., though the word continued to be used for to get by conquest in war, obtain as booty
up to 17c. Related: Purchased; purchasing.


purchase (n.)

c.1300, purchas, acquisition, gain; also, something acquired or received, a possession; property,
goods; especially booty, spoil; goods gained by pillage or robbery (to make purchase was to seize by
robbery). Also mercenary soldier, one who fights for booty. From Anglo-French purchace, Old French
porchaz acquisition, gain, profit; seizing, plunder; search pursuit, effort, from Anglo-French
purchaser, Old French porchacier (see purchase (v.)).    From early 14c. as endeavor, effort,
exertion; instigation, contrivance; late 14c. as act of acquiring, procurement. Meaning that which
is bought is from 1580s. The sense of hold or position for advantageously applying power (1711) is
extended from the nautical verb meaning to haul or draw (especially by mechanical power), often used
in reference to hauling up anchors, attested from 1560s. Wif of purchase (early 14c.) was a term for
concubine.


purchaser (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French, Old French porchaceor, agent noun from porchacier (see purchase (v.)).


purdah (n.)

1800, from Urdu and Persian pardah veil, curtain, from Old Persian pari around, over (from PIE *per-
(1); see per-) + da- to place, from PIE *dhe- to set, put (see factitious).


pure (adj.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname, and Old English had purlamb lamb without a blemish), unmixed, also
absolutely, entirely, from Old French pur pure, simple, absolute, unalloyed, figuratively simple,
sheer, mere (12c.), from Latin purus clean, clear; unmixed; unadorned; chaste, undefiled, from PIE
root *peue- to purify, cleanse (cognates: Latin putus clear, pure; Sanskrit pavate purifies,
cleanses, putah pure; Middle Irish ur fresh, new; Old High German fowen to sift).    Replaced Old
English hlutor. Meaning free from moral corruption is first recorded mid-14c. In reference to
bloodlines, attested from late 15c.


pureblood (adj.)

1851, from pure blood (n.), attested from 1751 in reference to breeding, from pure (adj.) + blood
(n.). As a noun meaning a pure-blood animal from 1882.


purebred (adj.)

1868, from pure + bred.


puree (n.)

1707, from French pur&eacute;e pea soup (puree de pois, early 14c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps
from past participle of purer to strain, cleanse, from Latin purare purify, from purus (see pure).


puree (n.)

1934, from puree (n.). Related: Pureed.


purely (adv.)

late 13c., from pure + -ly (2).


purgation (n.)

late 14c., purification from sin, also discharge of waste, from Old French purgacion a cleansing,
medical or spiritual (12c., Modern French purgation) and directly from Latin purgationem (nominative
purgatio) a cleansing, purging, figuratively an apology, justification, noun of action from past
participle stem of purgare (see purge (v.)).


purgative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French purgatif (14c.) and directly from Late Latin purgativus, from purgat-,
past participle stem of Latin purgare (see purge (v.)). The noun is attested from early 15c. (Old
English medical texts have cl&#230;nsungdrenc).


purgatory (n.)

c.1200, from Old French purgatore and directly from Medieval Latin purgatorium (St. Bernard, early
12c.), in Latin, means of cleansing, noun use of neuter of purgatorius (adj.) purging, cleansing,
from purgat-, past participle stem of Latin purgare (see purge (v.)). Figurative use from late 14c.


purge (v.)

c.1300, clear of a charge or suspicion; late 14c., cleanse, clear, purify, from Anglo-French purger,
Old French purgier wash, clean; refine, purify morally or physically (12c., Modern French purger)
and directly from Latin purgare cleanse, make clean; purify, especially of the body, free from what
is superfluous; remove, clear away, figuratively refute, justify, vindicate (also source of Spanish
purgar, Italian purgare), from Old Latin purigare, from purus pure (see pure) + root of agere to
drive, make (see act (n.)). Related: Purged; purging.


purge (n.)

1560s, that which purges, from purge (v.). Meaning a purgative, an act of purging is from 1590s.
Political sense from 1730. Earliest sense in English was the now-obsolete one examination in a legal
court (mid-15c.).


purgery (n.)

bleaching room for sugar, 1847, from French purgerie (1838), from purger (see purge (v.)). For the
legal term, see perjury.


purification (n.)

late 14c., originally especially in reference to Feast of the Purification of the Virgin Mary, from
Old French purificacion, from Latin purificationem (nominative purificatio) a purifying, noun of
action from past participle stem of purificare (see purify). General sense from 1590s.


purifier (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from purify; as a type of mechanical apparatus, from 1834.


purify (v.)

early 14c., free from spiritual pollution, from Old French purefier purify, cleanse, refine (12c.),
from Latin purificare to make pure, from purus pure (see pure) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Meaning free from extraneous matter is recorded from mid-15c. Related: Purified;
purifying.


Purim (n.)

Jewish festival on the 14th of Adar (in commemoration of the defeat of Haman's plot), late 14c.,
from Hebrew purim, literally lots (plural of pur), identified with haggoral the lot (Esther iii:7,
ix:24), perhaps from Akkadian puru stone, urn, which itself is prob. a loan word from Sumeric bur
[Klein].


purine (n.)

1898, from German purin (Fischer), said to be from Latin purum, neuter of purus clean, pure (see
pure) + Modern Latin uricum uric acid + chemical suffix -ine (2).


purism (n.)

1803, of language, from French purisme (see purist + -ism). As a movement in art from 1921.


purist (n.)

stickler for purity, 1706, from pure + -ist; on model of French puriste (1580s), originally in
reference to speech.


Puritan (n.)

1560s, opponent of Anglican hierarchy, later applied opprobriously to person in Church of England
who seeks further reformation (1570s), probably from purity. Largely historical from 19c. in literal
sense. After c.1590s, applied to anyone deemed overly strict in matters of religion and morals.
What [William] Perkins, and the whole Puritan movement after him, sought was to replace the personal
pride of birth and status with the professional's or craftsman's pride of doing one's best in one's
particular calling. The good Christian society needs the best of kings, magistrates, and citizens.
Perkins most emphasized the work ethic from Genesis: In the swaete of thy browe shalt thou eate thy
breade. [E. Digby Baltzell, Puritan Boston and Quaker Philadelphia, 1979]


puritanical (adj.)

c.1600, from Puritan + -ical. Chiefly in disparaging use. Related: Puritanically.


Puritanism (n.)

1570s, from Puritan + -ism. Originally in reference to specific doctrines; from 1590s of excessive
moral strictness generally. In this sense, famously defined by H.L. Mencken (1920) as the haunting
fear that someone, somewhere may be happy.


purity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French purete simple truth, earlier purte (12c., Modern French puret&#233;), from
Late Latin puritatem (nominative puritas) cleanness, pureness, from Latin purus clean, pure,
unmixed; chaste, undefiled (see pure (adj.)).


purl (v.1)

knit with inverted stitches, 1825; earlier embroider with gold or silver thread (1520s), probably
from Middle English pirlyng revolving, twisting, of unknown origin. The two senses usually are taken
as one word, but even this is not certain. Klein suggests a source in Italian pirolare to twirl,
from pirolo top. As a noun, from late 14c. as bordering, frills, 1530s as twisted thread of gold and
silver.


purl (v.2)

flow with a murmuring sound, 1580s, imitative, perhaps from a Scandinavian language. Related:
Purled; purling.


purloin (v.)

mid-14c., remove, misappropriate, from Anglo-French purloigner remove, Old French porloigner put
off, retard, delay, drag out; be far away, from por- (from Latin pro- forth; see pro-) + Old French
loing far, from Latin longe, from longus (see long (adj.)). Sense of to steal (1540s) is a
development in English. Related: Purloined; purloining.


purple (n., adj.)

Old English purpul, dissimilation (first recorded in Northumbrian, in Lindisfarne gospel) of purpure
purple dye, a purple garment, purpuren (adj.) purple, a borrowing by 9c. from Latin purpura purple
color, purple-dyed cloak, purple dye, also shellfish from which purple was made, and splendid attire
generally, from Greek porphyra purple dye, purple (see porphyry), of uncertain origin, perhaps
Semitic, originally the name for the shellfish (murex) from which it was obtained. Purpur continued
as a parallel form until 15c., and through 19c. in heraldry. As a color name, attested from early
15c. Tyrian purple, produced around Tyre, was prized as dye for royal garments.    Also the color of
mourning or penitence (especially in royalty or clergy). Rhetorical for splendid, gaudy (of prose)
from 1590s. Purple Heart, U.S. decoration for service members wounded in combat, instituted 1932;
originally a cloth decoration begun by George Washington in 1782. Hendrix' Purple Haze (1967) is
slang for LSD.


purple (v.)

c.1400, from purple (n.). Related: Purpled; purpling.


purplish (adj.)

1560s, from purple (n.) + -ish.


purport (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French purport (late 13c.), Old French porport contents, tenor, back-
formation from purporter to contain, convey, carry, from pur- (from Latin pro- forth; see pur-) +
Old French porter to carry, from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)).


purport (v.)

early 15c., indicate, express, set forth, from the noun in English and from Anglo-French purporter
(c.1300), from Old French purporter (see purport (n.)). Related: Purported; purporting.


purportedly (adv.)

allegedly, 1949, from past participle of purport (v.) + -ly (2).


purpose (n.)

c.1300, intention, aim, goal, from Anglo-French purpos, Old French porpos aim, intention (12c.),
from porposer to put forth, from por- forth (from Latin pro- forth; see pur-) + Old French poser to
put, place (see pose (v.1)). On purpose by design is attested from 1580s; earlier of purpose (early
15c.).


purpose (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French purposer to design, Old French porposer to intend, propose, variant of
proposer (see propose).


purposeful (adj.)

1835, from purpose (n.) + -ful. Related: Purposefully.


purposeless (adj.)

1550s, from purpose (n.) + -less. Related: Purposelessly; purposelessness.


purposely (adv.)

late 15c., from purpose (n.) + -ly (2).


purposive (adj.)

1849, from purpose + -ive.


purpura (n.)

disease characterized by purple patches on the skin, 1753, from Modern Latin, from Latin purpura
purple dye (see purple (n.)). Related: Purpuric.


purpurescent (adj.)

1890, from Latin purpura (see purple (n.)) + -escent. The Latin adjective was purparescent, present
participle of purpurascere to become purple, from purpurare.


purr (v.)

1610s, of imitative origin. Related: Purred; purring. As a noun from c.1600.


purse (n.)

Old English pursa little bag made of leather, especially for carrying money, from Medieval Latin
bursa leather purse (source also of Old French borse, 12c., Modern French bourse; see bourse), from
Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa hide, leather. Change of b- to p- perhaps
by influence of Old English pusa, Old Norse posi bag.    Meaning woman's handbag is attested from
1951. Meaning sum of money collected as a prize in a race, etc., is from 1640s. Purse-strings,
figurative for control of money, is from early 15c. Purse-snatcher first attested 1902 (earlier
purse-picker, 1540s). The notion of drawn together by a thong also is behind purse-net (c.1400).


purse (v.)

c.1300, put in a purse; c.1600 as draw together and wrinkle (as the strings of a money bag), from
purse (n.). Related: Pursed; pursing.


purse-seine (n.)

1870; see purse (n.) + seine.


purser (n.)

mid-15c., treasurer, especially caretaker of accounts and provisions on a ship, originally also
maker of purses (late 15c.), agent noun from Middle English purse (see purse (n.)). From late 13c.
as a surname.


pursual (n.)

1814, from pursue + -al (2).


pursuance (n.)

1590s, from Middle French poursuiance act of pursuing, from Old French poursuir (see pursue).


pursuant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French poursuiant, porsivant, present participle of porsuir, porsivre chase,
pursue (see pursue). Meaning carrying out; following, according is from 1690s.


pursue (v.)

late 13c., to follow with hostile intent, from Anglo-French pursuer and directly from Old French
poursuir (Modern  French poursuivre), variant of porsivre to chase, pursue, follow; continue, carry
on, from Vulgar Latin *prosequare, from Latin prosequi follow, accompany, attend; follow after,
escort; follow up, pursue, from pro- forward (see pro-) + sequi follow (see sequel). Meaning to
proceed, to follow (a path, etc.), usually figurative (a course of action, etc.), is from late 14c.
This sense also was in Latin. Related: Pursued; pursuing. For sense, compare prosecute.


pursuer (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from pursue.


pursuit (n.)

late 14c., persecution, also action of pursuit, from Anglo-French purseute, from Old French porsuite
a search, pursuit (14c., Modern French poursuite), from porsivre (see pursue). Sense of one's
profession, recreation, etc. first recorded 1520s. As a type of track cycling race from 1938.


purty (adj.)

1829, representing a colloquial pronunciation of pretty (adj.).


purulent (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French purulent and directly from Latin purulentus full of pus, from pus
(genitive puris) pus (see pus). Related: Purulence.


purvey (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French porveire, purveire and directly from Old French porveoir to provide,
prepare, arrange (Modern French pourvoir), from Latin providere make ready (see provide, which now
usually replaces it). Related: Purveyed; purveying.


purveyance (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French purveance and directly from Old French porveance, from Latin providentia
(see providence).


purveyor (n.)

c.1300, from Old French porveor (13c.), agent noun from porveoir (see purvey).


purview (n.)

mid-15c., body of a statute, from Anglo-French purveuest it is provided, or purveu que provided that
(late 13c.), clauses that introduced statutes in old legal documents, from Anglo-French purveu, Old
French porveu (Modern French pourvu) provided, past participle of porveoir to provide, from Latin
providere make ready (see provide). Sense of scope, extent is first recorded 1788 in Federalist
(Madison). Modern sense and spelling influenced by view (n.).


pus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin pus pus, matter from a sore; figuratively bitterness, malice (related to puter
rotten; see putrid), from PIE *pu- (2) to rot, decay (cognates: Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih
stinking, foul; Greek puon discharge from a sore, pythein to cause to rot; Gothic fuls, Old English
ful foul), perhaps originally echoic of a natural exclamation of disgust.


Pusey

family name, early 13c., from Le Puiset in France.


push (v.)

early 14c., from Old French poulser (Modern French pousser), from Latin pulsare to beat, strike,
push, frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus) to push, drive, beat (see pulse (n.1)).
Meaning promote is from 1714; meaning approach a certain age is from 1937. For palatization of -s-,
OED compares brush (n.1); quash. Related: Pushed; pushing.    Pushing up the daisies now, said a
soldier of his dead comrade. [The American Florist, vol. XLVIII, No. 1504, March 31, 1917]    To
push (someone) around is from 1923. To push (one's) luck is from 1754. To push the envelope in
figurative sense is late 1980s. To push up daisies be dead and buried is from World War I.


push (n.)

1560s, from push (v.). Phrase push comes to shove is from 1936.


push-button (adj.)

characterized by the use of push-buttons, 1945, originally of military systems, earlier operated by
push-buttons (1903), from push-button (n.), 1865, from push (v.) + button (n.). Earlier was press-
button (1892), from the noun (1879).


push-off (n.)

act of pushing off, 1902, from verbal phrase, from push (v.) + off (adv.).


push-up (n.)

also pushup, type of physical exercise, 1893, from push (v.) + up (adv.). As an adjective from 1892;
of bras from 1957. Related: Push-ups


pusher (n.)

1590s in a literal sense, agent noun from push (v.). Meaning peddler of illegal drugs (1935 in
prison slang) is from the verb in the promote sense.


pushmi-pullyu (n.)

fictional two-headed mammal, from Dr. Dolittle (1922), coined by Hugh Lofting from the expressions
push me, pull you. Popularized by the 1967 film version of the book.


pushover (n.)

also push-over, 1900 of jobs or tasks; 1922 of persons (bad boxers and easy women), from push (v.) +
over (adv.).


pushy (adj.)

forward, aggressive, 1894 of persons (1891 of a cow), from push (v.) + -y (2). Related: Pushily;
pushiness.


pusillanimity (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French pusillanimit&eacute; (14c.), from Church Latin pusillanimitatem
(nominative pusillanimitas) faintheartedness, from Latin pusillanimis fainthearted, having little
courage (see pusillanimous).


pusillanimous (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin pusillanimis having little courage (used in Church Latin to translate
Greek oligopsychos small-souled), from Latin pusillis very weak, little (diminutive of pullus young
animal; see foal (n.)) + animus spirit, courage (see animus). Related: Pusillanimously;
pusillanimousness.


puss (n.1)

cat, 1520s, but probably much older than the record, perhaps imitative of the hissing sound commonly
used to get a cat's attention. A conventional name for a cat in Germanic languages and as far off as
Afghanistan; it is the root of the principal word for cat in Rumanian (pisica) and secondary words
in Lithuanian (puz), Low German (puus), Swedish dialect katte-pus, etc. Applied to a girl or woman
from c.1600, originally in a negative sense, implying unpleasant cat-like qualities; but by mid-19c.
in affectionate use.


puss (n.2)

the face (but sometimes, especially in pugilism slang, the mouth), 1890, slang, from Irish pus lip,
mouth.


pussy (n.1)

cat, 1726, diminutive of puss (n.1), also used of a rabbit (1715). As a term of endearment for a
girl or woman, from 1580s (also used of effeminate men). To play pussy was World War II RAF slang
for to take advantage of cloud cover, jumping from cloud to cloud to shadow a potential victim or
avoid recognition.


pussy (n.2)

slang for female pudenda, 1879, but probably older; perhaps from Old Norse puss pocket, pouch
(compare Low German puse vulva), but perhaps instead from the cat word (see pussy (n.1)) on notion
of soft, warm, furry thing; compare French le chat, which also has a double meaning, feline and
genital. Earlier uses are difficult to distinguish from pussy (n.1), as in:The word pussie is now
used of a woman [Philip Stubbes, The Anatomie of Abuses, 1583]But the absence of pussy in Grose and
other early slang works argues against the vaginal sense being generally known before late 19c., as
does its frequent use as a term of endearment in mainstream literature, as in:What do you think,
pussy? said her father to Eva. [Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, 1852]Pussy-whipped first
attested 1956.


pussy-cat (n.)

also pussycat, 1773, from pussy (n.1) + cat (n.).


pussy-willow (n.)

1869, on notion of soft and furry, a children's word, from pussy (n.1) + willow.


pussyfoot (v.)

also pussy-foot, 1903, tread softly, from pussy (n.1) + foot (n.). As a noun from 1911, a detective,
American English, from the nickname of U.S. government Indian Affairs agent W.E. Johnson
(1862-1945), in charge of suppressing liquor traffic on Indian reservations in Oklahoma, who was
noted for his stealthy tactics. Related: Pussyfooting; pussy-footed (1893).


pustule (n.)

late 14c., from Old French pustule (13c.) and directly from Latin pustula blister, pimple, from PIE
imitative root *pu- (1)  blow, swell, on notion of inflated area (cognates: Sanskrit pupphusah lung,
Greek physa breath, blast, wind, bubble, Lithuanian puciu to blow, swell, Old Church Slavonic
puchati to blow). Compare emphysema. Related: Pustulant; pustular.


put (v.)

late Old English *putian, implied in putung instigation, an urging, literally a putting; related to
pytan put out, thrust out (of eyes), probably from a Germanic stem that also produced Danish putte
to put, Swedish dialectal putta; Middle Dutch pote scion, plant, Dutch poten to plant, Old Norse
pota to poke.    Meaning act of casting a heavy stone overhead (as a trial of strength) is attested
from c.1300. Obsolete past tense form putted is attested 14c.-15c. To put down end by force or
authority (a rebellion, etc.) is from c.1300. Adjective phrase put out angry, upset is first
recorded 1887; to put out, of a woman, to offer oneself for sex is from 1947. To put upon (someone)
play a trick on, impose on is from 1690s. To put up with tolerate, accept (1755) was originally to
put up, as in to pocket. To put (someone) on deceive is from 1958.


put (n.)

c.1300, act of throwing a weight overhand as a test of strength, from put (v.). General meaning act
of putting is from early 15c. Also compare putt (n.).


put-down (n.)

insult, snub, 1962, from verbal phrase put down to snub, attested from c.1400; see put (v.) + down
(adv.).


put-on (n.)

ruse, deception, 1937, from earlier adjectival meaning assumed, feigned (1620s), a figurative
extension of the notion of putting on costumes or disguises; from put (v.) + on (adv.). The
expression put (someone) on play a trick on seems to be a back-formation from the noun.


put-put

indicating the sound of a muffled internal combustion engine, 1904, imitative.


putative (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French putatif, from Late Latin putativus supposed, from Latin putat-, past
participle stem of putare to judge, suppose, believe, suspect, originally to clean, trim, prune (see
pave). At first especially in putative marriage, one which, though legally invalid, was contracted
in good faith by at least one party. Related: Putatively.


putrefaction (n.)

c.1400, from Old French putrefaction (14c.), from Latin putrefactionem (nominative putrefactio),
noun of action from past participle stem of putrefacere to make rotten, from putrere to be rotten
(see putrid) + facere to make, do (see factitious).


putrefy (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French putr&eacute;fier, from Latin putrefacere to make rotten, from putrere
(see putrid) + facere (see factitious). Related: Putrefied; putrefying.


putrescence (n.)

1640s, from Latin putrescentem (nominative putrescens), present participle of putrescere grow
rotten, moulder, decay, inchoative of putrere be rotten (see putrid).


putrescent (adj.)

1732, a back-formation from putrescence, or else from Latin putrescentem (nominative putrescens),
present participle of putrescere grow rotten, moulder, decay, inchoative of putrere be rotten (see
putrid).


putrid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin putridus, from putrere to rot, from putris rotten, crumbling, related to
putere to stink, from PIE root *pu- to rot, stink (see pus). First in reference to putrid fever, an
old name for typhus (also known in Middle English as putrida). Related: Putrification.


putridity (n.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin putriditas, from Latin putridus (see putrid).


putsch (n.)

1920, from German Putsch revolt, riot, from Swiss dialect, literally a sudden blow, push, thrust,
shock, of imitative origin.


putt (v.)

1510s, Scottish, to push, shove, a special use and pronunciation of put (v.). Golfing sense is from
1743. Meaning to throw (a stone, as a demonstration of strength) is from 1724; this also is the putt
in shot putting. Related: Putted; putting.


putt (n.)

c.1300, a putting, pushing, shoving, thrusting, special use and pronunciation of put (n.). Golfing
sense is from 1743.


puttee (n.)

1875, from Hindi patti band, bandage, from Sanskrit pattah strip of cloth.


putter (v.)

keep busy in a rather useless way, 1841, originally among farmers, alteration of potter (v.).
Related: Puttered; puttering.


putter (n.)

late 14c., beast that pushes with the head, agent noun from put (v.). As a type of golf club used in
putting, from 1743; see putt (v.).


putti (n.)

1640s, from Italian putti small boys, plural of putto, from Latin putus boy, child (see puerility).


putty (n.)

1630s, type of plasterer's cement, from French pot&eacute;e polishing powder (12c.), originally pot-
full, contents of a pot, from Old French pot container (see pot (n.1)). Meaning soft mixture for
sealing window panes first recorded 1706. Figurative use in reference to one easily influenced is
from 1924. Putty knife attested from 1834.


putty (v.)

1734, from putty (n.). Related: Puttied; puttying.


putz (n.)

obnoxious man, fool, 1964, from Yiddish, from German putz, literally finery, adornment, obviously
used here in an ironic sense. Attested in writing earlier in slang sense of penis (1934, in Tropic
of Cancer). A non-ironic sense is in putz Nativity display around a Christmas tree (1873), from
Pennsylvania Dutch (German), which retains the old German sense.


puy (n.)

conical volcanic hill, especially those in Auvergne, 1858, from French puy, from Latin podium a
height, balcony, literally support (see podium).


puzzle (v.)

1590s, pusle bewilder, confound, possibly frequentative of pose (v.) in obsolete sense of perplex
(compare nuzzle from nose). Related: Puzzled; puzzling.


puzzle (n.)

c.1600, state of being puzzled, from puzzle (v.); meaning perplexing question is from 1650s; that of
a toy contrived to test one's ingenuity is from 1814.


puzzlement (n.)

1822, from puzzle + -ment.


puzzler (n.)

1650s, agent noun from puzzle (v.).


puzzling (adj.)

bewildering, 1660s, present participle adjective from puzzle (v.). Related: Puzzlingly.


pvc (n.)

also P.V.C., initialism (acronym) from polyvinyl chloride (1933); see polyvinyl.


pwned (adj.)

dominated, humiliatingly defeated, taken over, by 2001, leetspeak slang, probably from the common
typographical mistake for owned (the -p- and -o- keys being adjacent on standard English keyboards)
in the gamer slang sense completely dominated by another (in a contest).


Pyanepsia (n.)

festival in honor of Apollo on the 7th of Pyanepsion (fourth month of the Attic calendar,
corresponding to October-November), from Greek Pyanepsia (plural), literally the feast of cooking
beans, from pyanos, name of a kind of bean, of unknown origin, + epsein to boil, cook. At this
festival a dish of pulse was offered to the god.


pycno-

before vowels pycn-, word-forming element meaning close, thick, dense, from comb. form of Greek
pyknos thick, dense. Sometimes via German as pykno-.


pyelo-

before vowels pyel-, medical word-forming element, 19c., from comb. form of Greek pyelos oblong
trough, bathing-tub, used for pelvis.


Pygmalion

also the Pygmalion word, a British euphemistic substitute for bloody in mid-20c. from its notorious
use in Bernard Shaw's play of the same name (1914: Walk? Not bloody likely!). The Greek legend of
the sculptor/goldsmith and the beautiful statue he made and wished to life, is centered on Cyprus
and his name might ultimately be Phoenician.


pygmy (n.)

late 14c., Pigmei, member of a fabulous race of dwarfs, described by Homer and Herodotus and said to
inhabit Egypt or Ethiopia and India, from Latin Pygmaei (singular Pygmaeus), from Greek Pygmaioi,
plural of Pygmaios a Pygmy, noun use of adjective meaning dwarfish, literally of the length of a
pygme; a pygme tall, from pygme cubit, literally fist, the measure of length from the elbow to the
knuckle; related to pyx with clenched fist and to Latin pugnus fist (see pugnacious).    Figurative
use for person of small importance is from 1590s. Believed in 17c. to refer to chimpanzees or
orangutans, and occasionally the word was used in this sense. The ancient word was applied by
Europeans to the equatorial African race 1863, but the tribes probably were known to the ancients
and likely were the original inspiration for the legend. As an adjective from 1590s. Related:
Pygmean; Pygmaean.


pyjamas (n.)

also pyjama (adj.), chiefly British English spelling of pajamas. Early spellings in English also
include pai jamahs (1800); pigammahs (1834), peijammahs (1840).


pylon (n.)

1823, gateway to an Egyptian temple, from Greek pylon gateway, from pyle gate, wing of a pair of
double gates; an entrance, entrance into a country; mountain pass; narrow strait of water, of
unknown origin. Meaning tower for guiding aviators (1909) led to that of steel tower for high-
tension wires (1923).


pylorus (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin pylorus the lower orifice of the stomach, from Greek pyloros, literally
gatekeeper, porter, from pyle gate (see pylon) + ouros watcher, guardian (see warrant (n.)).
Related: Pyloric.


pyo-

word-forming element meaning pus, from comb. form of Greek puon pus (see pus).


pyogenic (adj.)

1840s, from pyogenesis, medical Latin, from pyo- pus + genesis.


Pyongyang

North Korean capital, from Korean p'yong flat + yang land.


pyracanth (n.)

thorny shrub of the apple family, 1660s, from Modern Latin genus name Pyracantha, from Greek
pyrakantha (Dioscorides), a plant named but not described, from pyr- fire (see fire (n.)) + akantha
thorn, thorny plant, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid).


pyramid (n.)

1550s (earlier in Latin form piramis, late 14c.), from French pyramide (Old French piramide obelisk,
stela, 12c.), from Latin pyramides, plural of pyramis one of the pyramids of Egypt, from Greek
pyramis (plural pyramides) a pyramid, apparently an alteration of Egyptian pimar pyramid. Financial
sense is from 1911. Related: Pyramidal.


pyre (n.)

1650s, from Latin pyra and directly from Greek pyra funeral pyre; altar for sacrifice; any place
where fire is kindled, from pyr fire, cognate with Old English fyr (see fire (n.)).


Pyrenees

1550s, from French Pyr&eacute;n&eacute;es, from Latin Pyren&aelig;i montes, from Greek Pyrene, name
of a daughter of Bebryx/Bebrycius who was beloved of Herakles; she is said to be buried in these
mountains (or that the mountains are the tomb Herakles reared over her corpse). The name is said to
mean literally fruit-stone, but Room says it might be Greek pyr fire + eneos dumb, speechless, which
perhaps translates or folk-etymologizes a Celtic goddess name. In medieval times there was no
overall name for the range and local people would have known only the names of individual mountains
and valleys [Room, Adrian, Place Names of the World, 2nd ed., McFarland &amp; Co., 2006]. Related:
Pyrenean.


pyretic (adj.)

1809, from French pyr&#233;tique or directly from Modern Latin pyreticus, from Greek pyretos fever,
burning heat, related to pyr fire (see fire (n.)). As a noun, a pyretic agent, from 1728.


Pyrex (n.)

1915, proprietary name (Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.), arbitrary coinage, in which eager
etymologists see implications of Greek pyr fire and perhaps Latin rex king; but the prosaic
inventors say it was based on pie (n.1), because pie dishes were among the first products made from
it. The -r- is purely euphonious.


pyrexia (n.)

fever, 1769, medical Latin, from Greek pyrexis feverishness, from pyressein to be feverish, to be
ill of fever, from pyretos fever, burning heat, related to pyr fire (see fire (n.)).


pyrgologist (n.)

one versed in the structure and history of towers, 1877, from Greek pyrgos a tower; highest point of
a building + -ologist. It seems to have been used once, in the Athenaeum of Aug. 18, and then
forgotten except in the dictionary.


pyrite (n.)

metallic iron disulfide, fool's gold, 1550s, from Old French pyrite (12c.), from Latin pyrites, from
Greek pyrites lithos stone of fire, flint (so called because it glitters), from pyrites of or in
fire, from pyr (genitive pyros) fire (see fire (n.)). Related: Pyritic.


pyro-

before vowels pyr-, word-forming element form meaning fire, from Greek pyro-, combining form of pyr
(genitive pyros) fire, funeral fire, also symbolic of terrible things, rages, rarely as an image of
warmth and comfort [Liddell &amp; Scott]; see fire (n.). Pyriphlegethon, literally fire-blazing, was
one of the rivers of Hell.


pyroclastic (adj.)

1887, from pyro- + clastic.


pyrogen (n.)

1858, as a proposed word for electricity, from pyro- + -gen. Meaning fever-producer is from 1896.
Related: Pyrogenic; pyrogenetic. Greek pyrogenes meant born in fire, wrought by fire.


pyrolatry (n.)

fire-worship, 1660s, from pyro- + -latry. Related: Pyrolater.


pyrolusite (n.)

manganese dioxide, 1828, the name given in Roman times, when it was used, in a heated state, to de-
colorize glass, from Greek elements pyro- by heat, by fire (see pyro-) + lysis a loosening (see
lose).


pyrolysis (n.)

1879, from pyro- + -lysis. Related: Pyrolytic.


pyromania (n.)

1840, from pyro- fire + mania madness, frenzy. Used in German in the 1830s.    The propensity which
leads an insane person to accomplish his purpose by burning, has been considered to merit particular
notice, and to constitute a variety of monomania. Dr. Marc, of France, has published a memoir on the
subject; he gives the name of pyromania to it, and considers that, like other insane propensities,
it may be the result of instinct, or it may be the result of delusion--reasoning upon erroneous
principles. [Alexander Morrison, M.D., The Physiognomy of Mental Diseases, London, 1840]    An older
word for it was incendiarism.


pyromaniac (adj.)

1855, from pyromania. As a noun from 1861.


pyrophobia (n.)

morbid fear or fire, 1871, from pyro- + -phobia.


pyrophoric (adj.)

1779, from Modern Latin pyrophorus, literally fire-bearing, from Greek pyrophoros, from pyro- (see
pyro-) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). Related: Pyrophorous; pyrophorus.


pyrotechnic (adj.)

1704, of or pertaining to fire; 1825, of or pertaining to fireworks, from pyro- + Greek tekhnikos
made by art, from tekhne art (see techno-). Figurative use attested from 1847. Related:
Pyrotechnical (1610s, from pyrotechny use of gunpowder, 1570s).


pyrotechnician (n.)

1729, from pyrotechnic + -an.


pyrotechnics (n.)

1729, from pyrotechnic (also see -ics). Figurative sense is from 1901.


Pyrrhic (adj.)

1885 (usually in phrase Pyrrhic victory), from Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, who defeated Roman armies at
Asculum, 280 B.C.E., but at such cost to his own troops that he was unable to follow up and attack
Rome itself, and is said to have remarked, one more such victory and we are lost.


pyrrhic (n.)

dance in armor (1590s), also a type of metrical foot (1620s), from Latin pyrrhicha, from Greek
pyrrikhe orkhesis, the war-dance of ancient Greece, traditionally named for its inventor, Pyrrikhos.
The name means reddish, from pyrros flame-colored, from pyr fire (see fire (n.)). As an adjective
from 1749.


Pyrrhonic (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to Pyrrho, skeptic philosopher of Elis (c.360-c.275 B.C.E.), who held the
impossibility of attaining certainty of knowledge. Related: Pyrrhonism; Pyrrhonist.


Pythagorean (adj.)

1540s, from Latin Pythagoreus of or pertaining to Pythagoras, Greek philosopher of Samos (6c.
B.C.E.), whose teachings included transmigration of the soul and vegetarianism (these are some of
the commonest early allusions in English). The Pythagorean theorem is the 47th of the first book of
Euclid.


Pythia (n.)

priestess of Apollo at Delphi, 1842, from Greek pythia (hiereia) (Priestess) of Pythian Apollo, from
a variant form of Pythios, an epithet of Apollo, from Pytho, older name of the region of Delphi (see
python).


Pythian (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to Delphi or Delphic Apollo, from Pythia + -an. As a noun from 1590s.


python (n.)

1580s, fabled serpent, slain by Apollo near Delphi, from Latin Python, from Greek Python serpent
slain by Apollo, probably related to Pytho, the old name of Delphi, perhaps itself related to
pythein to rot, or from PIE *dhubh-(o)n-, from *dheub- hollow, deep, bottom, depths, and used in
reference to the monsters who inhabit them. Zoological application to large non-venomous snakes of
the tropics is from 1836, originally in French.


Pythonesque (adj.)

1975, in reference to the style of humor popularized by British TV series Monty Python's Flying
Circus.


pythoness (n.)

late 14c., woman with the power of soothsaying, from Old French phitonise (13c.), from Late Latin
pythonissa, used in Vulgate of the Witch of Endor (I Sam. xxviii:7), and often treated as her proper
name, literally fem. of pytho familiar spirit; which ultimately is connected with the title of the
prophetess of the Delphic Oracle, Greek pythia hiereia, from Pythios, an epithet of Apollo, from
Pytho, older name of the region of Delphi (see python).


pyuria (n.)

1811, from pyo- + -uria (see urine).


pyx (n.)

c.1400, a box, especially the vessel in which the host or consecrated bread is preserved, from Latin
pyxis, from Greek pyxis box-wood; a box, from pyxos box-wood; box-tree, of uncertain origin.


