-rama

noun suffix meaning sight, view, spectacular display or instance of, 1824, abstracted from panorama
(q.v.), ultimately from Greek horama sight, spectacle, that which is seen.


-re

word-ending that sometimes distinguish British from American English. In the U.S., the change from
-re to -er (to match pronunciation) in words such as fibre, centre, theatre began late 18c.; under
urging of Noah Webster (1804 edition of his speller, and especially the 1806 dictionary), it was
established over the next 25 years. The -re spelling, like -our, however, had the authority of
Johnson's dictionary behind it and remained in Britain, where it came to be a point of national
pride, contra the Yankees.    Despite Webster's efforts, -re was retained in words with -c- or -g-
(such as ogre, acre, the latter of which Webster insisted to the end of his days ought to be aker,
and it was so printed in editions of the dictionary during his lifetime). The -re spelling generally
is more justified by conservative etymology, based on French antecedents. It is met today in the
U.S. only in Theatre as an element in the proper names of entertainment showplaces, where it is
perhaps felt to inspire a perception of bon ton.


-rel

also -erel, diminutive or deprecatory word-forming element, in some cases from Old French -erel
(Modern French -ereau) or -erelle, but mostly used with native stems.


-ry

reduced form of -ery.


R

In a circle, meaning registered (trademark), first incorporated in U.S. statues 1946. R&R; rest and
relaxation, first recorded 1953, American English; R&B; rhythm and blues (type of popular music)
first attested 1949, American English.    If all our r's that are written are pronounced, the sound
is more common than any other in English utterance (over seven per cent.); the instances of
occurrence before a vowel, and so of universal pronunciation, are only half as frequent. There are
localities where the normal vibration of the tip of the tongue is replaced by one of the uvula,
making a guttural trill, which is still more entitled to the name of dog's letter than is the
ordinary r; such are considerable parts of France and Germany; the sound appears to occur only
sporadically in English pronunciation. [Century Dictionary]   <hr />   The moment we encounter the
added r's of purp or dorg in our reading we know that we have to do with humor, and so with school-
marm. The added consonants are supposed to be spoken, if the words are uttered, but, as a matter of
fact, they are less often uttered than seen. The words are, indeed, largely visual forms; the humor
is chiefly for the eye. [Louise Pound, The Humorous 'R,' American Mercury, October 1924]    She goes
on to note that in British humorous writing, -ar popularly indicates the sound of the vowel in
father and formations like larf (for laugh) are to be read with the broad vowel but no uttered r.
She also quotes Henry James on the characteristic prominence of the medial -r- sound (which tends to
be dropped in England and New England) in the speech of the U.S. Midwest, under some strange impulse
received toward consonantal recovery of balance, making it present even in words from which it is
absent, bringing it in everywhere as with the small vulgar effect of a sort of morose grinding of
the back teeth.


R.A.F.

also RAF, initialism (acronym) for Royal Air Force, founded 1918 by consolidation of Royal Flying
Corps and Royal Naval Air Service.


R.E.M.

also REM, 1957, initialism (acronym) for rapid eye movement.


R.O.T.C.

also ROTC, 1916, American English, initialism (acronym) for Reserve Officers' Training Corps,
established as part of the National Defense Act of 1916.


R.S.V.P.

also RSVP, c.1845, from French initialism (acronym) of r&eacute;pondez, s'il vous plait reply, if
you please, as it might have been written on a letter or envelope.


Ra

hawk-headed sovereign sun god of Egyptian mythology, from Egyptian R' sun, day.


Rabat

Moroccan capital, from Arabic ar-ribat, from ribat fortified monastery.


rabbet (n.)

rectangular groove cut out of the edge of a piece of wood or stone so that it may join by lapping
with others, late 14c., from Old French rabat a recess in a wall, a lower section, literally a
beating down, a back-formation from rabattre to beat down, beat back (see rebate (v.)). The verb is
attested from mid-15c. (implied in rabetynge).


rabbi (n.)

Jewish doctor of religious law, late 15c. (in Old English in biblical context only; in Middle
English also as a title prefixed to personal names), from Late Latin rabbi, from Greek rhabbi, from
Mishnaic Hebrew rabbi my master, from rabh master, great one, title of respect for Jewish doctors of
law + -i, first person singular pronominal suffix. From Semitic root r-b-b to be great or numerous
(compare robh multitude; Aramaic rabh great; chief, master, teacher; Arabic rabba was great, rabb
master).


rabbinate (n.)

1702, from rabbin rabbi (see rabbinical) + -ate (1).


rabbinical (adj.)

1620s, earlier rabbinic (1610s); see Rabbi + -ical. The -n- is perhaps via rabbin rabbi (1520s), an
alternative form, from French rabbin, from Medieval Latin rabbinus (also source of Italian rabbino,
Spanish and Portuguese rabino), perhaps from a presumed Semitic plural in -n, or from Aramaic rabban
our teacher, distinguishing title given to patriarchs and the presidents of the Sanhedrin since the
time of Gamaliel the Elder [Klein], from Aramaic plural of noun use of rabh great.


rabbit (n.)

late 14c., young of the coney, from Walloon rob&egrave;te or a similar French dialect word,
diminutive of Flemish or Middle Dutch robbe rabbit, of unknown origin. A Germanic noun with a French
suffix [Liberman]. The adult was a coney (q.v.) until 18c.Zoologically speaking, there are no native
rabbits in the United States; they are all hares. But the early colonists, for some unknown reason,
dropped the word hare out of their vocabulary, and it is rarely heard in American speech to this
day. When it appears it is almost always applied to the so-called Belgian hare, which, curiously
enough, is not a hare at all, but a true rabbit. [Mencken, The American Language]Rabbit punch chop
on the back of the neck so called from resemblance to a gamekeeper's method of dispatching an
injured rabbit. Pulling rabbits from a hat as a conjurer's trick recorded by 1843. Rabbit's foot
good luck charm first attested 1879, in U.S. Southern black culture. Earlier references are to its
use as a tool to apply cosmetic powders.    [N]ear one of them was the dressing-room of the
principal danseuse of the establishment, who was at the time of the rising of the curtain consulting
a mirror in regard to the effect produced by the application of a rouge-laden rabbit's foot to her
cheeks, and whose toilet we must remark, passim, was not entirely completed. [New York Musical
Review and Gazette, Nov. 29, 1856]   Rabbit ears dipole television antenna is from 1950. Grose's
1785 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue has RABBIT CATCHER. A midwife.


rabble (n.1)

c.1300, pack of animals, possibly related to Middle English rablen to gabble, speak in a rapid,
confused manner, probably imitative of hurry, noise, and confusion (compare Middle Dutch rabbelen,
Low German rabbeln to chatter). Meaning tumultuous crowd of vulgar, noisy people is from late 14c.;
applied contemptuously to the common or low part of any populace from 1550s.


rabble (n.2)

iron bar for stirring molten metal, 1864, from French r&#226;ble, from Old French roable, from Latin
rutabulum rake, fire shovel, from ruere  to rake up (perhaps cognate with Lithuanian raju to pluck
out, German roden to root out).


rabble-rouser (n.)

1842, agent noun from Rabble-rousing, which first attested 1802 in Sydney Smith; from rabble (n.1) +
rouse.


Rabelaisian (adj.)

1817, from French author Fran&ccedil;ois Rabelais (c.1490-1553), whose writings are distinguished by
exuberance of imagination and language combined with extravagance and coarseness of humor and
satire. [OED]


rabid (adj.)

1610s, furious, raving, from Latin rabidus raging, furious, enraged; inspired; ungoverned; rabid,
from rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Meaning made mad by rabies in English first recorded 1804.
Related: Rabidly; rabidness.


rabidity (n.)

1831, from rabid + -ity.


rabies (n.)

1590s, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Sense
of extremely fatal infectious disease causing madness in dogs was a secondary meaning in Latin.
Known hydrophobia in humans.


raccoon (n.)

also racoon, c.1600, arocoun, from Algonquian (Powhatan) arahkun, from arahkunem he scratches with
the hands. Early forms included Capt. John Smith's raugroughcum. In Norwegian, vaskebj&oslash;rn,
literally wash-bear.


race (n.1)

act of running, c.1300, from Old Norse ras running, rush (of water), cognate with Old English
r&aelig;s a running, a rush, a leap, jump; a storming, an attack; or else a survival of the Old
English word with spelling influenced by the Old Norse one. The Norse and Old English words are from
Proto-Germanic *res- (cognates: Middle Dutch rasen to rave, rage, German rasen, Old English
raesettan to rage (of fire)), from a variant form of PIE *ers- (1) be in motion (see err).
Originally a northern word, it became general in English c.1550. Meaning act of running is from
early 14c. Meaning contest of speed first recorded 1510s.


race (n.2)

people of common descent, a word from the 16th century, from Middle French race, earlier razza race,
breed, lineage, family (16c.), possibly from Italian razza, of unknown origin (cognate with Spanish
and Portuguese raza). Etymologists say no connection with Latin radix root, though they admit this
might have influenced the tribe, nation sense.    Original senses in English included wines with
characteristic flavor (1520), group of people with common occupation (c.1500), and generation
(1540s). Meaning tribe, nation, or people regarded as of common stock is by 1560s. Modern meaning of
one of the great divisions of mankind based on physical peculiarities is from 1774 (though as OED
points out, even among anthropologists there never has been an accepted classification of
these).Just being a Negro doesn't qualify you to understand the race situation any more than being
sick makes you an expert on medicine. [Dick Gregory, 1964]  In mid-20c. U.S. music catalogues,
Negro. Klein suggests these derive from Arabic ra's head, beginning, origin (compare Hebrew rosh).
Old English &thorn;eode meant both race, folk, nation and language; as a verb, ge&thorn;eodan, it
meant to unite, to join.


race (v.)

c.1200, rasen to rush, from a Scandinavian source akin to the source of race (n.1), reinforced by
the noun in English and by Old English cognate r&aelig;san to rush headlong, hasten, enter rashly.
Meaning run swiftly is from 1757. Meaning run in competition against is from 1809. Transitive sense
of cause to run is from 1860. In reference to an engine, etc., run with uncontrolled speed, from
1862. Related: Raced; racing.


race (n.3)

strong current of water, late 14c., perhaps a particular use of race (n.1), or from or influenced by
Old French raz, which had a similar meaning, and which probably is from Breton raz a strait, narrow
channel; this French source also may have given race its meaning of channel of a stream (especially
an artificial one to a mill), which is recorded in English from 1560s.


race-course (n.)

1764, from race (n.1) + course (n.).


race-horse (n.)

1620s, from race (n.1) + horse (n.).


race-riot (n.)

1889, American English, from race (n.2) + riot (n.).


race-track (n.)

1814, from race (n.1) + track (n.).


raceme (n.)

type of flower cluster, 1785, from Latin racemus a cluster of grapes (see raisin). Related: Racemic;
racemism.


racer (n.)

1640s of persons; 1793 of vehicles, agent noun from race (v.).


Rachel

fem. proper name, biblical daughter of Laban and wife of Jacob, from Late Latin, from Greek Rhakhel,
from Hebrew Rahel, literally ewe (compare Arabic rahil, Aramaic rahla, Akkadian lahru, a
metathesized form).


rachio-

also rhachio-, before vowels rachi-, word-forming element meaning spinal, from Greek rhakhis spine,
ridge, rib of a leaf. Compare Greek rhakhos thorn hedge.


rachitic (adj.)

1797, from rachitis (1727), medical Latin, from Late Greek rhakhitis (nosos) rachitic disease,
inflammation of the spine, from Greek rhakhis spine, ridge, rib of a leaf (see rachio-).


racial (adj.)

1862, from race (n.2) + -ial. Related: Racially.


racialism (n.)

racism, 1879, from racial + -ism. Also see racist.


racialist (n.)

1910, from racial + -ist. Also see racist. As an adjective from 1917.


racialization (n.)

1874, from racial + -ize + -ation.


raciation (n.)

evolutionary development of biological races, 1952, from race (n.2) + ending from speciation, etc.


racing (n.)

1670s, verbal noun from race (v.).


racism (n.)

1936; see racist.


racist

1932 as a noun, 1938 as an adjective, from race (n.2); racism is first attested 1936 (from French
racisme, 1935), originally in the context of Nazi theories. But they replaced earlier words,
racialism (1871) and racialist (1917), both often used early 20c. in a British or South African
context. In the U.S., race hatred, race prejudice had been used, and, especially in 19c. political
contexts, negrophobia.


rack (n.1)

frame with bars, c.1300, possibly from Middle Dutch rec framework, literally something stretched
out, related to recken (modern rekken) stretch out, cognate with Old English reccan to stretch out,
from Proto-Germanic *rak- (cognates: Old Saxon rekkian, Old Frisian reza, Old Norse rekja, Old High
German recchen, German recken, Gothic uf-rakjan to stretch out), from PIE *rog-, from root *reg- to
move in a straight line (see regal).    Meaning instrument of torture first recorded early 15c.,
perhaps from German rackbank, originally an implement for stretching leather, etc. Mechanical
meaning toothed bar is from 1797 (see pinion). Meaning set of antlers is first attested 1945,
American English; hence slang sense of a woman's breasts (especially if large), by 1991. Meaning
framework for displaying clothes is from 1948; hence off the rack (1951) of clothing, as opposed to
tailored.


rack (n.2)

type of gait of a horse, 1580s, from rack (v.) move with a fast, lively gait 1520s in this sense
(implied in racking), of unknown origin; perhaps from French racquassure racking of a horse in his
pace, itself of unknown origin. Or perhaps a variant of rock (v.1).


rack (n.3)

clouds driven before the wind, c.1300, also rush of wind, collision, crash, originally a northern
word, possibly from Old English racu cloud (or an unrecorded Scandinavian cognate of it), reinforced
by Old Norse rek wreckage, jetsam, or by influence of Old English wr&aelig;c something driven; from
Proto-Germanic *wrakaz, from PIE root *wreg- to push, shove, drive (see urge (v.)). Often confused
with wrack (n.), especially in phrase rack and ruin (1590s). The distinction is that rack is driven
clouds; wrack is seaweed cast up on shore.


rack (v.)

to stretch out for drying, also to torture on the rack, early 15c., from rack (n.1). Of other pains
from 1580s. Figurative sense of to torment is from c.1600. Meaning raise above a fair level (of
rent, etc.) is from 1550s. Meaning fit with racks is from 1580s. Teenager slang meaning to sleep is
from 1960s (rack (n.) was Navy slang for bed in 1940s). Related: Racked; racking. Rack up register,
accumulate, achieve is first attested 1943 (in Billboard), probably from method of keeping score in
pool halls.


rack (n.4)

cut of animal meat and bones, 1560s, of unknown origin; perhaps from some resemblance to rack (n.1).
Compare rack-bone vertebrae (1610s).


racket (n.1)

loud noise, 1560s, perhaps imitative. Klein compares Gaelic racaid noise. Meaning dishonest activity
(1785) is perhaps from racquet, via notion of game, reinforced by rack-rent extortionate rent
(1590s), from rack (n.1).


racket (n.2)

handled paddle or netted bat used in tennis, etc.; see racquet.


racketeer

1928 (noun and verb), from racket (n.1) + -eer. Related: Racketeering (1928).


raconteur (n.)

storyteller, person skilled in relating anecdotes, 1828, from French raconteur, from raconter to
recount, tell, narrate, from re- (see re-) + Old French aconter to count, render account (see
account (v.); and compare recount (v.1)). Related: Raconteuse (fem.).


racquet (n.)

handled hitting device used in tennis, etc., c.1500, probably originally tennis-like game played
with open hand (late 14c.), from Middle French rachette, requette (Modern French raquette) racket
for hitting; palm of the hand, perhaps via Italian racchetta or Spanish raqueta, both often said to
be from Arabic rahat, a form of raha palm of the hand, but this has been doubted. Compare French jeu
de paume tennis, literally play with the palm of the hand, and compare tennis).


racquetball (n.)

1972, from racquet + ball (n.1).


racy (adj.)

1650s, having a characteristic taste (of wines, fruits, etc.), from race (n.2) in its older sense of
flavor or in the sense class of wines + -y (2); meaning having a quality of vigor (1660s) led to
that of improper, risqu&eacute;, first recorded 1901, probably reinforced by phrase racy of the soil
earthy (1870). Related: Racily; raciness.


rad

x-ray dose unit, 1918, shortened form of radiation (q.v.). As shortened form of radical (n.), it is
attested in political slang from 1820. Teen slang sense of extraordinary, wonderful is from late
1970s (see radical (adj.)).


radar (n.)

electronic system for locating objects by means of radio waves, 1941, acronym (more or less) from
radio detecting and ranging. The U.S. choice, it won out over British radiolocation. Figurative from
1950.


radial (adj.)

c.1400, of or like a ray or radius, from Medieval Latin radialis, from Latin radius shaft, rod;
spoke of a wheel; beam of light (see radius). As a noun, a type of tire, attested from 1965, short
for radial-ply (tire). Related: Radially.


radian (n.)

angle subtended at the center of a circle by an arc equal in length to the radius, 1879, from
radius.


radiance (n.)

c.1600, brilliant light, from radiant or else from Medieval Latin radiantia brightness, from radiare
to beam, shine (see radiation). Figurative use from 1761. Related: Radiancy.


radiant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French radiant and directly from Latin radiantem (nominative radians) beaming,
shining, present participle of radiare to beam, shine (see radiation). Of beauty, etc., first
attested c.1500. Related: Radiantly.


radiant (n.)

point or object from which light radiates, 1727; see radiant (adj.). In astronomy, of meteor
showers, from 1864.


radiate (v.)

1610s, spread in all directions from a point, from Latin radiatus, past participle of radiare to
beam, shine, gleam; make beaming (see radiation). Meaning be radiant, give off rays (of light or
heat) is from 1704. Related: Radiated; radiates; radiating.


radiate (adj.)

having rays, furnished with rays, shining, 1660s, from Latin radiatus (see radiate (v.)).


radiation (n.)

mid-15c., act or process of radiating, from Middle French radiation and directly from Latin
radiationem (nominative radiatio) a shining, radiation, noun of action from past participle stem of
radiare to beam, shine, gleam; make beaming, from radius beam of light; spoke of a wheel (see
radius). Meaning rays or beams emitted is from 1560s. Meaning divergence from a center is 1650s.


radiative (adj.)

having a tendency to radiate, 1820, from radiate (v.) + -ive. Related: Radiativity.


radiator (n.)

1836, any thing that radiates, agent noun in Latin form from radiate. Meaning heater is from 1851;
sense of cooling device in internal combustion engine is 1900.


radical (adj.)

late 14c., in a medieval philosophical sense, from Late Latin radicalis of or having roots, from
Latin radix (genitive radicis) root (see radish). Meaning going to the origin, essential is from
1650s. Radical sign in mathematics is from 1680s.    Political sense of reformist (via notion of
change from the roots) is first recorded 1802 (n.), 1817 (adj.), of the extreme section of the
British Liberal party (radical reform had been a current phrase since 1786); meaning unconventional
is from 1921. U.S. youth slang use is from 1983, from 1970s surfer slang meaning at the limits of
control. Radical chic is attested from 1970; popularized, if not coined, by Tom Wolfe. Radical
empiricism coined 1897 by William James (see empiricism).


radical (n.)

1630s, root part of a word, from radical (adj.) Political sense from 1802; chemical sense from 1816.


radicalism (n.)

1819 in the political sense, from radical (adj.) + -ism.


radicality (n.)

1640s, from radical (adj.) + -ity.


radicalize (v.)

1820, from radical (adj.) + -ize. Related: Radicalized; radicalizing.


radically (adv.)

c.1600, thoroughly; 1620s with reference to roots and origins, from radical (adj.) + -ly (2).


radicand (n.)

the number under a radical sign, from Latin radicandus, gerundive of radicare (see radicant).


radicant (adj.)

bringing forth roots, 1735, from Latin radicantem (nominative radicans), present participle of
radicare, from radix root (see radish).


radicle (n.)

1670s, in botany, from Latin radicula, diminutive of radix (see radish).


radicular (adj.)

pertaining to roots, 1830, from Modern Latin radicula, diminutive of Latin radix (see radish) + -ar.


radio (n.)

wireless transmission of voice signals with radio waves, 1907, abstracted from earlier combinations
such as radio-receiver (1903), radiophone (1881), radio-telegraphy (1898), from radio- as a comb.
form of Latin radius beam. Use for radio receiver is first attested 1913; sense of sound
broadcasting as a medium is from 1913.    It is not a dream, but a probability that the radio will
demolish blocs, cut the strings of red tape, actuate the voice back home, dismantle politics and
entrench the nation's executive in a position of power unlike that within the grasp of any executive
in the world's history. [The Reading Eagle, Reading, Pa., U.S.A., March 16, 1924]   Wireless
remained more widespread until World War II, when military preference for radio turned the tables.
As an adjective by 1912, by radio transmission; meaning controlled by radio from 1974. Radio _______
radio station or service from _______ is recorded from 1920. A radio shack (1946) was a small
building housing radio equipment.


radio (v.)

1916, from radio (n.). Related: Radioed; radioing.


radio-

word-forming element meaning 1. ray, ray-like (see radius); 2. radial, radially (see radial (adj.));
3. by means of radiant energy (see radiate (v.)); 4. radioactive (see radioactive); 5. by radio (see
radio (n.)).


radio-carbon (n.)

Carbon-14, 1940, from radio-, comb. form of radioactive, + carbon. Radio-carbon dating is attested
from 1949.


radio-telephone (n.)

1900, from radio (n.) + telephone (n.).


radioactive (adj.)

1898, from French radio-actif, coined by Pierre and Marie Curie from radio-, comb. form of Latin
radius (see radiation) + actif active (see active).


radioactivity (n.)

1899, from French radioactivit&#233;, coined 1898 by the Curies; see radioactive.


radiocast (n.)

1924, from radio (n.) + ending from broadcast.


radiography (n.)

1896, from radiograph (1880), originally a device to measure sunshine; from radio-, comb. form of
radiation, + -graph. As a type of image-making device, from 1896.


radioisotope (n.)

1946, from radio-, comb. form of radiation, + isotope.


radiolarian (n.)

1862, from Radiolaria, Modern Latin classification name, from Latin radiolus, diminutive of radius
(q.v.).


radiology (n.)

1900, medical use of X-rays, later extended to scientific study of radiation, from radio-, comb.
form of radiation, + Greek-based scientific suffix -ology. Related: Radiological.


radiometric (adj.)

1877, from radiometer instrument to transform radiant energy into mechanical work (1875),
radiometry, from radio-, here indicating radiant energy, + -metric. Radiometric dating attested from
1906.


radioscopy (n.)

1896, from radio- + -scopy.


radiotherapy (n.)

1903, from radio- + therapy.


radish (n.)

late Old English r&aelig;dic radish, from Latin radicem (nominative radix) root, radish, from PIE
root *wrad- twig, root (cognates: Greek rhiza, Lesbian brisda root; Greek hradamnos branch; Gothic
waurts, Old English wyrt; Welsh gwridd, Old Irish fren root). Spelling perhaps influenced by Old
French radise, variant of radice, from Vulgar Latin *radicina, from radicem.


radium (n.)

radioactive metallic element, 1899, from French radium, named 1898 after identification by Marie
Curie and her husband, formed in Modern Latin from Latin radius ray (see radius). So called for its
power of emitting energy in the form of rays.


radius (n.)

1590s, cross-shaft, from Latin radius staff, stake, rod; spoke of a wheel; ray of light, beam of
light; radius of a circle, of unknown origin. Perhaps related to radix root, but Tucker suggests
connection to Sanskrit vardhate rises, makes grow, via root *neredh- rise, out, extend forth; or
else Greek ardis sharp point.    The geometric sense first recorded 1610s. Plural is radii. Meaning
circular area of defined distance around some place is attested from 1953. Meaning shorter bone of
the forearm is from 1610s in English (the Latin word had been used thus by the Romans).


Radnor

place in eastern Wales, the name is Old English, literally at the red bank, from Old English read
(dative singular readan; see red (n.1) + ofer bank, slope.


radon (n.)

heaviest gaseous element, 1918, from German Radon, from radium (q.v.) + -on suffix of inert gases.
The element was identified in radioactive decay of radium. Alternative name niton (from Latin nitens
shining) gained currency in France and Germany.


radula (n.)

surgical instrument, 1753, from Latin radula scraper, scraping iron, from radere to scrape (see
raze). Related: Radular.


raffia (n.)

fiber-yielding tree of Madagascar, 1729, rofia, from Malagasy rafia. Modern form is attested from
1882; also raphia (1866).


raffish (adj.)

disreputable, vulgar, 1801 (first attested in Jane Austen), from raff people, usually of a lower
sort (1670s), probably from rif and raf (mid-14c.) everyone, from Middle English raf, raffe one and
all, everybody (see riffraff). Related: Raffishly; raffishness.


raffle (n.)

late 14c., dice game, from Old French rafle dice game, also plundering, perhaps from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch raffel dice game, Old Frisian hreppa to move, Old Norse hreppa to
reach, get, Swedish rafs rubbish, Old High German raspon to scrape together, snatch up in haste,
German raffen to snatch away, sweep off), from Proto-Germanic *khrap- to pluck out, snatch off. The
notion would be to sweep up (the stakes), to snatch (the winnings). Dietz connects the French word
with the Germanic root, but OED is against this. Meaning sale of chances first recorded 1766.


raffle (v.)

dispose of by raffle, 1851, from raffle (n.). Related: Raffled; raffling.


Rafflesia (n.)

genus of Malaysian plants, 1820, named for Sir T. Stamford Raffles (1781-1826), British governor of
Sumatra, who introduced it to the West. He reports the native name was petimum sikinlili Devil's
betel-box.


raft (n.1)

floating platform, late 15c., originally rafter (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse raptr log (Old Norse -pt- pronounced as -ft-), related to Middle Low German rafter, rachter
rafter (see rafter).


raft (n.2)

large collection, 1830, variant of raff heap, large amount, from Middle English raf (compare
raffish, riffraff); form and sense associated with raft (n.1).


raft (v.)

1680s, from raft (n.1). Related: Rafted; rafting.


rafter (n.)

sloping timber of a roof, Old English r&aelig;ftras (West Saxon), reftras (Mercian), both plural,
related to Old Norse raptr log, from Proto-Germanic *raf-tra-, from PIE *rap-tro-, from root *rep-
stake, beam.


rag (n.)

scrap of cloth, early 14c., probably from Old Norse r&#246;gg shaggy tuft, earlier raggw-, or
possibly from Old Danish rag (see rug), or a back-formation from ragged, It also may represent an
unrecorded Old English cognate of Old Norse r&#246;gg. In any case, from Proto-Germanic *rawwa-,
from PIE root *reue- (2) to smash, knock down, tear up, uproot (see rough (adj.)).    As an
insulting term for newspaper, magazine it dates from 1734; slang for tampon, sanitary napkin is
attested from 1930s (on the rag menstruating is from 1948). Rags personal clothing is from 1855
(singular), American English. Rags-to-riches rise from poverty to wealth is attested by 1896. Rag-
picker is from 1860; rag-shop from 1829.


rag (v.)

scold, 1739, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Danish dialectal rag grudge. Related: Ragged;
ragging. Compare bullyrag, ballarag intimidate (1807).


rag-bag (n.)

1820, from rag (n.1) + bag (n.). Figurative sense of motley collection is first recorded 1864.


rag-doll (n.)

child's plaything, 1776 (from 1757 as a dressed-up woman), from rag (n.1) + doll (n.). Rag-baby
attested from 1798. Shakespeare has babe of clowts (i.e. clouts), 1590s.


raga (n.)

1788, from Sanskrit raga-s harmony, melody, mode in music, literally color, mood, related to rajyati
it is dyed, from PIE *reg- (3) to dye (cognates: Greek rhegos blanket, rug).


ragamuffin (n.)

mid-14c., demon, also in surnames (Isabella Ragamuffyn, 1344), from Middle English raggi ragged
(rag-y?) + fanciful ending (or else second element is Middle Dutch muffe mitten). Or, as Johnson has
it, From rag and I know not what else. Ragged was used of the devil from c.1300 in reference to
shaggy appearance. Raggeman was used by Langland as the name of a demon, and compare Old French
Ragamoffyn, name of a demon in a mystery play. Sense of dirty, disreputable boy is from 1580s.
Compare in the same sense ragabash (c.1600).


rage (n.)

c.1300, madness, insanity; fit of frenzy; anger, wrath; fierceness in battle; violence of storm,
fire, etc., from Old French rage, raige spirit, passion, rage, fury, madness (11c.), from Medieval
Latin rabia, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (compare rabies,
which originally had this sense), from PIE *rebh- violent, impetuous (cognates: Old English rabbian
to rage). Similarly, Welsh (cynddaredd) and Breton (kounnar) words for rage, fury originally meant
hydrophobia and are compounds based on the word for dog (Welsh ci, plural cwn; Breton ki). In
15c.-16c. it also could mean rabies. The rage fashion, vogue dates from 1785.


rage (v.)

mid-13c., to play, romp, from rage (n.). Meanings be furious; speak passionately; go mad first
recorded c.1300. Of things from 1530s. Related: Raged; raging.


ragged (adj.)

rough, shaggy, c.1300, past participle adjective as though from a verb form of rag (n.). Compare
Latin pannosus ragged, wrinkly, from pannus piece of cloth. But  the word might reflect a broader,
older meaning; perhaps from or reinforced by Old Norse ragga&eth;r shaggy, via Old English raggig
shaggy, bristly, rough (which, Barnhart writes, was almost surely developed from Scandinavian). Of
clothes, early 14c.; of persons, late 14c. To run (someone) ragged is from 1915. Related: Raggedly;
raggedness.


raggedy (adj.)

1845, U.S. Southern, from ragged + -y (2). Raggedy Ann stories first published 1918, character
created by U.S. illustrator Johnny Gruelle (1880-1938). The tangle of tales about the origin of the
doll and the name probably are mostly invention, sorrow's grieving-shrine for Marcella Gruelle
(1902-1915), best left alone.


raggedy-ass (adj.)

by 1930, from raggedy + ass (n.2).


raghead (n.)

insulting term for South Asian or Middle Eastern person, 1910, from rag (n.) + head (n.); in
reference to turbans, etc.


raglan (n.)

type of overcoat, 1863, named for British general Lord Raglan (1788-1855), commander of British
forces in the Crimean War. The name is from a place in Wales.


Ragnarok (n.)

in Norse mythology, the last battle of the world, in which gods and men will be destroyed by
monsters and darkness, 1770, from Old Norse ragna, genitive of r&ouml;gn gods + r&ouml;k destined
end or r&ouml;kr twilight. Also see Gotterdammerung.


ragout (n.)

highly seasoned meat and vegetable stew, 1650s, from French rago&#251;t (mid-17c.), from Middle
French rago&#251;ter awaken the appetite, from Old French re- back (see re-) + &agrave; to +
go&#251;t taste, from Latin gustum (nominative gustus); see gusto.


ragtag (n.)

also rag-tag, ragged people collectively, 1820, from rag (n.) + tag (n.); originally in expression
rag-tag and bobtail the rabble (tag-rag and bobtail is found in 1650s), with bobtail an old 17c.
word for cur. Tag and rag was very common in 16-17th c. [OED]


ragtime (n.)

also rag-time, syncopated, jazzy piano music, 1897, perhaps from rag dance ball (1895, American
English dialect), or a shortening of ragged, in reference to the syncopated melody. Rag (n.) ragtime
dance tune is from 1899.    If rag-time was called tempo di raga or rague-temps it might win honor
more speedily. ... What the derivation of the word is[,] I have not the faintest idea. The negroes
call their clog-dancing ragging and the dance a rag. [Rupert Hughes, Boston Musical Record, April
1900]   <hr />   Conceive the futility of trying to reduce the intangible ragness to a strict system
of misbegotten grace notes and untimely rests! In attempting to perfect, and simplify, art is
destroying the unhampered spirit in which consists the whole beauty of rag-time music. The very
essence of rag-time is that it shall lack all art, depending for the spirit to be infused more upon
the performer than upon the composer himself. [Yale Literary Magazine, June, 1899]   <hr />   Her
first rag-time was The Bully, in which she made great sport by bringing a little coloured boy on the
stage with her. Miss [May] Irwin says the way to learn to sing rag-time is to catch a negro and
study him. [Lewis C. Strang, Famous Actresses of the Day in America, Boston, 1899]


ragtop (n.)

convertible car, 1954, from rag (n.) + top (n.1).


ragweed (n.)

1790, from ragged + weed (n.); so called from shape of the leaves. Applied to a different plant
(ragwort) from 1650s.


ragwort (n.)

mid-15c., from ragged, in reference to the appearance of the leaves, + wort.


rah

in cheers, 1870, a shortening of hurrah. Adjective rah-rah is attested from 1907, originally
indicating college life generally, later enthusiastic cheerleading.


Rahab

name of a Biblical monster, from Hebrew rahab, literally storming, against, impetuous, from rahabh
he stormed against (compare Arabic rahiba he feared, was alarmed).


raid (n.)

early 15c., mounted military expedition, Scottish and northern English form of rade a riding,
journey, from Old English rad a riding, ride, expedition, journey; raid, (see road). The word died
out by 17c., but was revived by Scott (The Lay of the Last Minstrel, 1805), (Rob Roy, 1818), with
extended sense of attack, foray.


raid (v.)

take part in a raid, 1785 (implied in raiding), from raid (n.). Related: Raided; raiding. Also see
raider.


raider (n.)

1863, agent noun from raid (v.). A word from the American Civil War.


rail (n.1)

horizontal bar passing from one post or support to another, c.1300, from Old French reille bolt,
bar, from Vulgar Latin *regla, from Latin regula straight stick, diminutive form related to regere
to straighten, guide (see regal). Used figuratively for thinness from 1872. To be off the rails in a
figurative sense is from 1848, an image from the railroads. In U.S. use, A piece of timber, cleft,
hewed, or sawed, inserted in upright posts for fencing [Webster, 1830].


rail (n.2)

small wading bird, mid-15c., from Old French raale (13c.), related to r&acirc;ler to rattle, of
unknown origin, perhaps imitative of its cry.


rail (v.1)

complain, mid-15c., from Middle French railler to tease or joke (15c.), perhaps from Old
Proven&ccedil;al ralhar scoff, to chat, to joke, from Vulgar Latin *ragulare to bray (source also of
Italian ragghiare to bray), from Late Latin ragere to roar, probably of imitative origin. See rally
(v.2). Related: Railed; railing.


rail (v.2)

fence in with rails, late 14c., from rail (n.1). Related: Railed; railing.


rail-splitter (n.)

1853, from rail (n.1) + agent noun from split (v.). Usually with reference to or suggestion of U.S.
president Abraham Lincoln, as it figured in his political biography.


railing (n.)

construction in which rails form an important part, early 15c., verbal noun from rail (v.2).
Technically, railings (late 15c.) are horizontal, palings are vertical.


raillery (n.)

good-humored ridicule, 1650s, from rail (v.) + -ery, or perhaps from French raillerie, from Middle
French railler to tease (see rail (v.1)).


railroad (n.)

1757, from rail (n.1) + road. Originally road laid with rails for heavy wagons (in mining). The
process itself (but not the word) seems to have been in use by late 17c. Application to passenger
and freight trains dates from 1825, though tending to be replaced in this sense in England by
railway.


railroad (v.)

to convict quickly and perhaps unjustly, 1873, American English, from railroad (n.).    A person
knowing more than might be desirable of the affairs, or perhaps the previous life of some powerful
individual, high in authority, might some day ventilate his knowledge, possibly before a court of
justice; but if his wisdom is railroaded to State's prison, his evidence becomes harmless.
[Wanderings of a Vagabond, New York, 1873]    Related: Railroaded; railroading. An earlier verb
sense was to have a mania for building railroads (1847).


railroading (n.)

1842, travel by rail, from railroad (n.). As business of running railways from 1882.


railway (n.)

1812 in modern sense, from rail (n.1) + way (n.). Earlier used of any sort of road on which rails
(originally wooden) were laid for easier transport (1776).


raiment (n.)

c.1400, clothing, vesture (archaic), shortening of arayment clothing (late 14c.), from Anglo-French
araiement, from Old French areement, from areer to array (see array (v.)).


rain (n.)

Old English regn rain, from Proto-Germanic *regna- (cognates: Old Saxon regan, Old Frisian rein,
Middle Dutch reghen, Dutch regen, German regen, Old Norse regn, Gothic rign rain), with no certain
cognates outside Germanic, unless it is from a presumed PIE *reg- moist, wet, which may be the
source of Latin rigare to wet, moisten (see irrigate). Rain dance is from 1867; rain date in
listings for outdoor events is from 1948. To know enough to come in out of the rain (usually with a
negative) is from 1590s. Rainshower is Old English renscur.


rain (v.)

Old English regnian, usually contracted to rinan; see rain (n.), and compare Old Norse rigna,
Swedish regna, Danish regne, Old High German reganon, German regnen, Gothic rignjan. Related:
Rained; raining. Transferred and figurative use of other things that fall as rain (blessings, tears,
etc.) is recorded from c.1200.    To rain on (someone's) parade is attested from 1941. Phrase to
rain cats and dogs is attested from 1738 (variation rain dogs and polecats is from 1650s), of
unknown origin, despite intense speculation. One of the less likely suggestions is pets sliding off
sod roofs when the sod got too wet during a rainstorm. (Ever see a dog react to a rainstorm by
climbing up on an exposed roof?) Probably rather an extension of cats and dogs as proverbial for
strife, enmity (1570s).


rain forest (n.)

1899, apparently a loan-translation of German Regenwald, coined by A.F.W. Schimper for his 1898 work
Pflanzengeographie.


rain-cloud (n.)

also raincloud, 1800, from rain (n.) + cloud (n.).


rain-out (n.)

also rain out, rainout, 1947, from rain (v.) + out (adv.). Of baseball games, to be rained out is
attested from 1928.


rainbow (n.)

Old English renboga; see rain (n.) + bow (n.). Common Germanic compound (Old Frisian reinboga, Old
Norse regnbogi, Swedish regenb&#229;ge, Dutch regenboog, German Regenbogen). Rainbow trout (1876,
American English) so called for its resplendent colors. Old English also had scurboga shower-bow.


raincheck (n.)

also rain-check, rain check, 1884; see rain (n.) + check (n.1). Originally of tickets to rained-out
baseball games.


raincoat (n.)

also rain-coat, 1821, from rain (n.) + coat (n.).


raindrop (n.)

Old English rendropa; see rain (n.) + drop (n.).


rainfall (n.)

also rain-fall, amount of precipitation that falls as rain, 1839, from rain (n.) + fall (n.).


rainmaker (n.)

also rain-maker, 1775, in reference to American Indian tribal magicians, from rain (n.) + agent noun
of make (v.).


rainproof (adj.)

also rain-proof, 1788, from rain (n.) + proof (n.).


rainstorm (n.)

1804, from rain (n.) + storm (n.).


rainwater (n.)

Old English renw&#230;ter; see rain (n.) + water (n.1).


rainy (adj.)

Old English renig; see rain (n.) + -y (2).


raise (n.)

act of raising or lifting, 1530s, from raise (v.). Meaning an increase in amount or value is from
1728. Meaning increase in salary or wages is from 1898, chiefly American English (British preferring
rise). Earliest attested use (c.1500) is in obsolete sense of a levy.


raise (v.)

c.1200, cause a rising of; lift upright, set upright; build, construct, from a Scandinavian source,
such as Old Norse reisa to raise, from Proto-Germanic *raizjan (cognates: Gothic ur-raisjan, Old
English r&aelig;ran to rear; see rear (v.)), causative of root *ris- to rise (see rise (v.)). At
first sharing many senses with native rear (v.).    Meaning make higher is from c.1300 in the
physical sense, as is that of restore to life. Of the voice, from late 14c. Meaning increase the
amount of is from c.1500; from 1530s of prices, etc. Meaning to bring up (a question, etc.) is from
1640s. Card-playing sense is from 1821. Meaning promote the growth of (plants, etc.) is from 1660s;
sense of foster, rear, bring up (of children) is from 1744. Meaning to elevate (the consciousness)
is from 1970. Related: Raised; raising.    Pickering (1816) has a long passage on the use of raise
and grow in reference to crops. He writes that in the U.S. raise is used of persons, in the sense
brought up, but it is never thus used in the Northern States. Bartlett [1848] adds that it is
applied in the Southern States to the breeding of negroes. It is sometimes heard at the North among
the illiterate; as 'I was raised in Connecticut,' meaning brought up there.


raisin (n.)

dried sweet grape, c.1300, from Anglo-French raycin (late 13c.), Old French raisin grape; raisin,
from Vulgar Latin *racimus, alteration of Latin racemus cluster of grapes or berries (also source of
Spanish racimo, Italian racemo), probably from the same ancient lost Mediterranean language that
gave Greek rhax (genitive rhagos) grape, berry. Dutch razun also is from French; German Rosine is
from an Old French variant form.


raising (n.)

mid-14c., an act of elevating, verbal noun from raise (v.). Specifically in American English, the
erecting of a building, by 1650s.    RAISING. In New England and the Northern States, the operation
or work of setting up the frame of a building. [Webster, 1830]


raison d&#039;etat (n.)

from French raison d'&#233;tat reason of state, thus convenience of the government.


raison d&#039;etre (n.)

excuse for being, 1864, first recorded in letter of J.S. Mill, from French raison d'&#234;tre,
literally rational grounds for existence.


raisonne (adj.)

arranged logically, 1777, from French raisonn&#233; reasoned, past participle of raisonner to
reason, from raison (see reason (n.)).


Raj (n.)

British rule in India, 1859, from Hindi raj rule, dominion, kingdom (see rajah).


rajah (n.)

also raja, king or prince in India, 1550s, from Hindi, from Sanskrit rajan king, related to raj
kingdom, kingship, rajati he rules, and cognate with Latin rex, Old Irish rig king (see regal).
Related: Rajput, member of the ruling caste in northern India (1590s), from Sanskrit rajaputrah
prince, literally king's son, from putrah son, boy (see puerile).


rake (n.1)

toothed tool for drawing or scraping things together, Old English raca rake, earlier r&aelig;ce,
from Proto-Germanic *rak- gather, heap up (cognates: Old Norse reka spade, shovel, Old High German
rehho, German Rechen a rake, Gothic rikan to heap up, collect), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a
straight line (cognates: Greek oregein to reach, stretch out, Latin regere direct, rule; keep
straight, guide; see regal), perhaps via its action, or via the notion of implement with straight
pieces of wood [Watkins].


rake (v.)

mid-13c., clear (rubbish, grass, etc.) by raking; gather (grain) by raking, from rake (n.1), or from
a lost Old English verb related to it, or from a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish raka,
Danish rage rake). Of gunfire from 1630s. Related: Raked; raking. To rake in money or something like
it is from 1580s.


rake (n.2)

debauchee; idle, dissolute person, 1650s, shortening of rakehell. Hogarth's Rake's Progress
engravings were published in 1735.


rakehell (n.)

1540s, possibly an alteration (by association with rake (n.1) and Hell) of Middle English rakel
(adj.) hasty, rash, headstrong, probably from raken to go, proceed, from Old English racian to go
forward, move, hasten, of unknown origin. Compare rakeshame (n.) one who lives shamefully (1590s).


rakish (adj.)

1706, debauched, disreputable, from rake (n.2) + -ish. Related: Rakishly; rakishness.    The meaning
smart, jaunty, dashing (1824) is said to be a different word, probably from rake slant, slope
(1620s), used especially in reference to a ship's hull or sails, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Scandinavian (compare Old Swedish raka project, reach; Danish rage protrude, project) related to Old
English reccan stretch. The piratical craft of former times were distinguished for their rakish
build [Century Dictionary].


Raleigh

city in North Carolina, U.S., founded 1792 and named for Sir Walter Raleigh (1552-1618).


rally (n.)

1650s, originally in the military sense of a regrouping for renewed action after a repulse, from
rally (v.1). Sense of mass meeting to stir enthusiasm first attested 1840, American English. Sense
of gathering of automobile enthusiasts is from 1932, from French rallye, itself from the English
noun. Sports sense of long series of hits in tennis, etc., is from 1881, earlier series of back-and-
forth blows in a boxing match (1829).


rally (v.1)

bring together, c.1600, from French rallier, from Old French ralier reassemble, unite again, from
re- again (see re-) + alier unite (see ally (v.)). Intransitive meaning pull together hastily,
recover order, revive, rouse is from 1660s. Related: Rallied; rallying. Rally round the flag (1862)
is a line from popular American Civil War song Battle Cry of Freedom.


rally (v.2)

make fun of, tease, 1660s, from French railler to rail, reproach (see rail (v.)).


Ralph

masc. proper name, shortened from Radulf, from Old Norse Ra&eth;ulfr (Old English R&aelig;dwulf),
literally wolf-counsel, from ra&eth; counsel (see read (n.)) + ulfr wolf (see wolf (n.)). The
Century Dictionary also lists it as English printers' slang for An alleged or imagined evil spirit
who does mischief in a printing house.


ram (v.)

to beat with a heavy implement, c.1300, from ram (n.). Related: Rammed; ramming.


ram (n.)

Old English ramm male sheep, also battering ram and the zodiac sign; earlier rom male sheep, a West
Germanic word (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German ram), of unknown
origin. Perhaps [Klein] connected with Old Norse rammr strong, Old Church Slavonic ramenu impetuous,
violent.


RAM (n.)

1957, acronym for random access memory (computerese).


Rama

incarnation of Vishnu, from Sanskrit Ramah, literally lovely, from stem of ramate stands still,
rests, is pleased.


ramada (n.)

arbor, porch, 1869, from American Spanish ramada tent, shelter, from Spanish ramada an arbor, from
rama branch, from Vulgar Latin *rama, collective of Latin ramus branch (see ramus).


Ramadan (n.)

ninth month of the Muslim year, 1590s, from Arabic Ramadan (Turkish and Persian ramazan), originally
the hot month, from ramida be burnt, scorched (compare Mishnaic Hebrew remetz hot ashes, embers). In
the Islamic lunar calendar, it passes through all seasons in a cycle of about 33 years, but
evidently originally it was a summer month.


ramble (v.)

mid-15c., perhaps frequentative of romen to walk, go (see roam), perhaps via romblen (late 14c.) to
ramble. The vowel change perhaps by influence of Middle Dutch rammelen, a derivative of rammen
copulate, used of the night wanderings of the amorous cat [Weekley]. Meaning to talk or write
incoherently is from 1630s. Related: Rambled; rambling.


ramble (n.)

a roving or wandering, 1650s, from ramble (v.).


rambler (n.)

1620s, agent noun from ramble (v.).


rambling (adj.)

1623, present participle adjective from ramble (v.).


Rambo

used allusively from 1985, in reference to John Rambo, hero of David Morrell's novel First Blood
(1972), popularized as portrayed by Sylvester Stallone in Hollywood movie version (1982), a U.S.
Vietnam veteran, macho and self-sufficient, and bent on violent retribution [OED]. The family name
is an old one in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, originally Swedish, sometimes said to represent
Swedish place name Ramberget, or to be from French Huguenots who took refuge in Sweden.


rambunctious (adj.)

1859, earlier rumbunctious, 1830, probably altered (by influence of ram) from rumbustious.


ramekin

1706, from French ramequin (late 17c.), said to be from a Germanic source (compare Middle Low German
rom cream), from Proto-Germanic *rau(g)ma-, of uncertain origin.


ramification (n.)

1670s, a branching out, from French ramification, from ramifier (see ramify). Transferred sense of
outgrowth, consequence first recorded 1755. Related: Ramifications.


ramify (v.)

early 15c., branch out, from Middle French ramifier (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin ramificare to
form branches, from Latin ramus branch (see ramus) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Related: Ramified; ramifying.


ramjet (n.)

1942, from ram (v.) + jet (n.).


rammy (adj.)

c.1600, from ram (n.) + -y (2). Related: Ramminess.


ramp (n.1)

1778, slope, from French rampe, back-formation from Old French verb ramper to climb, scale, mount;
see ramp (v.). Meaning road on or off a major highway is from 1952, American English.


ramp (n.2)

rude, boisterous girl or woman, mid-15c., perhaps from ramp (v.). Compare romp in Johnson's
Dictionary (1755): a rude, awkward, boisterous, untaught girl.


ramp (v.)

c.1300, to climb; to stand on the hind legs (of animals), from Old French ramper to climb, scale,
mount (12c., in Modern French to creep, crawl), perhaps from Frankish *rampon to contract oneself
(compare Old High German rimpfan to wrinkle, Old English hrimpan to fold, wrinkle), via notion of
the bodily contraction involved in climbing [Klein], from Proto-Germanic *hrimp- to contract
oneself. Related: Ramped; ramping.


rampage (v.)

1715, in Scottish, probably from Middle English verb ramp rave, rush wildly about (c.1300),
especially of beasts rearing on their hind legs, as if climbing, from Old French ramper (see ramp
(n.1), also see rampant). Related: Rampaged; rampaging.


rampage (n.)

1861, from rampage (v.).


rampancy (n.)

1660s, from rampant + -cy.


rampant (adj.)

late 14c., standing on the hind legs (as a heraldic lion often does), thus, also, fierce, ravenous
(late 14c.), from Old French rampant, present participle of ramper to climb, scale, mount (see
rampage (v.)). Sense of growing without check (in running rampant), first recorded 1610s, probably
is via the notion of fierce disposition or else preserves the older French sense.


rampart (n.)

earthen elevation around a place for fortification, sometimes also including parapets, 1580s, from
Middle French rempart, rampart, from remparer to fortify, from re- again (see re-) + emparer
fortify, take possession of, from Old Proven&ccedil;al amparer, from Vulgar Latin *anteparare
prepare, properly to make preparations beforehand, from Latin ante- before (see ante) + parare
prepare (see pare). With excrescent -t in French, perhaps by influence of boulevart (see boulevard).


ramrod (n.)

1757, literally a rod used in ramming (the charge of a gun), from ram (v.) + rod. Used figuratively
for straightness or stiffness from 1939, also figuratively for formality, primness (ramroddy is in
Century Dictionary, 1902). The verb is 1948, from the noun. Related: Ramrodded; ramrodding.


ramshackle (adj.)

1809, back-formation from ramshackled, earlier ranshackled (1670s), alteration of ransackled, past
participle of ransackle (see ransack). The word seems to have been Scottish.    Reading over this
note to an American gentleman, he seemed to take alarm, lest the word ramshackle should be palmed on
his country. I take it home willingly, as a Scotticism, and one well applied, as may be afterwards
shown. [Robert Gourlay, General Introduction to a Statistical Account of Upper Canada, London, 1822]
Jamieson's Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language (1825) has it as a noun meaning
thoughtless, ignorant fellow.


ramus (n.)

a branch (anatomical), 1803, from Latin ramus a branch, bough, twig, related to radix root; see
radish.


ran

past tense of run (v.), Old English ran.


ranch (n.)

1808, country house, from American Spanish rancho small farm, group of farm huts, from Spanish
rancho mess-room, originally, group of people who eat together, from ranchear to lodge or station,
from Old French ranger install in position, from rang row, line (see rank (n.)).    Sense of large
stock-farm and herding establishment is from 1831. Of houses, single-story, split-level (adj.) from
1950; as a noun from 1960. Ranch-house attested from 1862.


ranch (v.)

1866, from ranch (n.). Related: Ranched; ranching.


rancher (n.)

1836, owner of a ranch; see ranch (n.). Meaning modern single-story house attested from 1964.


ranchero (n.)

one employed on a ranch, 1826, from American Spanish ranchero, from rancho (see ranch (n.)).


rancid (adj.)

1640s, from Latin rancidus rank, stinking, offensive (also source of Italian rancido, Spanish
rancio), from rancere be spoiled or rotten, of unknown origin. German ranzig is from French rancide.
Related: Rancidness.


rancor (n.)

c.1200, from Old French rancor bitterness, resentment; grief, affliction, from Late Latin rancorem
(nominative rancor) rancidness, a stinking smell (Palladius); grudge, bitterness (Hieronymus and in
Late Latin), from Latin rancere to stink (see rancid).


rancorous (adj.)

1580s, from rancor + -ous. Related: Rancorously; rancorousness.


rancour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of rancor; for ending see -or. Related: Rancourous.


rand (n.)

rocky ridge overlooking a river valley, 1839, South African English, from Afrikaans, from Dutch rand
edge, margin, cognate with Old English rand brink, bank. As a unit of currency, adopted by the
Republic of South Africa in 1961 (see Krugerrand). Johnson's dictionary has rand Border; seam: as
the rand of a woman's shoe.


Randal

masc. proper name, shortened from Old English Randwulf, from rand shield (see rand) + wulf wolf (see
wolf (n.)). Compare Randolph.


Randolph

masc. proper name, from Old Norse Rannulfr shield-wolf and Frankish *Rannulf raven-wolf, both
brought to England by the Normans.


random (adj.)

having no definite aim or purpose, 1650s, from at random (1560s), at great speed (thus, carelessly,
haphazardly), alteration of Middle English noun randon impetuosity, speed (c.1300), from Old French
randon rush, disorder, force, impetuosity, from randir to run fast, from Frankish *rant a running or
some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *randa (cognates: Old High German rennen to run, Old
English rinnan to flow, to run; see run (v.)).    In 1980s U.S. college student slang it began to
acquire a sense of inferior, undesirable. (A 1980 William Safire column describes it as a college
slang noun meaning person who does not belong on our dormitory floor.) Random access in reference to
computer memory is recorded from 1953. Related: Randomly; randomness.


randomize (v.)

1926, from random (adj.) + -ize. Related: Randomized; randomizing.


randy (adj.)

1690s, Scottish, aggressive, boisterous, probably from rand to rave, an obsolete variant of rant
(v.). In the original sense especially of beggars, and probably implying vagrant habits as well as
rude behavior [OED]. Sense of lewd, lustful first recorded 1847. Related: Randiness.


rang (v.)

past tense of ring (v.1). Middle English, by analogy of sang/sing, etc.


range (v.)

c.1200, rengen, move over a large area, roam with the purpose of searching or hunting, from Old
French ranger, earlier rengier to place in a row, arrange; get into line, from reng row, line, from
a Germanic source (see rank (n.)). Sense of to arrange in rows is recorded from c.1300; intransitive
sense of exist in a row or rows is from c.1600. Related: Ranged; ranging.


range (n.)

c.1200, row or line of persons (especially hunters or soldiers), from Old French range range, rank
(see range (v.)). General sense of line, row is from early 14c.; meaning row of mountains is from
1705.    Meaning scope, extent first recorded late 15c.; that of area over which animals seek food
is from 1620s, from the verb. Specific U.S. sense of series of townships six miles in width is from
1785. Sense of distance a gun can send a bullet is recorded from 1590s; meaning place used for
shooting practice is from 1862. The cooking appliance so called since mid-15c., for unknown reasons.
Originally a stove built into a fireplace with openings on top for multiple operations. Range-finder
attested from 1872.


ranger (n.)

late 14c., gamekeeper, agent noun from range (v.)). Attested from 1660s in sense of man (often
mounted) who polices an area. The elite U.S. combat unit is attested from 1942 (organized 1941).


rangy (adj.)

having a long, slender form (as an animal suited to ranging), 1845, from range (v.) + -y (2). Also
adapted for ranging (1868). Of landscapes, hilly, 1862, Australian English. Related: Ranginess.
As a rule, we hold that the Jersey should be growthy, deep-flanked, and loose-jointed, and should
have, generally, the characteristics which farmers know as rangy. [American Agriculturalist,
November 1876]


rank (v.)

1570s, arrange in lines; 1590s, put in order, classify; assign a rank to, from rank (n.). Related:
Ranked; ranking.


rank (n.)

early 14c., row, line series; c.1400, a row of an army, from Old French renc, ranc row, line (Modern
French rang), from Frankish *hring or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German hring
circle, ring), from Proto-Germanic *hringaz circle, ring, something curved (see ring (n.1)).
Meaning a social division, class of persons is from early 15c. Meaning high station in society is
from early 15c. Meaning a relative position is from c.1600.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


rank and file (n.)

1590s, in reference to the horizontal and vertical lines of soldiers marching in formation; thence
generalized to common soldiers (1796) and common people (1860).


rankle (v.)

c.1300, to fester, from Old French rancler, earlier raoncler, draoncler to suppurate, run, from
draoncle abscess, festering sore, from Medieval Latin dracunculus, literally little dragon,
diminutive of Latin draco serpent, dragon (see dragon). The notion is of an ulcer caused by a
snake's bite. Meaning cause to fester is from c.1400. Related: Rankled; rankling.


ransack (v.)

mid-13c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rannsaka to pillage, literally search the
house (especially legally, for stolen goods), from rann house, from Proto-Germanic *rasnan (c.f.
Gothic razn, Old English &aelig;rn house; see barn) + saka to search, related to Old Norse soekja
seek (see seek). Sense influenced by sack (v.). Related: Ransacked; ransacking.


ransom (n.)

c.1200, sum paid for the release of a prisoner or captured man, from Old French ranson (Modern
French ran&ccedil;on), earlier raenson ransom, redemption, from Latin redemptionem (nominative
redemptio) a redeeming, from redimere (see redeem).


ransom

early 14c., from ransom (n.). Related: Ransomed; ransoming.


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


rant (n.)

boisterous, empty declamation; fierce or high-sounding language without much meaning or dignity of
thought; bombast; a ranting speech, 1640s, from rant (v.).


rantallion (n.)

One whose scrotum is so relaxed as to be longer than his penis, i. e. whose shot pouch is longer
than the barrel of his piece. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1785]


rap (n.)

c.1300, a quick, light blow, stroke, also a fart (late 15c.), native or borrowed from a Scandinavian
source (compare Danish rap, Swedish rapp light blow); either way probably of imitative origin
(compare slap, clap).    Slang meaning rebuke, blame, responsibility is from 1777; specific meaning
criminal indictment (as in rap sheet, 1960) is from 1903. To beat the rap is from 1927. Meaning
music with improvised words first in New York City slang, 1979 (see rap (v.2)).


rap (v.1)

mid-14c., strike, smite, knock, from rap (n.). Related: Rapped; rapping. To rap (someone's) knuckles
give light punishment is from 1749. Related: Rapped; rapping.


rap (v.2)

talk informally, chat, 1929, popularized c.1965 in Black English, possibly first in Caribbean
English and from British slang meaning say, utter (1879), originally to utter a sudden oath (1540s),
ultimately from rap (n.). As a noun in this sense from 1898. Meaning to perform rap music is
recorded by 1979. Related: Rapped; rapping.


rapable (adj.)

1972, from rape (v.) + -able.


rapacious (adj.)

1650s, from Latin rapaci-, stem of rapax grasping, itself from stem of rapere to seize (see
rapacity) + -ous. Related: Rapaciously; rapaciousness.


rapacity (n.)

1540s, from Middle French rapacit&eacute; (16c.), from Latin rapacitatem (nominative rapacitas)
greediness, from rapax (genitive rapacis) grasping, plundering, from rapere seize (see rapid).


rape (v.)

late 14c., seize prey; abduct, take by force, from rape (n.) and from Anglo-French raper (Old French
rapir) to seize, abduct, a legal term, probably from past participle of Latin rapere seize, carry
off by force, abduct (see rapid).    Latin rapere was used for sexually violate, but only very
rarely; the usual Latin word being stuprare to defile, ravish, violate, related to stuprum (n.),
literally disgrace. Meaning to abduct (a woman), ravish; also seduce (a man) is from early 15c. in
English. Related: Raped; raping. Uncertain connection to Low German and Dutch rapen in the same
sense.


rape (n.1)

early 14c., booty, prey; mid-14c., forceful seizure; plundering, robbery, extortion, from Anglo-
French rap, rape, and directly from Latin rapere seize (see rape (v.)). Meaning act of abducting a
woman or sexually violating her or both is from early 15c., but perhaps late 13c. in Anglo-Latin.


rape (n.2)

kind of cruciferous plant (Brassica napus), late 14c., from Old French rape, from Latin rapa, rapum
turnip, from PIE *rap- (cognates: Greek hrapys rape, Old Church Slavonic repa, Lithuanian rope,
Middle Dutch roeve, Old High German ruoba, German R&uuml;be rape, turnip). Usually grown to feed
sheep, an oil made from it is used in cooking (see canola).


Raphael

masc. proper name, Biblical archangel (Apocrypha), from Late Latin, from Greek Rhaphael, from Hebrew
Repha'el, literally God has healed, from rapha he healed + el God. Raphaelesque (1832) is in
reference to painter Raffaello Sanzio (1483-1520). See Pre-Raphaelite.


raphe (n.)

seam, suture (medical), 1753, medical Latin, from Greek rhaphe seam, suture (of a skull), from
rhaptein to sew together, stitch (see wrap).


rapid (adj.)

1630s, moving quickly, from French rapide (17c.) and directly from Latin rapidus hasty, swift,
rapid; snatching; fierce, impetuous, from rapere hurry away, carry off, seize, plunder, from PIE
root *rep- to snatch (cognates: Greek ereptomai devour, harpazein snatch away, Lithuanian raples
tongs). Meaning happening in a short time is from 1780. Related: Rapidly; rapidness. Rapid-transit
first attested 1852, in reference to street railways; rapid eye movement is from 1906.


rapidity (n.)

1650s, from French rapidit&#233; and directly from Latin rapiditatem (nominative rapiditas)
swiftness, rapidity, velocity, from rapidus hasty, swift, rapid (see rapid).


rapids (n.)

1765, from French rapides (see rapid); applied by French voyagers to rough, swift-flowing reaches in
North American rivers.


rapier (n.)

light, sharp-pointed sword, 1550s, from Middle French rapi&egrave;re, from espee rapiere long,
pointed two-edged sword (late 15c.), in which the adjective is of uncertain origin, perhaps from
derisive use of raspiere poker, scraper. Dutch, Danish rapier, German Rappier are from French.


rapine (n.)

early 15c., plunder, from Middle French rapine (12c.), from Latin rapina act of robbery, plundering,
pillage, from rapere seize, carry off, rob (see rapid).


rapist (n.)

1883, agent noun from rape (v.).


rapparee (n.)

Irish freebooter, 1680s, originally pikeman, from Irish rapairidhe, plural of rapaire half-pike.
Kind of soldier prominent in the war of 1688-92.


rappel (n.)

1931, mountaineering technique for descending steep faces, from French rappel, literally recall (Old
French rapel), from rapeler to recall, summon (see repeal (v.)). The same word had been borrowed
earlier (1848) to mean a drum roll to summon soldiers.


rappel (v.)

1957 in the mountaineering sense; see rappel (n.). Related: Rappeled; rappelling.


rapper (n.)

agent noun meaning one who raps in any sense (see rap (v.)). Before the hip-hpo performance sense
emerged c.1979, it could mean door-knocker (1630s), spirit-rapper (1755), professional perjurer
(1840), prison slang for prosecutor (1904), itinerant antiques buyer, with a tinge of shadiness
(1914). Rapster is from 1772.


rapping (n.)

c.1400, verbal noun from rap (v.1). Meaning talking is from 1969; meaning rap music performance is
from 1979, from rap (v.2).


rapport (n.)

1660s, reference, relation, relationship, from French rapport bearing, yield, produce; harmony,
agreement, intercourse, back-formation from rapporter bring back; refer to, from re- again (see re-)
+ apporter to bring, from Latin apportare to bring, from ad- to (see ad-) + portare to carry (see
port (n.1)).    Psychological meaning intense harmonious accord, as between therapist and patient,
is first attested 1894, though the word had been used in a very similar sense with reference to
mesmerism from 1845 (first recorded in Poe). See also report (n.). Johnson frowns on the word and
credits its use in English to Sir William Temple, naturalizer of French terms, who did use it but
was not the first to do so.


rapportage (n.)

the describing of events in writing, 1903, from French rapportage, literally tale-telling, from
rapporter (see rapport).


rapporteur (n.)

c.1500, from French rapporteur tell-tale, gossip; reporter, from rapporter (see report (n.)).


rapprochement (n.)

establishment of cordial relations, 1809, from French rapprochement reunion, reconciliation,
literally a bringing near, from rapprocher bring near, from re- back, again (see re-) + aprochier
(see approach (v.)).


rapscallion (n.)

1690s, alteration of rascallion (1640s), a fanciful elaboration of rascal (q.v.). It had a parallel
in now-extinct rampallion (1590s), from Middle English ramp (n.2) ill-behaved woman.


rapt (adj.)

late 14c., carried away in an ecstatic trance, from Latin raptus, past participle of rapere seize,
carry off (see rape (v.)). A figurative sense, the notion is of carried up into Heaven (bodily or in
a dream), as in a saint's vision. Latin literal sense of carried away was in English from 1550s. In
15c.-17c. the word also sometimes could mean raped. Sense of engrossed first recorded c.1500. As a
past participle adjective, in English it spawned the back-formed verb rap to affect with rapture,
which was common c.1600-1750.


raptor (n.)

c.1600, ravisher, abductor, from Latin raptor a robber, plunderer, abductor, ravisher, agent noun
from past participle stem of rapere to seize (see rapid). Ornithological use is from 1873 (1823 in
Latin plural Raptores).


raptorial (adj.)

predatory, 1825, from raptor + -ial. Alternative raptatorial predacious (1840) is from Latin
raptatus, past participle of raptare.


rapture (n.)

c.1600, act of carrying off, from Middle French rapture, from Medieval Latin raptura seizure, rape,
kidnapping, from Latin raptus a carrying off, abduction, snatching away; rape (see rapt). Earliest
attested use in English is of women and in 17c. it sometimes meant rape (v.), which word is a
cognate of this. Sense of spiritual ecstasy, state of mental transport first recorded c.1600
(raptures).


rapture (v.)

1630s, from rapture (n.). Related: Raptured; rapturing.


rapturous (adj.)

1670s, from rapture + -ous. Related: Rapturously (1660s).


rara avis (n.)

c.1600, peculiar person, from Latin rara avis, literally strange bird, from rara, fem. of rarus rare
(see rare (adj.1)) + avis bird (see aviary). Latin plural is rar&aelig; aves. Horace's peacock (a
Roman delicacy), Juvenal's black swan (Rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno).


rare (adj.1)

unusual, late 14c., thin, airy, porous; mid-15c., few in number and widely separated, sparsely
distributed, seldom found; from Old French rere sparse (14c.), from Latin rarus thinly sown, having
a loose texture; not thick; having intervals between, full of empty spaces, from PIE *ra-ro-, from
root *ere- to separate; adjoin (cognates: Sanskrit rte besides, except, viralah distant, tight,
rare; Old Church Slavonic rediku rare, Old Hittite arha&#353; border, Lithuanian irti to be
dissolved). Few in number, hence, unusual. Related: Rareness. In chemistry, rare earth is from 1818.


rare (adj.2)

undercooked, 1650s, variant of Middle English rere, from Old English hrere lightly cooked, probably
related to hreran to stir, move, shake, agitate, from Proto-Germanic *hror- (cognates: Old Frisian
hrera to stir, move, Old Saxon hrorian, Dutch roeren, German r&#252;hren, Old Norse hroera), from
PIE base *kere- to mix, confuse; cook (cognates: Greek kera- to mix, krasis mixture). Originally of
eggs, not recorded in reference to meat until 1784, and according to OED, in this sense formerly
often regarded as an Americanism, although it was current in many English dialects ....


rare (v.)

rise up, 1833, dialectal variant of rear (v.1). Sense of eager (in raring to go) first recorded
1909. Related: Rared; raring.


rarebit

1785, perversion of (Welsh) rabbit, as if from rare + bit. See Welsh.


raree show

peep show contained in a box, 1680s, so called in imitation of the foreign way of pronouncing rare
show [Johnson]. Johnson's statement is prob. correct; the early exhibitors of peep-shows appear to
have been usually Savoyards, from whom the form was no doubt adopted [OED]. Early peep shows were
more innocent than what usually was meant later by that word.


rarefaction (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French rar&#233;faction or directly from Medieval Latin rarefactionem
(nominative rarefactio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin rarefacere (see rarefy).
Used chiefly in reference to gases.


rarefy (v.)

late 14c., from Old French rarefier (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin rarificare, from Latin
rarefacere make rare, from rarus rare, thin (see rare (adj.1)) + facere to make (see factitious).
Related: Rarefied.


rarely (adv.)

1550s, from rare (adj.1) + -ly (2). Seldom, not often; also finely, excellently.


rarify (v.)

common but incorrect spelling of rarefy (q.v.). Related: Rarified; rarifying.


rarity (n.)

early 15c., thinness; 1550s, fewness, from Middle French rarit&eacute; or directly from Latin
raritas thinness, looseness of texture; fewness, from rarus (see rare (adj.1)). Sense of a rare
thing or event is from 1590s.


ras

Ethiopian title, from Amharic ras chief, head, from Arabic ra's.


rascal (n.)

mid-14c., rascaile people of the lowest class, rabble of an army, also singular, low, tricky,
dishonest person, from Old French rascaille rabble, mob (12c., Modern French racaille, the rascality
or base and rascall sort, the scumme, dregs, offals, outcasts, of any company [Cotgrave, French-
English Dictionary, 1611]), perhaps a diminutive from Old French rascler, from Vulgar Latin
*rasicare to scrape (see rash (n.)). Used also in Middle English of animals not hunted as game.


rascality (n.)

low and vulgar people collectively, 1570s; character of a rascal, 1590s, from rascal + -ity.


rascally (adj.)

low, mean, unprincipled, from rascal + -ly (1).


rase (v.)

late 14c., remove by scraping, rub, scrape out, erase, from Old French raser to scrape, shave, from
Medieval Latin rasare, frequentative of Latin radere (past participle rasus) to scrape, shave,
perhaps from PIE *razd- (cognates: Latin rastrum rake), possible extended form of root *red- to
scrape, scratch, gnaw (see rodent). Related: Rased; rasing.


rash (adj.)

late 14c., nimble, quick, vigorous (early 14c. as a surname), a Scottish and northern word, perhaps
from Old English -r&aelig;sc (as in ligr&aelig;sc flash of lightning) or one of its Germanic
cognates, from Proto-Germanic *raskuz (cognates: Middle Low German rasch, Middle Dutch rasc quick,
swift, German rasch quick, fast). Related to Old English horsc quick-witted. Sense of reckless,
impetuous, heedless of consequences is attested from c.1500. Related: Rashly; rashness.


rash (n.)

eruption of small red spots on skin, 1709, perhaps from French rache a sore (Old French rasche rash,
scurf), from Vulgar Latin *rasicare to scrape (also source of Old Proven&ccedil;al rascar, Spanish
rascar to scrape, scratch, Italian raschina itch), from Latin rasus scraped, past participle of
radere to scrape (see raze). The connecting notion would be of itching. Figurative sense of any
sudden outbreak or proliferation first recorded 1820.


rasher (n.)

thin slice of bacon or ham, 1590s, of unknown origin. Perhaps from Middle English rash to cut,
variant of rase to rub, scrape out, erase. However, early lexicographer John Minsheu explained it in
1627 as a piece rashly or hastily roasted.


Raskolnik

dissenter from the Russian Church, an Old Believer, 1723, from Russian Raskolnik separatist, from
raskol schism, separation. The schism was a result of reforms by Patriarch Nikon in 1667.


rasp (v.)

mid-13c., to scrape, from Middle Dutch raspen and from Old French rasper (Modern French r&#226;per)
to grate, rasp, which is perhaps from a West Germanic source (compare Old English gehrespan) akin to
the root of raffle. Vocalic sense is from 1843. Related: Rasped; rasping.


rasp (n.)

coarse file, 1540s, from Middle French raspe (Modern French r&#226;pe), from Old French rasper to
rasp (see rasp (v.)).


raspberry (n.)

1620s, earlier raspis berry (1540s), possibly from  raspise a sweet rose-colored wine (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-Latin vinum raspeys, origin uncertain, as is the connection between this and Old French
raspe, Medieval Latin raspecia, raspeium, also meaning raspberry. One suggestion is via Old Walloon
raspoie thicket, of Germanic origin. Klein suggests it is via the French word, from a Germanic
source akin to English rasp (v.), with an original sense of rough berry, based on appearance.    A
native plant of Europe and Asiatic Russia, the name was applied to a similar vine in North America.
Meaning rude sound (1890) is shortening of raspberry tart, rhyming slang for fart.


Rasputin

acquired name (Russian, literally debauchee) of Grigory Yefimovich Novykh (c.1872-1916), mystic and
faith healer who held sway over court of Nicholas II of Russia. His nickname is from his doctrine of
rebirth through sin, that true holy communion must be preceded by immersion in sin. His name used
figuratively in English from 1937 for anyone felt to have an insidious and corrupting influence.


raspy (adj.)

1670s, of plants; by 1821 of voices, from rasp + -y (2).


Rasta (adj.)

1955; see Rastafarian. From 1962 as a noun. Related: Rastaman.


Rastafarian (n.)

1955 (Rastafarite is found from 1953), from Rastafari, Jamaican religion built around writings of
Marcus Garvey and belief that Haile Selassie (1892-1975), former emperor of Ethiopia, was God. From
Ras Tafari, Selassie's title from 1916 to his accession in 1936, from Amharic ras chief, head (from
Arabic ra's) + tafari to be feared. As an adjective from 1960.


Rastafarianism

1964, from Rastafarian + -ism. Rastafarism is attested from 1955.


rastaquouere (n.)

1883, from French rastaquou&egrave;re, rastacou&egrave;re (19c.) social intruder, upstart
(especially one of exaggerated manners and dress, from a Mediterranean or South American country),
thus dashing but untrustworthy foreigner. Short form rasta attested from 1905. According to French
sources, the word is from South American Spanish rastacuero upstart, from arrastrar to drag, pull,
tow, trail along the ground + cuero leather. Arrastrar is said to be from Spanish rastro rake, from
Latin rastrum (see raster), while cuero is from Latin corium (see corium).


raster (n.)

1934 in electrical engineering, from German Raster screen, frame, from Latin rastrum rake, from
rasum, from rodere to scrape (see raze). Related: Rasterization; rasterize. From Latin form
rastellum comes French r&#226;teau rake, formerly ratel, originally rastel.


Rastus

also 'Rastus, masc. proper name, short for Erastus. As a stereotypical name of an American slave or
derogatory for black man, 1881, probably from use in stories of Joel Chandler Harris.


rat (n.)

late Old English r&aelig;t rat, of uncertain origin. Similar words are found in Celtic (Gaelic
radan), Romanic (Italian ratto, Spanish rata, French rat) and Germanic (Old Saxon ratta; Dutch rat;
German Ratte, dialectal Ratz; Swedish r&#229;tta, Danish rotte) languages, but connection is
uncertain and origin unknown. In all this it is very much like cat.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin
*rattus, but Weekley thinks this is of Germanic origin, the animal having come from the East with
the race-migrations and the word passing thence to the Romanic languages. American Heritage and
Tucker connect Old English r&aelig;t to Latin rodere and thus PIE *red- to scrape, scratch, gnaw,
source of rodent (q.v.). Klein says there is no such connection and suggests a possible cognate in
Greek rhine file, rasp. Weekley connects them with a question mark and Barnhart writes, the
relationship to each other of the Germanic, Romance, and Celtic words for rat is uncertain. OED says
probable the rat word spread from Germanic to Romanic, but takes no position on ultimate origin.
RATS. Of these there are the following kinds: a black rat and a grey rat, a py-rat and a cu-rat.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1788]    Middle English common form was ratton, from
augmented Old French form raton. Sense of one who abandons his associates (1620s) is from belief
that rats leave a ship about to sink or a house about to fall and led to meaning traitor, informant
(1902; verb 1910). Interjection rats is American English, 1886. To smell a rat is 1540s; to be put
on the watch by suspicion as the cat by the scent of a rat; to suspect danger [Johnson]. _____-rat,
person who frequents _____ (in earliest reference dock-rat) is from 1864.


rat (v.)

1812, to desert one's party; 1864 as to catch rats; 1910 as to peach on, inform on, behave
dishonestly toward; from rat (n.). Related: Ratted; ratting.


rat fink (n.)

also ratfink, 1963, teen slang, see rat (n.) + fink (n.). Popularized by, and perhaps coined by,
U.S. custom car builder Ed Big Daddy Roth (1932-2001), who made a hot-rod comic character of it,
supposedly to lampoon Mickey Mouse.


rat-a-tat

1680s, echoic, originally of a cooper hammering tubs.


rat-catcher (n.)

1590s, from rat (n.) + catcher.


rat-hole (n.)

also rathole, 1812 in figurative sense of nasty, messy place; rat (n.) + hole (n.). As bottomless
hole (especially one where money goes) from 1961.


rat-pack (n.)

juvenile gang, 1951, from rat (n.) + pack (n.). In reference to a Hollywood circle around Frank
Sinatra, from 1958.


rat-poison (n.)

arsenic, 1799, from rat (n.) + poison (n.).


rat-race (n.)

also rat race, competitive struggle, 1934, from rat (n.) + race (n.1). Rat-run is from 1870 in a
literal sense.


rat-tail (n.)

also rat's-tail, used since 16c. of conditions or devices held to resemble a rat's long, hairless
tail in some sense, including lank lock of hair (1810); end of a rope (1867); from rat (n.) + tail
(n.).


rat-trap (n.)

late 15c., from rat (n.) + trap (n.).


ratable (adj.)

also rateable, c.1500, from rate (v.2) + -able.


ratafia (n.)

liqueur flavored with kernels of cherries, apricots, etc., 1690s, from French ratafia (17c.), of
unknown origin; perhaps ultimately from the same source as arrack.


ratatouille (n.)

1877, from French ratatouille (19c.), first element uncertain, second element evidently touiller to
stir up, ultimately from Latin tudes hammer [Gamillscheg].


ratbag (n.)

also rat-bag, unpleasant person, 1937, from rat (n.) + bag (n.).


ratchet (v.)

1852, from ratchet (n.). Transferred sense attested by 1977. Related: Ratcheted; ratcheting.


ratchet (n.)

1650s, rochet, from French rochet bobbin, spindle, from Italian rocchetto spool, ratchet, diminutive
of rocca distaff, possibly from a Germanic source (compare Old High German rocko distaff, Old Norse
rokkr), from Proto-Germanic *rukka-, from PIE root *ruk- fabric, spun yarn. Compare rocket (n.2).
Current spelling in English dates from 1721, influenced by synonymous ratch, which perhaps is
borrowed from German R&auml;tsche ratchet.


rate (n.)

estimated value or worth, early 15c., from Old French rate price, value and directly from Medieval
Latin rata (pars) fixed (amount), from Latin rata fixed, settled, fem. past participle of reri to
reckon, think (see reason (n.)). Meaning degree of speed (prop. ratio between distance and time) is
attested from 1650s. Currency exchange sense first recorded 1727. First-rate, second-rate, etc. are
1640s, from British Navy division of ships into six classes based on size and strength. Phrase at
any rate originally (1610s) meant at any cost; weakened sense of at least is attested by 1760.


rate (v.1)

to scold, late 14c., probably from Old French reter to impute blame, accuse, find fault with, from
Latin reputare to count over, reflect, in Vulgar Latin, to impute, blame (see reputation). Related:
Rated; rating.


rate (v.2)

estimate the worth or value of, mid-15c., from rate (n.). Intransitive sense of have a certain
value, rank, or standing is from 1809; specifically as have high value from 1928. Related: Rated;
rating.


rather (adv.)

Old English hra&thorn;or more quickly, earlier, sooner, also more readily, comparative of
hra&thorn;e, hr&aelig;&thorn;e quickly, hastily, promptly, readily, immediately, which is related to
hr&aelig;&eth; quick, nimble, prompt, ready, from Proto-Germanic *khratha- (cognates: Old Norse
hra&eth;r, Old High German hrad), from PIE *kret- to shake. The base form rathe was obsolete by 18c.
except in poetry (Tennyson); superlative rathest fell from use by 17c. Meaning more willingly is
recorded from c.1300; sense of more truly is attested from late 14c.    The rather lambes bene
starved with cold  [Spenser, The Shepheardes Calender (Februarie), 1579]


rathskeller (n.)

1900, from German ratskeller, earlier rathskeller, a cellar in a German town hall in which beer is
sold, from rat council (see rede (n.)) + keller cellar (see cellar (n.)). The German -h- inserted to
avoid association with the word for rat.


ratification (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French ratification (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin ratificationem
(nominative ratificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of ratificare (see ratify).


ratify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French ratifier (13c.), from Medieval Latin ratificare confirm, approve,
literally fix by reckoning, from Latin ratus fixed by calculation; determined; approved; certain,
sure; valid (past participle adjective from reri to reckon, think; see reason (v.)) + root of facere
to make (see factitious). Related: Ratified; ratifying.


rating (n.)

1530s, a fixing of rates, verbal noun from rate (v.2). Meaning a classification according to rates
is from 1764. Ratings of TV programs, originally radio programs, began 1930 in U.S. under system set
up by U.S. pollster and market researcher Archibald M. Crossley (1896-1985), and were called
Crossley ratings or Crossleys until ratings began to be preferred c.1947.


ratio (n.)

1630s, reason, rationale, from Latin ratio reckoning, numbering, calculation; business affair,
procedure, also reason, reasoning, judgment, understanding, from rat-, past participle stem of reri
to reckon, calculate, also think (see reason (n.)). Mathematical sense relationship between two
numbers is attested from 1650s.


ratiocinate (v.)

to reason, 1640s, from Latin ratiocinatus, past participle of ratiocinare (see ratiocination).
Related: Ratiocinant.


ratiocination (n.)

process of reasoning, 1520s, from Latin ratiocinationem (nominative ratiocinatio) a reasoning, calm
reasoning, from past participle stem of ratiocinare to calculate, deliberate, from ratio (see ratio)
+ -cinari, which probably is related to conari to try (see conation).    Most writers make
ratiocination synonymous with reasoning. J.S. Mill and others hold that the word is usually limited
to necessary reasoning. [Century Dictionary]


ration (n.)

1550, reasoning, later, relation of one number to another (1660s), then fixed allowance of food
(1702, often rations, from French ration in this sense), from Latin rationem (nominative ratio) a
reckoning, calculation, proportion (see ratio). The military pronunciation (rhymes with fashion)
took over from the preferred civilian pronunciation (rhymes with nation) during World War I.


ration (v.)

put (someone) on a fixed allowance, 1859, from ration (n.); sense of apportion in fixed amounts is
from 1870. Related: Rationed; rationing.


rational (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to reason; mid-15c., endowed with reason, from Old French racionel and
directly from Latin rationalis of or belonging to reason, reasonable, from ratio (genitive rationis)
reckoning, calculation, reason (see ratio).


rationale (n.)

1650s, exposition of principles, from Late Latin rationale, noun use of neuter of Latin rationalis
of reason (see rational). Hence, fundamental reason (1680s).


rationalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of rationalize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Rationalised;
rationalising; rationalisation.


rationalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of rationalize; see -ize. Related: Rationalised; rationalising;
rationalisation.


rationalist (n.)

one who follows reason and not authority in thought or speculation, originally especially physician
whose treatment is based on reason, 1620s, from rational + -ist. Applied to a philosophical doctrine
1640s. Related: Rationalism.


rationality (n.)

1620s, quality of having reason; 1650s, fact of being agreeable to reason, from French
rationalit&#233;, from Late Latin rationalitas reasonableness, rationality (also source of Spanish
racionalidad, Italian razionalita), from Latin rationalis (see rational).


rationalization (n.)

1825, a rendering rational, from rationalize + -ation. Psychological use is from 1908.    Of the
three works now on our table, the two which we have placed first have these laudable objects in
view; an improvement on the former versions of the Psalms as compositions, and the rationalization,
if we may so speak, of our Church psalmody. [The British Critic, London, Jan.-June 1825]


rationalize (v.)

1767, explain in a rational way, make conformable to reason, from rational + -ize. In the
psychological sense of to give an explanation that conceals true motives it dates from 1922.
Related: Rationalized; rationalizing.


rationing (n.)

restriction to limited allotments, 1865, verbal noun from ration (v.). Specifically of restrictions
during wartime from 1917, from conditions in England during World War I.


ratline (n.)

thin rope, especially as used on sailing ships, late 15c., originally ratling, of unknown origin;
spelling ratline attested from 1773, by influence of line (n.).


rats (interj.)

expressing incredulity, disappointment, etc., 1886, from rat (n.).


ratsbane (n.)

rat poison, arsenic, 1520s; see rat (n.) + bane.


rattan

1650s, from Malay rotan, from raut to trim, strip, peel, pare.


rattle (v.)

c.1300 (intransitive), To make a quick sharp noise with frequent repetitions and collisions of
bodies not very sonorous: when bodies are sonorous, it is called jingling [Johnson]. Perhaps in Old
English but not recorded; if not, from Middle Dutch ratelen, probably of imitative origin (compare
German rasseln to rattle, Greek kradao I rattle). Sense of utter smartly and rapidly is late 14c.
Meaning to go along loosely and noisily is from 1550s. Transitive sense is late 14c.; figurative
sense of fluster is first recorded 1869. Related: Rattled; rattling.


rattle (n.)

c.1500, rapid succession of short, sharp sounds, from rattle (v.). As a child's toy, recorded from
1510s. As a sound made in the throat (especially of one near death) from 1752.


rattler (n.)

mid-15c., one who talks overmuch, agent noun from rattle (v.). From c.1300 as a surname. As short
for rattlesnake, 1827.


rattlesnake (n.)

1620s, from rattle + snake (n.).


rattletrap

1766, originally a noun, knick-knacks, trifles, odds and ends, from rattle (adj.) + trap, perhaps in
the sense in traps (n.2). Hence, a shabby, rattling object, especially a rickety coach or other
vehicle (1822). The adjectival sense of rickety is recorded from 1834.


ratty (adj.)

1856, resembling a rat; 1865, full of rats; 1867, wretched, miserable, shabby, from rat (n.) + -y
(2).


raucous (adj.)

1769, from Latin raucus hoarse (also source of French rauque, Spanish ronco, Italian rauco), related
to ravus hoarse, from PIE echoic base *reu- make hoarse cries (cognates: Sanskrit rayati barks,
ravati roars; Greek oryesthai to howl, roar; Latin racco a roar; Old Church Slavonic rjevo I roar;
Lithuanian rekti roar; Old English rarian to wail, bellow). Middle English had rauc in the same
sense, from the same source.


raunch (n.)

1963 (in Billboard, describing lead guitar on surf music tracks), back-formation from raunchy. There
was a singing group in U.S. c.1960 called the Raunch Hands.


raunchy (adj.)

1939, clumsy, careless, sloppy, U.S. Army Air Corps slang, of unknown origin. Origins among cadets
in Texas suggest possible connection to Mexican Spanish rancho (see ranch (n.)), which had
connotations of animal filth by 1864. Sense of coarse, vulgar, smutty is from 1967. Related:
Raunchiness.


ravage (v.)

1610s, from French ravager lay waste, devastate, from Old French ravage destruction, especially by
flood (14c.), from ravir to take away hastily (see ravish). Related: Ravaged; ravaging.


ravage (n.)

1610s, from French ravage destruction (see ravage (v.)). Related: Ravages.


rave (v.)

early 14c., to show signs of madness or delirium, from Old French raver, variant of resver to dream;
wander here and there, prowl; behave madly, be crazy, of unknown origin (compare reverie). The
identical (in form) verb meaning to wander, stray, rove first appeared c.1300 in Scottish and
northern dialect, and is probably from an unrelated Scandinavian word (such as Icelandic rafa).
Sense of talk enthusiastically about first recorded 1704. Related: Raved; raving.


rave (n.)

act of raving, 1590s, from rave (v.). Meaning temporary popular enthusiasm is from 1902; that of
highly flattering review is from 1926. Sense of rowdy party is from 1960; rave-up was British slang
for wild party from 1940; specific modern sense of mass party with loud, fast electronic music and
often psychedelic drugs is from 1989.


ravel (v.)

1580s, to untangle, disentangle, unwind (originally with out), also to entangle, become tangled or
confused, from Dutch ravelen to tangle, fray, rafelen to unweave, from rafel frayed thread. The
seemingly contradictory senses of this word (ravel and unravel are both synonyms and antonyms) are
reconciled by its roots in weaving and sewing: as threads become unwoven, they get tangled.


ravel (n.)

1630s, a tangle; 1832, a broken thread, from ravel (v.).


raven (n.)

Old English hr&aelig;fn (Mercian), hrefn; hr&aelig;fn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-
Germanic *khrabanas (cognates: Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban,
German Rabe raven, Old English hroc rook), from PIE root *ker- (2), imitative of harsh sounds
(cognates: Latin crepare to creak, clatter, cornix crow, corvus raven; Greek korax raven, korone
crow; Old Church Slavonic kruku raven; Lithuanian krauklys crow). Raven mythology shows considerable
homogeneity throughout the whole area [northern regions of the northern hemisphere] in spite of
differences in detail. The Raven peeps forth from the mists of time and the thickets of mythology,
as a bird of slaughter, a storm bird, a sun and fire bird, a messenger, an oracular figure and a
craftsman or culture hero. [Edward A. Armstrong, The Folklore of Birds, 1958]Old English also used
hr&aelig;mn, hremm. The raven standard was the flag of the Danish Vikings. The Quran connects the
raven with Cain's murder of Abel; but in Christianity the bird plays a positive role in the stories
of St. Benedict, St. Paul the Hermit, St. Vincent, etc. It was anciently believed to live to great
old age, but the ancients also believed it wanting in parental care. The vikings, like Noah, were
said to have used the raven to discover land. When uncertain of their course they let one loose, and
steered the vessel in his track, deeming that the land lay in the direction of his flight; if he
returned to the ship, it was supposed to be at a distance [Charles Swainson, The Folk Lore and
Provincial Names of British Birds, London, 1886].


ravening (adj.)

voracious, 1520s, present participle adjective from an extinct verb raven to prey, to plunder,
devour greedily (late 14c., implied in ravener), from Old French raviner (see ravenous). It is not
etymologically related to raven (n.).


ravenous (adj.)

late 14c., obsessed with plundering, extremely greedy, from Old French ravinos, of people,
rapacious, violent, of water, swift-flowing, from raviner to seize, from ravine violent rush,
robbery (see ravine). Meaning voracious, very hungry is from early 15c. Related: Ravenously;
ravenousness.


raver (n.)

c.1400, madman, agent noun from rave (v.). Meaning attendee at a mass party is from 1991. In Old
French, the noun resveor meant vagabond, night-prowler.


ravine (n.)

1760, deep gorge, from French ravin a gully (1680s, from Old French raviner to pillage, sweep down,
cascade), and from French ravine violent rush of water, gully worn by a torrent, from Old French
ravine violent rush of water, waterfall; avalanche; robbery, rapine, both ultimately from Latin
rapina act of robbery, plundering (see rapine); sense influenced by Latin rapidus rapid. Middle
English ravine meant booty, plunder, robbery from c.1350-1500. Compare ravening.


raving (adj.)

late 15c., delirious, frenzied, present participle adjective from rave (v.); sense of remarkable,
fit to excite admiration is from 1841, hence slang superlative use.


ravioli (n.)

1610s, from Middle English raffyolys, also rafyols (late 14c.). The word probably was re-borrowed
several times, most recently in 1841, from Italian ravioli, a dialectal plural of raviolo, a
diminutive of an unidentified noun, perhaps of rava turnip.


ravish (v.)

c.1300, to seize (someone) by violence, carry (a person, especially a woman) away, from Old French
raviss-, present participle stem of ravir to seize, take away hastily, from Vulgar Latin *rapire,
from Latin rapere to seize and carry off, carry away suddenly, hurry away (see rapid). Meaning to
commit rape upon is recorded from mid-15c. Related: Ravished; ravishing.


ravishing (n.)

act of plundering, c.1300, verbal noun from ravish (v.).


ravishing (adj.)

mid-14c., ravenous; early 15c., enchanting; present participle adjective from ravish (v.). The
figurative notion is of carrying off from earth to heaven. Related: Ravishingly.


ravishment (n.)

1530s, from Middle French ravissement (14c.), from ravir (see ravish).


raw (adj.)

Old English hreaw uncooked, raw, from Proto-Germanic *khrawaz (cognates: Old Norse hrar, Danish raa,
Old Saxon hra, Middle Dutch rau, Dutch rauw, Old High German hrawer, German roh), from PIE root
*kreue- (1) raw flesh (cognates: Sanskrit kravih raw flesh, krura- bloody, raw, hard; Greek kreas
flesh; Latin crudus not cooked, cruor thick blood; Old Irish cru, Lithuanian kraujas, Old Church
Slavonic kruvi blood; Old English hrot thick fluid, serum).    Meaning tender, sore is from late
14c.; of persons, inexperienced from 1560s; of weather, damp and chilly first recorded 1540s.
Related: Rawly; rawness. Raw material is from 1796, with sense of in a rudimental condition,
unfinished. Phrase in the raw naked (1921) is from the raw exposed flesh, attested from 1823. Raw
deal harsh treatment attested by 1893.


raw-boned (adj.)

 having little flesh on the bones, gaunt, from raw (adj.) + bone (n.).


raw-head (n.)

name of a nursery specter or scare-child, usually coupled with bloody-bones, early 16c., from raw
(adj.) + head (n.).


rawhide (n.)

material cut from untanned skins of cattle, 1650s, from raw (adj.) + hide (n.1).


ray (n.1)

beam of light, c.1300, from Old French rai (nominative rais) ray (of the sun), spoke (of a wheel);
gush, spurt, from Latin radius ray, spoke, staff, rod (see radius). Not common before 17c. [OED]; of
the sun, usually in reference to heat (beam being preferred for light). Science fiction ray-gun is
first recorded 1931 (but the Martians had a Heat ray weapon in H.G. Wells' War of the Worlds, 1898).


ray (n.2)

type of fish related to sharks, early 14c., from French raie (13c.), from Latin raia, of unknown
origin.


Raymond

masc. proper name, from Old French Raimund, from Frankish *Raginmund counsel-protection or might-
protection, from ragin counsel, might + mund hand, protection (cognate with Old High German munt,
Old English mund, second element in Edmund, Sigismund, etc.), from PIE *man- hand (see manual
(adj.)).


rayon (n.)

1924, chosen by National Retail Dry Goods Association of America, probably from French rayon beam of
light, ray, from rai (see ray (n.1)), which also was used in Middle English as a name for a type of
cloth. So called because it is shiny. A more marketable alternative than the original patented name,
artificial silk (1884), or the intervening attempt, Glos, which was killed by ridicule [Draper's
Record, June 14, 1924].


Raza (n.)

in La Raza, literally the race, 1964, from American Spanish (see race (n.2)), designating the strong
sense of racial and cultural identity held by Mexican-Americans [OED].


raze (v.)

1540s, alteration of racen pull or knock down (a building or town), from earlier rasen (14c.) to
scratch, slash, scrape, erase, from Old French raser to scrape, shave (see rase). Related: Razed;
razing.


razor (n.)

late 13c., from Old French raseor a razor (12c.), from raser to scrape, shave (see rase). Razor clam
(1835, American English) so called because its shell resembles an old folding straight-razor. Razor-
edge figurative of sharpness or a fine surface from 1680s.


razorback (n.)

type of pig with a sharp ridge-like back, 1849, from razor (n.) + back (n.). Especially of feral
hogs in the U.S. South. Also used of narrow ridges of land.


razz (v.)

to hiss or deride, 1920, shortened and altered variant of raspberry (q.v.) in its rhyming slang
sense. Related: Razzed; razzing. As a noun, in to give the razz, from 1919.


razzle-dazzle (n.)

1886, American English slang, varied reduplication of dazzle (q.v.).    My confr&#232;re, The
Chevalier, last month gave a new name to the scarfs of disjointed pattern when he called them the
razzle-dazzle. The name was evidently a hit of the most patent character, for in several avenue and
Broadway stores the clerks have thrown out a display of broken figures before me and explained that
the ruling style at present was the razzle-dazzle, and the word seems to have been equally effective
with the public, for when it is quoted by the live salesman, the customer, I am told is at once
interested and caught by it. [Clothier and Furnisher magazine, Jan. 1889]    Meaning state of
confusion is from 1889.


razzmatazz (n.)

1894, perhaps a varied reduplication of jazz (n.). The word had early associations with that kind of
music (later especially in contrast to swing).


RBI (n.)

also R.B.I., in baseball, 1947, short for run batted in.


RCA (n.)

1922, initialism (acronym) of Radio Corporation of America.


re

with reference to, used from c.1700 in legalese, from Latin (in) re in the matter of, from ablative
case of res matter, thing. Its use is execrated by Fowler in three different sections of Modern
English Usage.


re-

word-forming element meaning back to the original place; again, anew, once more, also with a sense
of undoing, c.1200, from Old French and directly from Latin re- again, back, anew, against, Latin
combining form concievably from Indo-European *wret-, metathetical variant of *wert- to turn
[Watkins]. Often merely intensive, and in many of the older borrowings from French and Latin the
precise sense of re- is lost in secondary senses or weakened beyond recognition. OED writes that it
is impossible to attempt a complete record of all the forms resulting from its use, and adds that
The number of these is practically infinite .... The Latin prefix became red- before vowels and h-,
as in redact, redeem, redolent, redundant.


re-absorb (v.)

also reabsorb, 1761, from re- + absorb. Related: Reabsorbed; reabsorbing.


re-absorption (n.)

also reabsorption, 1718, from re- + absorption.


re-accustom (v.)

also reaccustom, 1610s, from re- + accustom. Related: Reaccustomed; reaccustoming.


re-acquaint (v.)

also reacquaint, 1640s, from re- + acquaint. Related: Reacquainted; reacquainting.


re-acquisition (n.)

also reacquisition, 1796, from re- + acquisition.


re-adjust (v.)

also readjust, 1742, from re- back, again + adjust. Related: Readjusted; readjusting.


re-admission (n.)

also readmission, 1650s; see re- + admission.


re-admit (v.)

also readmit, 1610s, from re- back, again + admit. Related: Readmitted; readmitting.


re-affirm (v.)

also reaffirm, 1610s, to confirm anew, from re- back, again + affirm. Meaning to assert anew is
recorded from 1842. Related: Reaffirmed; reaffirming.


re-affirmation (n.)

also reaffirmation, 1845, noun of action from re-affirm.


re-aggravate (v.)

also reaggravate, 1610s, from re- + aggravate. Related: Reaggravated; reaggravating.


re-align (v.)

also realign, 1876 in reference to railroad tracks; 1923, in reference to European international
relations, from re- back, again + align. Related: Realigned; realigning.


re-alignment (n.)

also realignment, 1850, from re- + alignment.


re-allocate (v.)

also reallocate, by 1868, from re- + allocate. Related: Reallocated; reallocating.


re-allocation (n.)

also reallocation, 1931, noun of action from reallocate (v.).


re-ally (v.)

to form an alliance again, c.1600, from re- + ally (v.). Related: Re-allied.


re-animate (v.)

also reanimate, 1610s, in spiritual and physical sense, from re- back, again + animate (v.) to endow
with life. Related: Reanimated; reanimating.


re-animation (n.)

also reanimation, 1777, from re- + animation.


re-appear (v.)

also reappear, 1610s, from re- back, again + appear. Related: Reappeared; reappearing.


re-appearance (n.)

also reappearance, 1660s; see reappear + -ance.


re-apply (v.)

also also reapply, 1723, from re- + apply. Related: Reapplied; reapplying.


re-apportion (v.)

also reapportion, 1832, from re- + apportion. Related: Reapportioned; reapportioning.


re-apportionment (n.)

also reapportionment, 1800, American English, from re- + apportionment.


re-arm (v.)

also rearm, 1805 (implied in re-arming), from re- back, again + arm (v.) to supply with arms.
Related: Re-armed.


re-armament (n.)

also rearmament, 1864; see re- + armament.


re-arrange (v.)

also rearrange, 1798, from re- back, again + arrange. Related: Rearranged; rearranging;
rearrangement.


re-assemble (v.)

also also reassemble, late 15c., from re- + assemble. Related: Reassembled; reassembling;
reassembler; reassembly.


re-assert (v.)

also also reassert, 1660s, from re- + assert. Related: Reasserted; reasserting; reassertion.


re-assess (v.)

also also reassess, 1803; see re- + assess. Related: Reassessed; reassessing.


re-assessment (n.)

also also reassessment, 1751, from re- + assessment.


re-awaken (v.)

also reawaken, 1810, from re- + awaken. Related: Reawakened; reawakening.


re-collect (v.)

to collect or gather again, c.1600, from re- + collect (v.). Earlier simply to collect (1510s).
Related: Re-collected; re-collecting.


re-cover (v.)

to put a new cover on, c.1400, from re- again + cover (v.). Related: Re-covered; re-covering.


re-echo (v.)

1580s, from re- + echo (v.). Related: Re-echoed; re-echoing.


re-educate (v.)

also reeducate, 1808, from re- + educate. Related: Re-educated; re-educating.


re-elect (v.)

also reelect, c.1600, from re- back, again + elect (v.). Related: Re-elected; re-electing.


re-enact (v.)

also reenact, 1670s, from re- back, again + enact. Originally of laws, etc.; meaning to perform
again, reproduce is recorded from 1854. Related: Re-enacted; re-enacting.


re-enactment (n.)

also reenactment, 1780; see re-enact + -ment.


re-enactor (n.)

1965, agent noun from re-enact (v.). Specifically of one whose hobby or profession is to embody
accurate historical presentation is in use by 1984, American English.


re-energize (v.)

1803, from re- + energize. Related: Re-energized; re-energizing.


re-enforce (v.)

also reenforce, 1580s, to give fresh strength to, from re- back, again + enforce (v.). Originally of
persons or military units; of buildings, structures, etc., attested from 1883. Related: Re-enforced;
re-enforcing.


re-enforcement (n.)

c.1600, from re- + enforcement.


re-enlist (v.)

also reenlist, 1828, from re- back, again + enlist. Related: Re-enlisted; re-enlisting.


re-enter (v.)

late 15c., from re- + enter. Related: Re-entered; re-entering.


re-entry (n.)

also reentry, mid-15c., act of entering again, from re- again + entry; probably on model of Middle
French rentrer (12c.). Specifically of spacecraft from 1948.


re-establish (v.)

also reestablish, late 15c.; from re- + establish. Related: Re-established; re-establishing.


re-evaluate (v.)

also reevaluate, 1903, from re- + evaluate. Related: Reevaluated; reevaluating.


re-evaluation (n.)

also reevaluation, 1905; noun of action from re-evaluate.


re-examine (v.)

also reexamine, 1590s, from re- + examine. Related: Re-examined; re-examining.


re-form (v.)

form again, mid-14c., from re- + form (v.). Related: Re-formed; re-forming; re-formation.


re-formation (n.)

early 15c., from re- + formation.


re-fund (v.)

1860, from re- + fund. Related: Re-funded; re-funding.


re-hear (v.)

also rehear, 1680s, legal, from re- + hear. Related: Re-heard; re-hearing.


re-ignite (v.)

also reignite, 1863, from re- + ignite. Related: Reignited; reigniting.


re-import (v.)

also reimport, 1742, from re- + import (v.). Related: Re-imported; re-importing.


re-inter (v.)

also reinter, 1610s, from re- + inter. Related: Re-interred; re-interring.


re-lay (v.)

to lay again, 1590s, from re- + lay (v.). Related: Re-laid; re-laying.


re-mark (v.)

to mark again, 1610s, from re- + mark (v.). Related: Re-marked; re-marking.


re-present (v.)

to offer again, 1560s, from re- + present (v.). Related: Re-presented; re-presenting; re-
presentation.


re-presentation (n.)

a presenting again, 1805, from re- + presentation.


re-read (v.)

also reread, 1782, from re- + read (v.). Related: Re-reading. As a noun, from 1973.


re-record (v.)

1930, from re- + record (v.). Related: Re-recorded; re-recording.


re-route (v.)

also reroute, 1929, of mails, from re- back, again + route (v.). Related: Rerouted; rerouting.


re-search (v.)

to search again, 1760, from re- + search (v.). Related: Re-searched; re-searching.


re-sign (v.)

sign again, 1805, from re- + sign (v.). Related: Re-signed; re-signing.


re-strain (v.)

strain again, 1874, from re- + strain (v.). Related: Re-strained; re-straining.


re-up (v.)

to re-enlist, 1906, U.S. armed forces slang, from re- back, again + up (v.) enlist. Related: Re-
upped; re-upping.


re-view (n.)

a second or repeated viewing, from re- + view (n.).


reach (v.)

Old English r&aelig;can, reccan reach out, stretch out, extend, hold forth, also succeed in
touching, succeed in striking; address, speak to, also offer, present, give, grant, from West
Germanic *raikjan stretch out the hand (cognates: Old Frisian reka, Middle Dutch reiken, Dutch
reiken, Old High German and German reichen), from Proto-Germanic *raikijanau, perhaps from PIE root
*reig- to stretch out (cognates: Sanskrit rjyati he stretches himself, riag torture (by racking);
Greek oregein to reach, extend; Lithuanian rai&#382;ius to stretch oneself; Old Irish rigim I
stretch).    Shakespeare uses the now-obsolete past tense form raught (Old English r&aelig;hte).
Meaning arrive at is early 14c.; that of succeed in influencing is from 1660s. Related: Reached;
reaching. Reach-me-down ready-made (of clothes) is recorded from 1862, from notion of being on the
rack in a finished state.


reach (n.)

1520s, from reach (v.); earliest use is of stretches of water. Meaning extent of reaching is from
1540s; that of act of reaching is from 1560s.    Ah, but a man's reach should exceed his grasp,  Or
what's a heaven for?  [Browning, Andrea del Sarto]


react (v.)

1640s, to exert, as a thing acted upon, an opposite action upon the agent, from re- + act (v.).
Chemical sense is from 1944. Related: Reacted; reacting (1610s). For sense development, see
reaction. Meaning perform again (often re-act) is from 1650s.


reactant

1901 (n.), 1911 (adj.), from react + -ant.


reaction (n.)

action in resistance or response to another action or power, 1610s, from re- again, anew + action
(q.v.). Modeled on French r&eacute;action, older Italian reattione, from Medieval Latin reactionem
(nominative reactio), noun of action formed in Late Latin from past participle stem of Latin reagere
react, from re- back + agere to do, act (see act (v.)).    Originally scientific; physiological
sense is attested from 1805; psychological sense first recorded 1887; general sense of action or
feeling in response (to a statement, event, etc.) is recorded from 1914. Reaction time, time
elapsing between the action of an external stimulus and the giving of a signal in reply, attested by
1874.


reactionary (adj.)

1831, on model of French r&eacute;actionnaire (19c.), from r&eacute;action (see reaction). In
Marxist use, tending toward reversing existing tendencies, opposed to revolutionary and used
opprobriously in reference to opponents of communism, by 1858. As a noun, person considered
reactionary, especially in politics, one who seeks to check or undo political action, by 1855.


reactivate (v.)

1902, from re- back, again + activate. Related: Reactivated; reactivating; reactivation.


reactive (adj.)

1712, from react + -ive. Related: Reactively; reactiveness; reactivity.


reactor (n.)

one that reacts, 1835, agent noun in Latin form from react. In nuclear sense, attested from 1945.


read (v.)

Old English r&aelig;dan (West Saxon), redan (Anglian) to advise, counsel, persuade; discuss,
deliberate; rule, guide; arrange, equip; forebode; read, explain; learn by reading; put in order
(related to r&aelig;d, red advice), from Proto-Germanic *redan (cognates: Old Norse ra&eth;a, Old
Frisian reda, Dutch raden, Old High German ratan, German raten to advise, counsel, guess), from PIE
root *re(i)- to reason, count (cognates: Sanskrit radh- to succeed, accomplish, Greek arithmos
number amount, Old Church Slavonic raditi to take thought, attend to, Old Irish im-radim to
deliberate, consider). Words from this root in most modern Germanic languages still mean counsel,
advise.    Sense of make out the character of (a person) is attested from 1610s. Connected to riddle
via notion of interpret. Transference to understand the meaning of written symbols is unique to Old
English and (perhaps under English influence) Old Norse ra&eth;a. Most languages use a word rooted
in the idea of gather up as their word for read (such as French lire, from Latin legere). Read up
study is from 1842; read out (v.) expel by proclamation (Society of Friends) is from 1788. read-only
in computer jargon is recorded from 1961.


read (adj.)

1580s, having knowledge gained from reading, in well-read, etc., past participle adjective from read
(v.).


read (n.)

an act of reading, 1825, from read (v.).


read-out (n.)

1946, in computer sense, from read (v.) + out (adv.).


readability (n.)

1829, from readable + -ity.


readable (adj.)

1560s, from read (v.) + -able. Related: Readably.


reader (n.)

Old English r&aelig;dere person who reads aloud to others; lector; scholar; diviner, interpreter,
agent noun from r&aelig;dan (see read (v.)). Compare Dutch rader adviser, Old High German ratari
counselor. Old English fem. form was r&aelig;distre.


readership (n.)

1719, office of a reader, from reader + -ship. Meaning total number of readers of a publication is
from 1914.


readily (adv.)

c.1300, from ready + -ly (2).


readiness (n.)

mid-14c., state of preparation, preparedness; late 14c., promptness; from ready (adj.) + -ness. As
willingness from c.1400.


Reading

county town of Berkshire, Old English Readingum (c.900), (Settlement of) the family or followers of
a man called *Read.


reading (n.)

Old English r&#230;ding, a reading, the act of reading either silent or aloud, a passage or lesson,
verbal noun; see read (v.)). Meaning interpretation is from mid-14c. (in reference to dreams).
Meaning a form of a passage of text is from 1550s; that of a public event featuring reading aloud is
from 1787.


ready (adj.)

Old English r&aelig;de, ger&aelig;de prepared, ready, of a horse, ready for riding, from Proto-
Germanic *garaidijaz arranged (cognates: Old Frisian rede ready, Middle Dutch gereit, Old High
German reiti, Middle High German bereite, German bereit, Old Norse grei&eth;r ready, plain, Gothic
garai&thorn;s ordered, arranged), from PIE root *reidh- to ride (see ride (v.)). Lengthened in
Middle English by change of ending. Ready-made first attested early 15c.; ready-to-wear is from
1890.


ready (v.)

early 13c., to administer; c.1300, to take aim; mid-14c., to prepare, make ready, from ready (adj.).
Related: Readied; readying.


Reagan

surname, from Irish riagan, literally little king. Reaganism first recorded 1966, in reference to
policies of Ronald W. Reagan (1911-2004), U.S. governor of California 1967-75, U.S. president
1981-89.


Reaganomics (n.)

by Feb. 1981, in reference to economic police of U.S. President Ronald Reagan, from Reagan +
economics.


reagent (n.)

1785, from re- + agent substance that produces a chemical reaction.


real (adj.)

early 14c., actually existing, true; mid-15c., relating to things (especially property), from Old
French reel real, actual, from Late Latin realis actual, in Medieval Latin belonging to the thing
itself, from Latin res matter, thing, of uncertain origin. Meaning genuine is recorded from 1550s;
sense of unaffected, no-nonsense is from 1847.    Generally, by the time you are Real, most of your
hair has been loved off, and your eyes drop out and you get loose in the joints and very shabby. But
these things don't matter at all, because once you are Real you can't be ugly, except to people who
don't understand. [Margery Williams, The Velveteen Rabbit]   Real estate is first recorded 1660s and
retains the oldest English sense of the word. Noun phrase real time is early 19c. as a term in logic
and philosophy, 1953 as an adjectival phrase; get real, usually an interjection, was U.S. college
slang in 1960s, reached wide popularity c.1987.


real (n.)

small Spanish silver coin, 1580s, from Spanish real, noun use of real (adj.) regal, from Latin
regalis regal (see regal). Especially in reference to the real de plata, which circulated in the
U.S. till c.1850 and in Mexico until 1897. The same word was used in Middle English in reference to
various coins, from Old French real, cognate of the Spanish word.    The old system of reckoning by
shillings and pence is continued by retail dealers generally; and will continue, as long as the
Spanish coins remain in circulation. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]    He adds that,
due to different exchange rates of metal to paper money in the different states, the Spanish money
had varying names from place to place. The Spanish real of one-eighth of a dollar or 12 and a half
cents was a ninepence in New England, one shilling in New York, elevenpence or a levy in
Pennsylvania, and in many of the Southern States, a bit. The half-real was in New York a sixpence,
in New England a fourpence, in Pennsylvania a fip, in the South a picayune.


realia (n.)

real things, 1952, neuter plural of Late Latin realis actual, real (see real (adj.)).


realise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of realize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Realisation; realised;
realising.


realism (n.)

1794, from real (adj.) + -ism; after French r&eacute;alisme or German Realismus; from Late Latin
realis real. Opposed to idealism in philosophy, art, etc. In reference to scholastic doctrine of
Thomas Aquinas (opposed to nominalism) it is recorded from 1826. Meaning close resemblance to the
scene (in art, literature, etc., often with reference to unpleasant details) is attested from 1856.


realist (n.)

c.1600, in philosophy, from real (adj.) + -ist, and compare French r&#233;aliste. Also see realism.


realistic (adj.)

true to reality (of art, literature, etc.), 1829; involving a practical view of life (opposed to
idealistic), 1831; from realist + -ic. Related: Realistically.


reality (n.)

1540s, quality of being real, from French r&#233;alit&#233; and directly Medieval Latin realitatem
(nominative realitas), from Late Latin realis (see real (adj.)). Meaning real existence, all that is
real is from 1640s; that of the real state (of something) is from 1680s. Sometimes 17c.-18c. also
meaning sincerity. Reality-based attested from 1960. Reality television from 1991.


realization (n.)

1610s, action of making real, from realize + -ation. Meaning action of forming a clear concept is
from 1828. Related: Realizational.


realize (v.)

1610s, bring into existence, from French r&eacute;aliser make real (16c.), from Middle French real
actual (see real (adj.)). Sense of understand clearly, make real in the mind is first recorded 1775.
Sense of obtain, amass is from 1753. Related: Realized; realizing.


really (adv.)

c.1400, originally in reference to the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, from real (adj.) + -ly
(2). Sense of actually is from early 15c. Purely emphatic use dates from c.1600; interrogative use
(oh, really?) is first recorded 1815.


realm (n.)

late 13c., kingdom, from Old French reaume, probably from roiaume kingdom, altered (by influence of
Latin regalis regal) from Gallo-Roman *regiminem, accusative form of Latin regimen system of
government, rule (see regimen). Transferred sense sphere of activity is from late 14c.


realpolitik (n.)

1914, from German Realpolitik, which can be translated as practical politics. See real (adj.) +
politics.


Realtor (n.)

1916, real estate agent, American English, coined by real estate agent Charles N. Chadbourn of
Minneapolis, Minn., to distinguish the legitimate section of the business; popularized 1920s;
patented as Realtor by the National Association of Real Estate Boards.    The 1916 Convention of the
National Association of Real Estate Boards (NAREB) approved the adoption of the term as the official
designation of an active member of the Association. In 1920 the District Court of Hennepin County,
Minnesota, decided in favor of the Realtors in a case against a telephone directory publisher that
had indiscriminately used the word in listings. The court asserted that the word had never been used
in any way whatsoever until so invented and could thus be used only by those duly licensed by the
National Association of Real Estate Boards. Until the Lanham Acts of 1948 changed federal patent
regulations to allow protection for registered collective marks, the National Association fought and
won sixteen cases on the local and state levels to protect its symbolic property. [Jeffrey M.
Hornstein, The Rise of Realtor, in The Middling Sorts: Explorations in the History of the American
Middle Class, New York, 2001]


realty (n.)

1660s, real estate, from earlier meaning (1540s) real possession, earlier reality (mid-15c.), from
real (adj.) + -ty (2). Compare reality.


ream (n.1)

measure of paper, mid-14c., from Old French reyme, from Spanish resma, from Arabic rizmah bundle (of
paper), from rasama collect into a bundle. The Moors brought manufacture of cotton paper to Spain.
Early variant rym (late 15c.) suggests a Dutch influence (compare Dutch riem), probably borrowed
from Spanish during the time of Hapsburg control of Holland. For ordinary writing paper, 20 quires
of 24 sheets each, or 480 sheets; often 500 or more to allow for waste; slightly different numbers
for drawing or printing paper.


ream (v.)

to enlarge a hole, 1815, probably a southwest England dialectal survival from Middle English reme to
make room, open up, from Old English ryman widen, extend, enlarge, from Proto-Germanic *rumijan
(cognates: Old Saxon rumian, Old Norse ryma, Old Frisian rema, Old High German rumen to make room,
widen), from *rumaz spacious (see room (n.)). Slang meaning to cheat, swindle first recorded 1914;
anal sex sense is from 1942. To ream (someone) out scold, reprimand is recorded from 1950.


ream (n.2)

cream (obsolete), Old English ream, from Proto-Germanic *raumoz (cognates: Middle Dutch and Dutch
room, German Rahm), of uncertain origin.


reap (v.)

to cut grain with a hook or sickle, Old English reopan, Mercian form of ripan to reap, related to
Old English ripe ripe (see ripe). Related: Reaped; reaping.


reaper (n.)

Old English ripere, agent noun from reap (v.). As the name of a personification of death, from 1839.


rear (n.)

hindmost part, c.1600, abstracted from rerewarde rear guard, hindmost part of an army or fleet (mid-
14c.), from Anglo-French rerewarde, Old French rieregarde, from Old French adverb riere behind (from
Latin retro back, behind; see retro-) + Old French garde (see guard (n.)). Or the word may be a
shortened form of arrear (see arrears).    As a euphemism for buttocks it is attested from 1796.
Rear admiral is first attested 1580s, apparently so called from ranking behind an admiral proper.
Rear-view (mirror) is recorded from 1926.


rear (v.1)

Old English r&aelig;ran to raise, build up, create, set on end; arouse, excite, stir up, from Proto-
Germanic *raizijanau to raise, causative of *risanan to rise (see raise (v.)). Meaning bring into
being, bring up (as a child) is recorded from early 15c.; that of raise up on the hind legs is first
recorded late 14c. Related: Reared; rearing.


rear (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French rere (see rear (n.)).


rear (v.2)

attack in the rear, 17c., from rear (n.).


rear-end (n.)

buttocks, 1937, from rear (adj.) + end (n.). As a verb, to collide (with another vehicle) from
behind, from 1976. Related: Rear-ended; rear-ending.


rearward (adv.)

1590s, from rear (adj.) + -ward.


reason (n.)

c.1200, intellectual faculty that adopts actions to ends, also statement in an argument, statement
of explanation or justification, from Anglo-French resoun, Old French raison course; matter;
subject; language, speech; thought, opinion, from Latin rationem (nominative ratio) reckoning,
understanding, motive, cause, from ratus, past participle of reri to reckon, think, from PIE root
*re(i)- to reason, count (source of Old English r&aelig;dan to advise; see read (v.)).    Meaning
sanity; degree of intelligence that distinguishes men from brutes is recorded from late 13c. Sense
of grounds for action, motive, cause of an event is from c.1300. Middle English sense of meaning,
signification (early 14c.) is in the phrase rhyme or reason. Phrase it stands to reason is from
1630s. Age of Reason the Enlightenment is first recorded 1794, as the title of Tom Paine's book.


reason (v.)

early 14c., resunmen, to question (someone), also to challenge, from Old French raisoner speak,
discuss; argue; address; speak to, from Late Latin rationare to discourse, from ratio (see reason
(n.)). Intransitive sense of to think in a logical manner is from 1590s; transitive sense of employ
reasoning (with someone) is from 1847. Related: Reasoned; reasoning.


reasonable (adj.)

c.1300, having sound judgment, sane, rational, from Old French raisonable, from Latin rationabilis,
from ratio (see reason (n.)).What the majority of people consider to be 'reasonable' is that about
which there is agreement, if not among all, at least among a substantial number of people;
'reasonable' for most people, has nothing to do with reason, but with consensus. [Erich Fromm, The
Heart of Man, 1968]Meaning moderate in price is recorded from 1660s. Related: Reasonably.


reasoning (n.)

late 14c., exercise of the power of reason; act or process of thinking logically; also an instance
of this; verbal noun from reason (v.).


reassurance (n.)

also re-assurance, 1610s, from reassure + -ance.


reassure (v.)

restore (someone) to confidence, 1590s, from re- back, again + assure. Related: Reassured;
reassuring.


reattach (v.)

also re-attach, c.1600 in law; 1813 in a literal sense, from re- + attach. Related: Reattached;
reattaching.


reave (v.)

Old English reafian to rob (something from someone), plunder, pillage, from Proto-Germanic *raubjon
(cognates: Old Frisian ravia, Middle Dutch roven, Dutch rooven, Old High German roubon, German
rauben), from PIE *reup- to snatch (see rip (v.)). Related: Reaved; reaving.


reaver (n.)

Old English reafere plundering forager, agent noun from reafian (see reave (v.)). Similar formation
in Old Frisian ravere, Middle Dutch rover, Dutch roover, Old High German roubari, German
R&#228;uber.


reb (n.)

abbreviation of rebel (n.), 1862, in U.S. Civil War context.


rebar (n.)

also re-bar, steel reinforcing rod in concrete, 1961, from re(inforced) bar.


rebarbative (adj.)

repellent, unattractive, 1885, from French r&eacute;barbatif (14c.), from barbe beard, from Latin
barba (see barb (n.)).


rebate (v.)

late 14c., to reduce; early 15c., to deduct, subtract, from Old French rabattre beat down, drive
back, also deduct, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + abattre beat down (see abate). Meaning to pay
back (a sum) as a rebate is from 1957. Related: Rebated; rebating.


rebate (n.)

1650s, from rebate (v.).


rebbe (n.)

1881, from Yiddish, from Hebrew rabbi (see rabbi).


rebec (n.)

medieval stringed musical instrument, early 15c., from Middle French rebec (15c.), an unexplained
alteration (perhaps somehow influenced by bec beak) of Old French ribabe (13c.), ultimately from
Arabic rebab. Compare Old Proven&ccedil;al rebec, Italian ribeca. It has three strings and is played
with a bow.


Rebecca

fem. proper name, biblical wife of Isaac, mother of Jacob and Esau, from Late Latin Rebecca, from
Greek Rhebekka, from Hebrew Ribhqeh, literally connection (compare ribhqah team), from Semitic base
r-b-q to tie, couple, join (compare Arabic rabaqa he tied fast). Rebekah, the form of the name in
Authorized Version, was taken as the name of a society of women (founded 1851 in Indiana, U.S.) as a
complement to the Odd Fellows.


rebel (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French rebelle stubborn, obstinate, rebellious (12c.) and directly from Latin
rebellis insurgent, rebellious, from rebellare to rebel, revolt, from re- opposite, against, or
perhaps again (see re-) + bellare wage war, from bellum war.


rebel (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French rebeller (14c.), from Latin rebellare to revolt (see rebel (adj.)).
Related: Rebelled; rebelling.


rebel (n.)

person who makes war on his country for political motives, mid-14c., from rebel (adj.). Meaning
supporter of the American cause in the War of Independence is from 1775; sense of supporter of the
Southern cause in the American Civil War is attested from April 15, 1861. Rebel yell in an American
Civil War context attested from 1862, but the thing itself is older and was said to have been picked
up by southwestern men in their periodic wars against the Indians.  The Southern troops, when
charging or to express their delight, always yell in a manner peculiar to themselves. The Yankee
cheer is more like ours; but the Confederate officers declare that the rebel yell has a particular
merit, and always produces a salutary and useful effect upon their adversaries. A corps is sometimes
spoken of as a 'good yelling regiment.' [A.J.L. Fremantle, The Battle of Gettysburg and the Campaign
in Pennsylvania, in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Sept. 1863]


rebellion (n.)

war waged against a government by some portion of its subjects, mid-14c., from Old French rebellion
(14c.) and directly from Latin rebellionem (nominative rebellio) rebellion, revolt; renewal of war,
from rebellis (see rebel (adj.)).


rebellious (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin rebellis (see rebel (adj.)) + -ous. Related: Rebelliously; rebelliousness.


rebirth (n.)

1812, reincarnation; 1833, renewed life or activity, from re- + birth (n.).


reboot (v.)

1981, from re- + boot (v.) in the computer sense. Related: Rebooted; rebooting.


rebop (n.)

see bebop.


reborn (adj.)

1590s, from re- back, again + born.


reborrow (v.)

1630s, from re- back, again + borrow. Related: Reborrowed; reborrowing.


rebound (v.)

late 14c., to spring, leap, also return to afflict (early 15c.), from Old French rebondir leap back,
resound; repulse, push back, from re- back (see re-) + bondir leap, bound (see bound (v.)). Sense of
to spring back from force of impact is recorded from late 14c. Sports use probably first in tennis;
basketball sense is attested from 1914. Related: Rebounded; rebounding.


rebound (n.)

1520s, in reference to a ball, from rebound (v.). Sense in basketball from 1920 (from 1917 in ice
hockey). Meaning period of reaction or renewed activity after disturbance is from 1570s.


rebroadcast (v.)

also re-broadcast, 1923, from re- + broadcast (v.). Related: Rebroadcasting.


rebuff (v.)

1580s, from obsolete French rebuffer to check, snub, from Italian ribuffare to check, chide, snide,
from ribuffo a snub, from ri- back (from Latin re-, see re-) + buffo a puff, of imitative origin
(compare buffet (v.)). Related: Rebuffed; rebuffing.


rebuff (n.)

1610s, from rebuff (v.), or from Middle French rebuffe or Italian ribuffo.


rebuild (v.)

c.1600 (implied in rebuilding), from re- back, again + build (v.). Related: Rebuilt.


rebuke (v.)

early 14c., to reprimand, reprove; chide, scold, from Anglo-French rebuker to repel, beat back, Old
French rebuchier, from re- back (see re-) + buschier to strike, chop wood, from busche (French
bÃ&fnof;Â»che) wood, from Proto-Germanic *busk- (see bush (n.)). Related: Rebuked; rebuking.


rebuke (n.)

early 15c., a reproof, reprimand, from rebuke (v.).


rebus (n.)

c.1600, from Latin rebus by means of objects, ablative plural of res thing, object. According to
French sources, principally from the phrase de rebus qu&aelig; geruntur of things which are going
on, in reference to the satirical pieces composed by Picardy clerks at carnivals, subtle satires of
current events using pictures to suggest words, phrases or things. Or it may be from the
representations being non verbis sed rebus not by words, but by things. In either case from Latin
res thing.


rebut (v.)

c.1300, to thrust back, from Old French reboter, rebuter to thrust back, from re- back (see re-) +
boter to thrust, hit (see butt (v.)). Legalese sense of try to disprove, refute by evidence or
argument is from 1817. Related: Rebutted; rebutting.


rebuttal (n.)

1793, from rebut + -al (2). Earlier were rebutment (1590s) and rebutter (1530s, in law).


rec (n.)

1929 as a shortening of recreation.


recalcitrance (n.)

1845, from French r&#233;calcitrance or from recalcitrant + -ance.


recalcitrant (adj.)

1823, from French r&eacute;calcitrant, literally kicking back (17c.-18c.), past participle of
recalcitrare to kick back; be inaccessible, from re- back (see re-) + Latin calcitrare to kick, from
calx (genitive calcis) heel. Used from 1797 as a French word in English.


recalcitrate (v.)

to kick out, 1620s, from Latin recalcitratus, past participle of recalcitrare (see recalcitrant).
Sense of resist obstinately is from 1759. Related: Recalcitrated; recalcitrating.


recalibrate (v.)

1883, from re- + calibrate. Related: Recalibrated; recalibrating.


recall (v.)

1580s, to bring back by calling upon, from re- back, again + call (v.); in some cases a loan-
translation of Middle French rappeler (see repeal (v.)) or Latin revocare (see revoke). Sense of
bring back to memory is from 1610s. Related: Recalled; recalling.


recall (n.)

1650s, act of recalling to mind, from recall (v.). In U.S. politics, removal of an elected official,
1902.


recant (v.)

1530s, from Latin recantare recall, revoke, from re- back (see re-) + cantare to chant (see chant
(v.)). A word from the Reformation. Loan-translation of Greek palinoidein recant, from palin back +
oeidein to sing. Related: Recanted; recanting.


recantation (n.)

1540s, noun of action from recant.


recap (v.)

1856, put a cap on again, from re- + cap (n.). Specific sense put a strip of rubber on the tread of
a tire is 1920s. As a shortened form of recapitulate, it dates from 1920s. Related: Recapped;
recapping.


recapitulate (v.)

1560s, back-formation from recapitulation and also from Late Latin recapitulatus, past participle of
recapitulare. Related: Recapitulated; recapitulating.


recapitulation (n.)

late 14c., a summarizing, from Old French recapitulacion (13c.), from Late Latin recapitulationem
(nominative recapitulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of recapitulare go over the
main points of a thing again, literally restate by heads or chapters, from re- again (see re-) +
capitulum main part (see chapter).


recapture (n.)

1680s; see re- back, again + capture (n.).


recapture (v.)

1783, from re- back, again + capture (v.). Related: Recaptured; recapturing.


recast (v.)

c.1600, from re- + cast (v.). Of literary works and other writing, from 1790. Theater sense is from
1951.


recce

1941, military slang, short for reconnaissance.


recede (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French receder, from Latin recedere to go back, fall back; withdraw, depart,
retire, from re- back (see re-) + cedere to go (see cede). Related: Receded; receding.


receipt (n.)

late 14c., act of receiving; also statement of ingredients in a potion or medicine; from Anglo-
French or Old North French receite receipt, recipe, prescription (c.1300), altered (by influence of
receit he receives, from Vulgar Latin *recipit) from Old French recete, from Latin recepta received,
fem. past participle of recipere (see receive). Meaning written acknowledgment of money or goods
received is from c.1600.


receivable (adj.)

late 14c., from receive + -able, and in part from Anglo-French or Old French recevable, from Old
French recoivre. Related: Receivables.


receive (v.)

c.1300, from Old North French receivre (Old French recoivre) seize, take hold of, pick up; welcome,
accept, from Latin recipere regain, take back, bring back, carry back, recover; take to oneself,
take in, admit, from re- back, though the exact sense here is obscure (see re-) + -cipere, comb.
form of capere to take (see capable). Radio and (later) television sense is attested from 1908.
Related: Received; receiving.


received (adj.)

generally accepted as true or good, mid-15c., past participle adjective from receive. Thomas Browne
called such notions receptaries (1646).


receiver (n.)

mid-14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), agent noun from receive, or from Old French recevere (Modern
French receveur), agent noun from recievere. As a telephone apparatus, from 1877; in reference to a
radio unit, from 1891; in U.S. football sense, from 1897.


receivership (n.)

late 15c., office of a receiver (of public revenues), from receiver + -ship. As condition of being
under control of a receiver, 1884.


recension (n.)

1630s, from Latin recensionem (nominative recensio) an enumeration, noun of action from past
participle stem of recensere to count, enumerate, survey, from re- (see re-) + censere to tax, rate,
assess, estimate (see censor (n.)).


recent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin recentem (nominative recens) lately done or made, new, fresh, young, from re-
(see re-) + PIE root *ken- (2) fresh, new, young (cognates: Greek kainos new; Sanskrit kanina-
young; Old Irish cetu- first; Old Church Slavonic na&#269;ino to begin, koni beginning). Related:
Recently; recentness (1670s, but OED reports recency (1610s) was Common in 19th c.).


receptacle (n.)

late 14c., from Old French receptacle (14c.) and directly from Latin receptaculum place to receive
and store things, from receptare, frequentative of recipere to hold, contain (see receive). As an
adjectival form, receptacular (1847) has been used.


reception (n.)

late 14c., in astrology, effect of two planets on each other; sense of act of receiving is recorded
from late 15c., from Latin receptionem (nominative receptio) a receiving, noun of action from past
participle stem of recipere (see receive). Sense of ceremonial gathering is 1882, from French.


receptionist (n.)

person hired to receive clients in an office, 1900, from reception + -ist.  Originally in
photography studios.    Let me not forget the receptionist -- generally and preferably, a woman of
refined and gentle manners, well informed and specially gifted in handling people of varied
dispositions. A woman especially who knows how to handle other women, and who can make herself
beloved by the children who may visit the studio. A woman, also, who in a thoroughly suave and
dignified way, knows just how to handle the young man of the period so that the photographer may be
glad to have his business. What a power the receptionist is when properly chosen and trained. It is
not too much to say that she can both make and destroy a business, if she has the amount of
discretionary power given to her in some galleries. [John A. Tennant, Business Methods Applied in
Photography, Wilson's Photographic Magazine, October 1900]    Earlier as an adjective in theology
and law (1867).


receptive (adj.)

1540s, from Medieval Latin receptivus, from Latin recipere (see receive). Related: Receptivity.


receptor (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French receptour or directly from Latin receptor, agent noun from recipere (see
receive). Medical use from 1900.


recess (n.)

1530s, act of receding, from Latin recessus a going back, retreat, from recessum, past participle of
recedere to recede (see recede). Meaning hidden or remote part first recorded 1610s; that of period
of stopping from usual work is from 1620s, probably from parliamentary notion of recessing into
private chambers.


recess (v.)

1809, from recess (n.). Related: Recessed; recessing.


recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


recessional (adj.)

1858, from recession + -al (1). As a noun, hymn sung while the clergy and choir are leaving church,
1864, with -al (2).


recessive (adj.)

1670s, from Latin recess-, past participle stem of recedere (see recede) + -ive. Linguistics sense
is from 1879;  in genetics, 1900, from German recessiv (Mendel, 1865). Related: Recessiveness.


recharge (v.)

early 15c., to reload (a vessel), from re- again, back + charge to load (q.v.); modeled on Old
French rechargier to load, load back on (13c.). Meaning re-power a battery is from 1876. Related:
Recharged; recharging. The noun is recorded from 1610s in English.


rechargeable (adj.)

1901 of batteries, etc., from recharge + -able. Earlier in financial accounts.


recherche (adj.)

1722, from French recherch&eacute; carefully sought out, past participle of rechercher to seek out
(12c.), from re-, here perhaps suggesting repeated activity (see re-) + chercher to search, from
Latin circare, in Late Latin to wander hither and thither, from circus circle (see circus). Commonly
used 19c. of food, styles, etc., to denote obscure excellence.


recidivate (v.)

fall back; relapse, 1520s, from Medieval Latin recidivatus, past participle of recidivare to relapse
(see recidivist). Related: Recidivated; recidivating.


recidivism (n.)

habit of relapsing (into crime), 1882, from recidivist + -ism, modeled on French r&#233;cidivisme,
from r&#233;cidiver.


recidivist (n.)

relapsed criminal, 1863, from French r&eacute;cidiviste, from r&eacute;cidiver to fall back,
relapse, from Medieval Latin recidivare to relapse into sin, from Latin recidivus falling back, from
recidere fall back, from re- back, again (see re-) + comb. form of cadere to fall (see case (n.)).
Recidivation in the spiritual sense is attested from early 15c., was very common 17c.


recipe (n.)

1580s, medical prescription, from Middle French r&eacute;cip&eacute; (15c.), from Latin recipe
take!, second person imperative singular of recipere to take (see receive); word written by
physicians at the head of prescriptions. Figurative use from 1640s. Meaning instructions for
preparing food first recorded 1743. The original sense survives only in the pharmacist's
abbreviation Rx.


recipient (n.)

1550s, from Middle French r&eacute;cipient (16c.) and directly from Latin recipientem (nominative
recipiens), present participle of recipere (see receive). As an adjective from 1610s. Related:
Recipience; recipiency.


reciprocal (adj.)

1560s, with -al (1) + stem of Latin reciprocus returning the same way, alternating, from pre-Latin
*reco-proco-, from *recus (from re- back; see re-, + -cus, adjective formation) + *procus (from pro-
forward; see pro-, + -cus. Related: Reciprocally. The noun meaning that which is reciprocal (to
another) is from 1560s.


reciprocate (v.)

to return, requite, 1610s, back-formation from reciprocation, or else from Latin reciprocatus, past
participle of reciprocare rise and fall, move back and forth; reverse the motion of, from reciprocus
(see reciprocal). Related: Reciprocated; reciprocating.


reciprocating (adj.)

moving back and forth, 1690s, present participle adjective from reciprocate (v.). Specifically of
machines by 1822.


reciprocation (n.)

1520s, mode of expression; 1560s, act of reciprocating, from Latin reciprocationem (nominative
reciprocatio) retrogression, alternation, ebb, noun of action from past participle stem of
reciprocare move back, turn back, also come and go, move back and forth; from reciprocus (see
reciprocal).


reciprocity (n.)

1766, from French r&eacute;ciprocit&eacute; (18c.), from reciproque, from Latin reciprocus, past
participle of reciprocare (see reciprocal).


recision (n.)

act of cutting off, 1610s, from Middle French recision, alteration of rescision (from Late Latin
rescissionem annulment; see rescission), influenced in form by Late Latin recisionem (nominative
recisio) a cutting back, noun of action from past participle stem of recidere to cut back (see
recidivist).


recital (n.)

1510s, a legal term, rehearsal or statement of relevant facts, from recite + -al. Meaning act of
reciting is from 1610s; musical performance sense is from 1811.


recitation (n.)

late 15c., act of detailing, from Old French r&eacute;citation (14c.) and directly from Latin
recitationem (nominative recitatio) public reading, a reading aloud, noun of action from past
participle stem of recitare (see recite). Meaning act of repeating aloud is from 1620s; that of
repetition of a prepared lesson is first recorded 1770, American English.


recitative (n.)

style of musical declamation intermediate between speech and singing, form of song resembling
declamation, 1650s, from Italian recitativo, from recitato, past participle of recitare, from Latin
recitare read out, read aloud (see recite). From 1640s as an adjective. The Italian form of the word
was used in English from 1610s.


recite (v.)

early 15c., from Old French reciter (12c.) and directly from Latin recitare read aloud, read out,
repeat from memory, declaim, from re- back, again (see re-) + citare to summon (see cite). Related:
Recited; reciting.


reck (v.)

Old English reccan (2) take care of, be interested in, care for; have regard to, take heed of; to
care, heed; desire (to do something) (strong verb, past tense rohte, past participle rought), from
West Germanic *rokjan, from Proto-Germanic *rokja- (cognates: Old Saxon rokjan, Middle Dutch roeken,
Old Norse r&aelig;kja to care for, Old High German giruochan to care for, have regard to, German
geruhen to deign, which is influenced by ruhen to rest).    And in that very moment, away behind in
some courtyard of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear he crowed, recking nothing of wizardry
or war, welcoming only the morning that in the sky far above the shadows of death was coming with
the dawn. [J.R.R. Tolkien, Return of the King, 1955]    The -k- sound is probably a northern
influence from Norse. No known cognates outside Germanic. From its earliest appearance in Eng., reck
is almost exclusively employed in negative or interrogative clauses [OED]. Related: Recked; recking.


reck (n.)

care, heed, consideration, 1560s, from reck (v.).


reckless (adj.)

Old English receleas careless, thoughtless, heedless, earlier reccileas, from *rece, recce care,
heed, from reccan to care (see reck (v.)) + -less. The same affixed form is in German ruchlos, Dutch
roekeloos wicked. Root verb reck (Old English reccan) is passing into obscurity.


recklessly (adv.)

Old English recceleaslice; see reckless + -ly (2).


recklessness (n.)

Old English recceleasnes recklessness, carelessness, negligence; see reckless + -ness.


reckon (v.)

c.1200, recenen, from Old English gerecenian to explain, relate, recount, from Proto-Germanic
*(ga)rekenojan (cognates: Old Frisian rekenia, Middle Dutch and Dutch rekenen, Old High German
rehhanon, German rechnen, Gothic rahnjan to count, reckon), from Proto-Germanic *rakina- ready,
straightforward, from PIE *reg- to move in a straight line, with derivatives meaning direct in a
straight line, rule (see regal).    Intransitive sense make a computation is from c.1300. In I
reckon, the sense is hold an impression or opinion, and the expression, used parenthetically, dates
from c.1600 and formerly was in literary use (Richardson, etc.), but came to be associated with U.S.
Southern dialect and was regarded as provincial or vulgar. Related: Reckoned; reckoning.


reckoner (n.)

early 13c., agent noun from reckon. Especially book of tables used in calculation, often known as a
ready reckoner.


reckoning (n.)

early 14c., narrative, account, verbal noun from reckon (v.). Meaning a settling of accounts is from
mid-14c.; that of calculation is from late 14c. Compare Dutch rekening a bill, account, reckoning,
Old High German rechenunga, German rechnung, Danish regning a reckoning, computation. Day of
reckoning attested from c.1600.


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


reclamation (n.)

late 15c., a revoking (of a grant, etc.), from Old French r&eacute;clamacion and directly from Latin
reclamationem (nominative reclamatio) a cry of 'no,' a shout of disapproval, noun of action from
past participle stem of reclamare cry out against, protest (see reclaim). From 1630s as action of
calling (someone) back (from iniquity, etc.); meaning action of claiming something taken awat is
from 1787. Of land from 1848.


recline (v.)

early 15c., from Old French recliner rest, lay; bend, lean over (13c.) and directly from Latin
reclinare to bend back, to lean back; cause to lean, from re- back, against (see re-) + clinare to
bend, from PIE *klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei to lean (see lean (v.)). Related: Reclined;
reclining.   Recline is always as strong as lean, and generally stronger, indicating a more
completely recumbent position, and approaching lie. [Century Dictionary]


recliner (n.)

1660s, agent noun from recline. From 1880 as a type of chair.


recluse (n.)

c.1200, person shut up from the world for purposes of religious meditation, from Old French reclus
(fem. recluse) hermit, recluse, also confinement, prison; convent, monastery, noun use of reclus
(adj.) shut up, from Late Latin reclusus, past participle of recludere to shut up, enclose (but in
classical Latin to throw open), from Latin re-, intensive prefix, + claudere to shut (see close
(v.)).


reclusive (adj.)

1590s, from recluse + -ive. Recluse alone formerly served also as an adjective in English (early
13c.).


recognise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of recognize; for spelling, see -ize. Related: Recognised;
recognising; recognisance.


recognition (n.)

mid-15c., knowledge of an event or incident; understanding, from Middle French recognition (15c.)
and directly from Latin recognitionem (nominative recognitio) a reviewing, investigation,
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of recognoscere to acknowledge, know again;
examine (see recognize).    Sense of formal avowal of knowledge and approval is from 1590s;
especially acknowledgement of the independence of a country by a state formerly exercising
sovereignty (1824). Meaning a knowing again is from 1798.


recognizance (n.)

early 14c., reconisaunce, a bond acknowledging some obligation binding one over to do some
particular act, from Old French reconissance acknowledgment, recognition (12c., Modern French
reconnaissance), from reconoiss-, present participle stem of reconoistre (see recognize). Related:
Recognizant.


recognization (n.)

act of recognizing, 1550s, from recognize + -ation.


recognize (v.)

early 15c., resume possession of land, back-formation from recognizance, or else from Old French
reconoiss-, stem of reconoistre to know again, identify, recognize, from Latin recognoscere
acknowledge, recall to mind, know again; examine; certify, from re- again (see re-) + cognoscere
know (see cognizance). Meaning know again, recall or recover the knowledge of, perceive an identity
with something formerly known or felt first recorded 1530s. Related: Recognized; recognizing.


recoil (n.)

c.1300, retreat, from Old French recul recoil, backward movement, retreat, from reculer (see recoil
(v.)). Meaning back-kick of a firearm is from 1570s.


recoil (v.)

early 13c. (transitive) force back, drive back, from Old French reculer to go back, give way,
recede, retreat (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *reculare, from Latin re- back (see re-) + culus backside,
bottom, fundament. Meaning shrink back, retreat is first recorded c.1300; and that of spring back
(as a gun) in 1520s. Related: Recoiled; recoiling.


recollect (v.)

remember, recover knowledge of, 1550s, from Latin recollectus, past participle of recolligere,
literally to collect again, from re- again (see re-) + colligere gather (see collect). Related:
Recollected; recollecting. The pronunciation is based on recollection.


recollection (n.)

1590s, a gathering together again, from French r&eacute;collection (14c.) or directly from Medieval
Latin recollectionem (nominative recollectio), noun of action from past participle stem of
recolligere (see recollect). Meaning act of recalling to memory is from 1680s; a thing or scene so
recalled, from 1781.


recombinant (adj.)

1942, from recombine + -ant.


recombination (n.)

1791, from re- + combination.


recombine (v.)

1630s, from re- + combine (v.). Related: Recombined; recombining.


recommence (v.)

late 15c., from Old French recommencier begin again, start afresh (11c.), from re- back, again (see
re-) + commencer (see commence). Related: Recommenced; recommencing.


recommend (v.)

late 14c., praise, present as worthy, from Medieval Latin recommendare, from Latin re-, here
probably an intensive prefix, or else from a sense now obscure (see re-), + commendare commit to
one's care, commend (see commend). Meaning advise as to action, urge (that something be done) is
from 1746. Related: Recommended; recommending.


recommendation (n.)

early 15c., action of commending oneself to another, from Old French recommendation (Modern French
recommandation), from Medieval Latin recommendationem (nominative recommendatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of recommendare (see recommend). Meaning act of recommending (someone or
something) as worthy is from 1570s. Letter of recommendation is from late 15c.


recommission (v.)

1781, in reference to British Navy ships, from re- back, again + commission (v.). Related:
Recommissioned; recommissioning.


recommit (v.)

1620s, from re- again + commit (v.). Related: Recommitted; recommitting.


recompense (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French recompense (13c.), related to recompenser make good, recompense from
Late Latin recompensare (see recompense (v.)).


recompense (v.)

c.1400, to redress, from Middle French recompenser (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
recompensare to reward, remunerate, from Latin re- again (see re-) + compensare balance out,
literally weigh together (see compensate). From early 15c. as to compensate. Related: Recompensed;
recompensing.


recon

military slang shortening; 1918 for reconnaissance (n.); 1966 for reconnoitre (v.).


reconceptualize (v.)

1969, from re- + conceptualize. Related: Reconceptualized; reconceptualizing.


reconcilable (adj.)

1610s, from reconcile + -able.


reconcile (v.)

mid-14c., of persons, from Old French reconcilier (12c.) and directly from Latin reconcilare to
bring together again; regain; win over again, conciliate, from re- again (see re-) + concilare make
friendly (see conciliate). Reflexive sense is recorded from 1530s. Meaning to make (discordant facts
or statements) consistent is from late 14c. Intransitive sense of become reconciled is from 1660s.
Related: Reconciled; reconciling.


reconciliation (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French reconciliacion (14c.) and directly from Latin reconciliationem (nominative
reconciliatio) a re-establishing, a reconciling, noun of action from past participle stem of
reconciliare (see reconcile).


recondite (adj.)

1640s, removed or hidden from view, from Old French recondit, from Latin reconditus, past participle
of recondere store away, hide, conceal, put back again, put up again, lay up, from re- away, back
(see re-) + condere to store, hide, put together, from con- together (see con-) + -dere to put,
place, comb. form of dare to give (see date (n.1)). Meaning removed from ordinary understanding,
profound is from 1650s; of writers or sources, obscure, it is recorded from 1817.


recondition (v.)

also re-condition, 1850, from re- back, again + condition (v.). Related: Reconditioned;
reconditioning.


reconfigure (v.)

1964, from re- + configure. Related: Reconfigured; reconfiguring.


reconnaissance (n.)

1810, from French reconnaissance act of surveying, literally recognition, from Old French
reconoissance recognition, acknowledgement (see recognizance).


reconnect (v.)

1752, from re- + connect (v.). Related: Reconnected; reconnecting.


reconnoiter (v.)

also reconnoitre, 1707, make a survey, from older French reconnoitre (Modern French
reconna&icirc;tre), from Old French reconoistre to identify (see recognize).


reconquer (v.)

1580s, from Middle French reconquerre (12c.), from re- again, back (see re-) + conquerre (see
conquer). Related: Reconquered; reconquering.


reconquest (n.)

1540s, from Middle French reconqueste (16c., Modern French reconqu&#234;te), cognate with Spanish
reconquista; see re- + conquest.


reconsider (v.)

1570s, from French reconsid&#233;rer and also from re- back, again + consider. Related:
Reconsidered; reconsidering.


reconsideration (n.)

1650s, from re- again + consideration.


reconstitute (v.)

1790, from re- back, again + constitute (v.). Related: Reconstituted; reconstituting.


reconstruct (v.)

1768, to build anew, from re- back, again + construct (v.). Meaning to restore (something) mentally
is attested from 1862. Related: Reconstructed; reconstructing.


reconstruction (n.)

1791, action or process of reconstructing, from re- + construction. In U.S. political history sense
(usually with a capital R-), from 1865. It had been used during the American Civil War in reference
to reconstitution of the union.


reconvene (v.)

1640s, from re- + convene and from Medieval Latin reconvenire. Related: Reconvened; reconvening;
reconvention.


reconveyance (n.)

1714; see re- + conveyance.


record (v.)

c.1200, to repeat, reiterate, recite; rehearse, get by heart, from Old French recorder tell, relate,
repeat, recite, report, make known (12c.) and directly from Latin recordari remember, call to mind,
think over, be mindful of, from re- restore (see re-) + cor (genitive cordis) heart (as the
metaphoric seat of memory, as in learn by heart); see heart.    Meaning set down in writing first
attested mid-14c.; that of put sound or pictures on disks, tape, etc. is from 1892. Related:
Recorded; recording.


record (n.)

c.1300, testimony committed to writing, from Old French record memory, statement, report, from
recorder to record (see record (v.)). Meaning written account of some event is from late 14c.
Meaning disk on which sounds or images have been recorded is first attested 1878. That of best or
highest recorded achievement in sports, etc. is from 1883. Phrase on the record is from 1900;
adverbial phrase off the record confidentially is attested from 1906. Record-player attested from
1919.


record-keeping (n.)

also recordkeeping, 1841; see record (n.) + keeping, verbal noun from keep (v.).


recordation (n.)

late 14c., faculty of remembering, Old French recordacion record, memory (14c.) or directly from
Latin recordationem (nominative recordatio), noun of action from past participle stem of recordari
(see record (v.)). Meaning act or process of committing to writing is c.1810.


recorder (n.)

chief legal officer of a city, early 15c., from Anglo-French recordour (early 14c.), Old French
recordeor witness; storyteller; minstrel, from Medieval Latin recordator, from Latin recordari
remember (see record (v.)).    Meaning registering apparatus is from 1873. The musical instrument is
attested by this name from early 15c., from record (v.) in the obsolete sense of practice a tune.
Used by Shakespeare and Milton (of flutes and soft recorders, Paradise Lost). The name, and the
device, were rarely heard by mid-1800s, ousted by the flute, but enjoyed a revival after 1911 as an
easy-to-play instrument for musical beginners.


recount (v.1)

to tell, mid-15c., also recompt, from Old North French and Anglo-French reconter (12c., Modern
French raconter), from Old French re- (see re-) + conter to relate, reckon (see count (v)). Related:
Recounted; recounting.


recount (n.)

also re-count, a new count (especially in an election), 1855, American English, from re- + count
(n).


recount (v.2)

also re-count, to enumerate again, 1764, from re- + count (v). Related: Recounted; recounting.


recoup (v.)

1620s, from French recouper to cut back (12c.), from Old French re- back (see re-) + couper to cut,
from coup a blow (see coup). Originally a legal term meaning to deduct; sense of to recompense for
loss or expense first recorded 1660s. Related: Recouped; recouping.


recourse (n.)

late 14c., from Old French recours (13c.), from Latin recursus a return, a retreat, literally a
running back, a going back, from stem of past participle of recurrere run back, return (see recur).


recover (v.)

c.1300, to regain consciousness, from Anglo-French rekeverer (13c.), Old French recovrer come back,
return; regain health; procure, get again (11c.), from Medieval Latin recuperare to recover (source
of Spanish recobrar, Italian ricoverare; see recuperation). Meaning to regain health or strength is
from early 14c.; sense of to get (anything) back is first attested mid-14c. Related: Recovered;
recovering.


recoverable (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French recouvrable, from recouvrer (see recover) .


recovery (n.)

mid-14c., return to health, from Anglo-French recoverie (c.1300), Old French recovree remedy, cure,
recovery, from past participle stem of recovrer (see recover). Meaning a gaining possession by legal
action is from early 15c. That of act of righting oneself after a blunder, mishap, etc. is from
1520s.


recreant (adj.)

c.1300, confessing oneself to be overcome or vanquished, from Old French recreant defeated,
vanquished, yielding, giving; weak, exhausted; cowardly, present participle adjective from recroire
to yield in a trial by combat, surrender allegiance, literally believe again; perhaps on notion of
take back one's pledge, yield one's cause, from re- again, back (see re-) + croire entrust, believe,
from Latin credere (see credo).Non sufficit ... nisi dicat illud verbum odiosum, quod recreantus
sit. [Bracton, c.1260]Meaning cowardly in English is from late 14c. Meaning unfaithful to duty is
from 1640s.


recreant (n.)

one who yields in combat, one who begs for mercy, one who admits defeat, early 15c., hence coward,
faint-hearted wretch; from recreant (adj.) and from Old French recreant as a noun, one who
acknowledges defeat, a craven, coward, renegade, traitor, wretch. In English, sense of apostate,
deserter, villain is from 1560s.


recreate (v.)

also re-create, to create anew, 1580s, from re- back, again + create. Related: Recreated;
recreating; recreation.


recreation (n.)

late 14c., refreshment or curing of a person, refreshment by eating, from Old French recreacion
(13c.), from Latin recreationem (nominative recreatio) recovery from illness, noun of action from
past participle stem of recreare to refresh, restore, make anew, revive, invigorate, from re- again
(see re-) + creare (see create). Meaning refresh oneself by some amusement is first recorded c.1400.
A verb recreate to refresh by physical influence after exertion is attested from early 15c. and was
used by Lyly, Pope, Steele, and Harriet Martineau, but it did not take, probably to avoid confusion
with recreate.


recreational (adj.)

1650s, from recreation + -al (1). Related: Recreationally. Recreational drug attested from 1967.


recrement (n.)

dross, scum, 1590s, from French r&#233;cr&#233;ment (mid-16c.) or directly from Latin recrementum,
from re- (see re-) + cernere to sift, separate (see crisis).


recriminate (v.)

return one accusation with another, c.1600, from Medieval Latin recriminatus, past participle of
recriminari to make charges against, from Latin re- back, again (see re-) + criminari to accuse,
from crimen (genitive criminis) a charge (see crime). Related: Recriminated; recriminating.


recrimination (n.)

1610s, from French r&eacute;crimination, from Medieval Latin recriminationem (nominative
recriminatio), noun of action from past participle stem of recriminari (see recriminate).


recrudesce (v.)

1875, break out afresh, back-formation from recrudescence or else from Latin recrudescere become raw
again, break open afresh. Related: Recrudesced; recrudescing.


recrudescence (n.)

1707, a becoming raw again, a breaking out afresh, from stem of Latin recrudescere re-open (of
wounds), literally become raw again, from re- again (see re-) + crudescere, from crudus raw (see
crude (adj.)) + inchoative suffix -escere. Meaning revival is from 1906. Related: Recrudescency
(1650s); recrudescent (1726).


recruit (v.)

1630s, to strengthen, reinforce, from French recruter (17c.), from recrute a levy, a recruit (see
recruit (n.)). Sense of to enlist new soldiers is attested from 1650s; of student athletes, from
1913. Related: Recruited; recruiting.


recruit (n.)

military reinforcement, one of a newly raised body of troops, 1640s, from recruit (v)., replacing
earlier recrew, recrue; or from obsolete French recrute, alteration of recreue a supply, recrue a
levy of troops (late 16c.), Picardy or Hainault dialect variant of recrue a levy, a recruit,
literally new growth, from Old French recreu (12c.), past participle of recreistre grow or increase
again, from re- again (see re-) + creistre to grow, from Latin crescere to grow (see crescent). The
French word first appeared in literary use in gazettes published in Holland, and was disapproved of
by French writers in the latter part of the 17th c. [OED]. The French word also is the source of
Dutch recruut, German Recrut, Swedish rekryt.


recruiter (n.)

1690s, agent noun from recruit (v.).


recruitment (n.)

1795, from recruit (v.) + -ment.


recrystallization (n.)

1782, from re- + crystallization.


recrystallize (v.)

also re-crystallize, 1774, from re- + crystallize. Related: Recrystallized; recrystallizing.


rectal (adj.)

1822, from stem of rectum + -al (1). Related: Rectally.


rectangle (n.)

1570s, from Middle French rectangle (16c.) and directly from Late Latin rectangulum, from rect-,
comb. form of Latin rectus right (see right (adj.1)) + Old French angle (see angle (n.)). Medieval
Latin rectangulum meant a triangle having a right angle.


rectangular (adj.)

1620s, from Middle French rectangulaire (16c.) or formed in English from Latin stem of rectangle +
-ar. Related: Rectangularity.


rectification (n.)

c.1400, from Old French rectificacion (14c.) or directly from Late Latin rectificationem (nominative
rectificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of rectificare (see rectify).


rectifier (n.)

1610s, agent noun from rectify.


rectify (v.)

c.1400, from Old French rectifier, literally to make straight (14c.), from Late Latin rectificare
make right, from Latin rectus straight (see right (adj.1)) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Related: Rectified; rectifying.


rectilinear (adj.)

forming a straight line, 1650s, with -ar + rectiline (1560s), from Late Latin rectilineus, from
rectus straight (see right (adj.1)) + linea line (see line (n.)). Related: Rectilineal (1640s).


rectitude (n.)

early 15c., quality of being straight, from Middle French rectitude (14c.), from Late Latin
rectitudinem (nominative rectitudo) straightness, uprightness, from Latin rectus straight (see right
(adj.1)). Sense of upright in conduct or character is from 1530s.


recto (n.)

right-hand page in an open book (opposed to verso or reverso), 1824, from Latin recto (in recto
folio), ablative of rectum right, (see right (adj.1)).


recto-

word-forming element meaning pertaining to or involving the rectum, before vowels rect-, from comb.
form of rectum.


rector (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Latin rector ruler, governor, director, guide, from
rect-, past participle stem of regere to rule, guide (see regal). Used originally of Roman governors
and God, by 18c. generally restricted to clergymen and college heads. Related: Rectorship.


rectory (n.)

mid-15c., from French rectorie (14c.) or Medieval Latin rectoria, from rector (see rector).
Originally benefice held by a rector; of his residence, from 1849.


rectum (n.)

early 15c., from Latin intestinum rectum straight intestine, in contrast to the convolution of the
rest of the bowels, from neuter past participle of regere to straighten (see regal). A loan-
translation of Greek apeuthysmeon enteron, the name given to the lowest part of the large intestine
by Galen, who so called it because he dissected only animals whose rectum (in contradistinction to
that of man) is really straight [Klein].


recumbent (adj.)

1705, from Latin recumbentem (nominative recumbens), present participle of recumbere recline, lie
down, lie down again; of things, to fall, sink down, settle down, from re- back (see re-) + -cumbere
to lie down (see succumb). Related: Recumbency (1640s). A verb, recumb, has been attempted in
English occasionally since 1670s.


recuperate (v.)

1540s, from Latin recuperatus, past participle of recuperare to get again, in Medieval Latin revive,
convalesce, recover (see recuperation). Meaning to recover from sickness or loss is from 1864.
Related: Recuperated; recuperating.


recuperation (n.)

late 15c., recovery or regaining of things, from Latin recuperationem (nominative recuperatio) a
getting back, regaining, recovery, noun of action from past participle stem of recuperare get back,
regain, get again, in Medieval Latin revive, convalesce, recover, related to recipere (see receive).
Meaning restoration to health or vigor is from 1865.


recur (v.)

late 14c., recover from illness or suffering; mid-15c., to return (to a place), from Latin recurrere
to return, run back, hasten back, figuratively revert, recur, from re- back, again (see re-) +
currere to run (see current (adj.)). Originally of persons; application to thoughts, ideas, etc. is
recorded from 1620s. Meaning happen again is from 1670s. Related: Recurred; recurring.


recurrence (n.)

1640s, from recurrent + -ence. Related: Recurrency (1610s).


recurrent (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French recurrent (16c.) and directly from Latin recurrentem (nominative
recurrens), present participle of recurrere run back, hasten back, return (see recur). From 1590s as
a noun (recurrent muscle).


recurring (adj.)

1711, present participle adjective from recur.


recursion (n.)

1610s, from Latin recursionem (nominative recursio) a running backward, return, noun of action from
past participle stem of recurrere run back (see recur).


recursive (adj.)

1790, periodically recurring, from Latin recurs-, stem of recurrere (see recur) + -ive. Mathematical
sense is from 1934. Related: Recursively; recursiveness.


recusal (n.)

1911; from recuse + -al (2). Earlier were recusancy (1560s), recusance (1590s).


recusant (adj.)

obstinate in refusal, 1550s, from Latin recusantem (nominative recusans) refusing to obey, present
participle of recusare make an objection against; decline, refuse, reject; be reluctant to (see
recuse). The noun meaning one obstinate in refusing is from 1610s.


recuse (v.)

late 14c., to reject another's authority as prejudiced, from Old French recuser (13c.), from Latin
recusare make an objection against; decline, refuse, reject; be reluctant to, from re- (see re-) +
causa (see cause (n.)). Specifically, in law, reject or challenge (a judge or juror) as disqualified
to act. The word now is used mostly reflectively. Related: Recused; recusing.


recyclable (adj.)

1971, from recycle + -able. As a noun, by 1973. Related: Recyclables.


recycle (v.)

1922, originally of industrial processes; see re- + cycle (v.). Specifically of waste material from
1960. Related: Recycled; recycling.


recycling (n.)

1924, verbal noun from recycle (v.). Originally a technical term in oil-refining and similar
industries; its broader consumer sense dates from 1960.


red (adj.1)

Old English read red, from Proto-Germanic *rauthaz (cognates: Old Norse rau&eth;r, Danish
r&oslash;d, Old Saxon rod, Old Frisian rad, Middle Dutch root, Dutch rood, German rot, Gothic
rau&thorn;s). As a noun from mid-13c.    The Germanic words are from PIE root *reudh- red, ruddy
(cognates: Latin ruber, also dialectal rufus light red, mostly of hair; Greek erythros; Sanskrit
rudhira-; Avestan raoidita-; Old Church Slavonic rudru, Polish rumiany, Russian rumjanyj flushed,
red, of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas; Old Irish ruad, Welsh rhudd, Breton ruz red). The only
color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is
because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r-.    Along with dead, bread (n.), lead (n.1),
the vowel shortened in Middle English. The surname Read/Reid retains the original Old English long
vowel pronunciation and is the corresponding surname to Brown-, Black, White.    The color
designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s. The color as characteristic of British
possessions on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism,
from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag,
1852. The red flag was used as a symbol of defiance in battle on land or sea from c.1600. To see red
get angry is an American English expression first recorded 1898. Red rover, the children's game,
attested from 1891. Red light as a sign to stop is from 1849, long before traffic signals. As the
sign of a brothel, it is attested from 1899. As a children's game (in reference to the traffic light
meaning) it is recorded from 1953.   Red-letter day (late 14c.) was originally a saint's day, marked
on church calendars in red letters. Red ball signifying express in railroad jargon is 1904,
originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog, type of U.S. football pass
rush, is recorded from 1959. Red meat is from 1808. Red shift in spectography is first recorded
1923. Red carpet sumptuous welcome is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far
back as Aeschylus (Agamemnon); it also was the name of a type of English moth.


red (adj.2)

Bolshevik, 1917, from red (adj.1), the color they adopted for themselves. Association in Europe of
red with revolutionary politics (on notion of blood and violence) is from at least 1297, but got a
boost 1793 with adoption of the red Phrygian cap (French bonnet rouge) as symbol of the French
Revolution. First specific political reference in English was 1848 (adj.), in news reports of the
Second French Republic (a.k.a. Red Republic). Red China is from 1934. The noun meaning radical,
communist is from 1851.


red cent (n.)

obsolete type of copper penny, 1839, American English, from red (adj.1) + cent. Red has been the
color of copper, brass, and gold since ancient times.


red cross (n.)

early 15c., national emblem of England (St. George's Cross), also the badge of the Order of the
Temple. Hence red-cross knight, one bearing such a marking on shield or crest. In 17c., a red cross
was the mark placed on the doors of London houses inflected with the plague. Red Cross (in Muslim
lands, red crescent) adopted as a symbol of ambulance service 1864 by the Geneva Conference.


red herring (n.)

smoked herring early 15c. (they turn red when cured), as opposed to white herring fresh herring.
Supposedly used by fugitives to put bloodhounds off their scent (1680s), hence metaphoric sense
(1864) of something used to divert attention from the basic issue; earlier simply a false lead:
Though I have not the honour of being one of those sagacious country gentlemen, who have so long
vociferated for the American war, who have so long run on the red-herring scent of American taxation
before they found out there was no game on foot; (etc.) [Parliamentary speech dated March 20, 1782,
reprinted in Beauties of the British Senate, London, 1786]


red ink (n.)

financial losses, 1929, from the red ink traditionally used to indicate debits in accounts.


Red Sea (n.)

the Greek thalassa erythra; the reason for the name is unknown; speculation has traced it to: 1.
algae in coastal waters; 2. sandstone rock formations on the shores; 3. a tribal name; 4. ancient
association of red with south (as black with north).


red tape (n.)

excessive bureaucratic rigmarole, 1736, in reference to the red tape formerly used in Great Britain
(and the American colonies) for binding up legal and other official documents, mentioned from 1690s.


red-blooded (adj.)

having red blood, 1802, from red (adj.1) + blood (n.). Figurative meaning vigorous, spirited is
recorded from 1877.


red-eye (n.)

airplane flight which deprives travelers of sleep, 1968, from the red eyes of sleeplessness; earlier
as a noun meaning raw and inferior whiskey (1819, American English).


red-handed (adj.)

1781, earlier red-hand (early 15c.), originally in Scottish legal writing, from red (adj.1) + hand
(n.), presumably from the image of a murderer caught in the act, with blood-stained hands.


red-hot (adj.)

late 14c., heated till it glows red (of metal, etc.); of persons, lively, passionate, it is recorded
from c.1600. Red-hot mama is 1926, jazz slang, earthy female singer, also girlfriend, lover.


red-streak (n.)

type of apple prized for cider-making, 1660s, from red (adj.1) + streak (n.).


redact (v.)

early 15c., bring into organized form, from Latin redactus, past participle of redigere to drive
back, force back; bring back; collect, call in; bring down, reduce, from re- back, again (see re-) +
agere to drive (see act (n.)). Specific meaning arrange, edit is from 1851.


redaction (n.)

editing for publication, 1785, from French r&#233;daction a compiling; a working over, editing;
editorial staff (late 17c.), from Late Latin redact-, past participle stem of redigere (see redact).
Meaning a redacted version is from 1810. Earlier it meant a driving back (1620s).


redbird (n.)

mid-13c., a name for sundry red or partly red birds, including the common bullfinch and the scarlet
tanager, but in U.S. especially the cardinal, from red (adj.1) + bird (n.).


redbreast (n.)

early 15c., of the English robin, from red (adj.1) + breast (n.). Later of the American bird.


redcap (n.)

porter at a railroad station, 1914, American English, from red (adj.1) + cap (n.). Earlier it was
the name of the goldfinch, a type of hen, and a long-toothed spectre in Scottish castles.


redcoat (n.)

British soldier, 1510s, from red (adj.1) + coat (n.). In Britain, especially of Cromwellian troops
in the English Civil War; in the U.S., of British soldiers in the American Revolution.


redd (v.)

early 15c., to clear (a space, etc.), from Old English hreddan to save, free from, deliver, recover,
rescue, from Proto-Germanic *hradjan. Sense evolution tended to merge with unrelated rid. Also
possibly influenced by Old English r&aelig;dan to arrange, related to Old English ger&aelig;de,
source of ready (adj.).    A dialect word in Scotland and northern England, where it has had senses
of to fix (boundaries), to comb (hair), to separate (combatants), to settle (a quarrel). The
exception to the limited use is the meaning to put in order, to make neat or trim (1718), especially
in redd up, which is in general use in England and the U.S. Use of the same phrase, in the same
sense, in Pennsylvania Dutch may be from cognate Low German and Dutch redden, obviously connected
historically to the English word, but the origin and relationship of the forms is not clear [OED].


redden (v.)

become red; make red, late 14c., from red (adj.1) + -en (1). Old English had readian, reodian become
red. Related: Reddened; reddening.


redder (n.)

one who sets or puts in order, especially one who tries to settle a quarrel, mid-15c., Scottish,
agent noun from redd (v.).


reddish (adj.)

late 14c., from red (adj.1) + -ish. Related: Reddishness.


rede (n.)

counsel, advice, Old English r&aelig;d advice, counsel; see read (v.). Cognate with Old Saxon rad
advice, counsel, help, advantage, Dutch raad advice, counsel, German Rat advice, counsel, Old Norse
ra&#240; advice, consideration, remedy, power; marriage.


redeem (v.)

early 15c., buy back, ransom, from Middle French redemer buy back, from Latin redimere (see
redemption). Theological sense of deliver from sin and spiritual death is from c.1500. Meaning make
amends for is from 1520s. Sense of make good (a promise, obligation, etc.) is from 1840. Related:
Redeemed; redeeming.


redeemable (adj.)

1610s, from redeem + -able.


redeemer (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from redeem. Originally in the Christian sense, Savior of the world, Jesus
Christ; it replaced earlier redemptor.


redefine (v.)

1848, from re- + define. Related: Redefined; redefining; redefinition.


redemption (n.)

mid-14c., deliverance from sin, from Old French redemcion (12c.) and directly from Latin
redemptionem (nominative redemptio) a buying back, releasing, ransoming (also bribery), noun of
action from past participle stem of redimere to redeem, buy back, from red- back (see re-) + emere
to take, buy, gain, procure (see exempt). The -d- is from the Old Latin habit of using red- as the
form of re- before vowels. In the Mercian hymns, Latin redemptionem is glossed by Old English
alesnisse.


redemptioner (n.)

indentured servant, 1775, from redemption + -er (1).    REDEMPTIONER. One who redeems himself or
purchases his release from debt or obligation to the master of a ship by his services; or one whose
services are sold to pay the expenses of his passage to America. [Webster, 1830]


redemptive (adj.)

1640s, from redempt (mid-15c.), adjective from Latin redemptus, past participle of redimere (see
redemption) + -ive. Related: Redemptively.


Redemptorist (n.)

member of the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer (founded Naples, 1732, by St. Alphonsus
Liguori), 1835 in English. Fem. form is Redemptoristine.


redeploy (v.)

1945, in reference to U.S. troops shifting from Europe to Asia after the fall of Berlin, from re- +
deploy. Related: Redeployed; redeploying.


redeployment (n.)

1945, from re- + deployment.


redesign (v.)

1843, from re- + design (n.). Related: Redesigned; redesigning.


redesign (n.)

1881, probably from redesign (v.).


redevelopment (n.)

also re-development, 1830, from re- + development.


redfish (n.)

15c., of various species, especially originally the male salmon in spawning season; from red (adj.1)
+ fish (n.).


redhead (n.)

mid-13c., from red (adj.1) + head (n.). Red (adj.), of persons, having red hair is from late Old
English.The Carrot pate be sure you hate, for she'l be true to no man,  But put her too 't and she
will do 't, and oft turns very common:  She that is red upon the head will doubtless ne'r forsake
it,  But wanton be, assuredly, and willingly will take it.  [The True Lover's Admonition, Roxburghe
Ballads, c.1680]


redial (v.)

also re-dial, 1961, from re- + dial (v.). Related: Redialed; redialing.


redingote (n.)

double-breasted outer coat with long plain skirts, also a similar garment for women, 1793, from
French redingote (1725) from English riding coat (c.1500).


redirect (v.)

1805 (implied in redirected), from re- back, again + direct (v.). Related: Redirecting.


rediscover (v.)

1752, from re- + discover (v.). Related: Rediscovered; rediscovering.


rediscovery (n.)

1747, from re- + discovery.


redistribute (v.)

1610s, from re- back, again + distribute. Related: Redistributed; redistributing.


redistribution (n.)

1831, from French redistribution; see re- + distribution.


redistributive (adj.)

1860, from redistribute + -ive. Related: Redistributively.


redistrict (v.)

redraw the boundaries of districts, 1838, in U.S. political sense, from re- again + district.
Related: Redistricted; redistricting.


redivide (v.)

c.1600, from re- + divide (v.). Related: Redivided; redividing.


redline (v.)

also red-line, mark in red ink, 1820, from red (adj.1) + line (v.). Specific sense of deny loans to
certain neighborhoods based on ethnicity is from 1973, on notion of lines drawn on maps. Used
earlier in reference to insurance company practices (1961) and in World War II military slang in
reference to a red line drawn through a soldier's name for some infraction, thus denying his pay.
Related: Redlined; redlining.


redneck (n.)

cracker, attested 1830 in a specialized sense (This may be ascribed to the Red Necks, a name
bestowed upon the Presbyterians in Fayetteville -- Ann Royall, Southern Tour I, p.148), from red
(adj.1) + neck (n.). According to various theories, red perhaps from anger, or from pellagra, but
most likely from mule farmers' outdoors labor in the sun, wearing a shirt and straw hat, with the
neck exposed. Compare redshanks, old derogatory name for Scots Highlanders and Celtic Irish (1540s),
from their going bare-legged.    It turns up again in an American context in 1904, again from
Fayetteville, in a list of dialect words, meaning this time an uncouth countryman [Dialect Notes,
American Dialect Society, Vol. II, Part VI, 1904], but seems not to have been in widespread use in
the U.S. before c.1915. In the meantime, it was used from c.1894 in South Africa (translating Dutch
Roinek) as an insulting Boer name for an Englishman.    Another common Boer name for an Englishman
is redneck, drawn from the fact that the back of an Englishman's neck is often burnt red by the sun.
This does not happen to the Boer, who always wears a broad-brimmed hat. [James Bryce, Impressions of
South Africa, London, 1899]


redness (n.)

Old English readnes; see from red (adj.1) + -ness.


redo (v.)

also re-do, 1590s, from re- back, again + do (v.). Related: Redone; redoing.


redolence (n.)

early 15c., from Old French redolence, related to redolent (see redolent).


redolent (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French redolent emitting an odor and directly from Latin redolentem (moninative
redolens), present participle of redolere emit a scent, diffuse odor, from red-, intensive prefix
(see re-), + olere give off a smell (see odor).


redouble (v.)

mid-15c., double again, multiply (trans.), from Middle French redoubler, from Old French re- again
(see re-) + doubler to double (see double (v.)). Meaning become twice as much (intrans.) is from
late 15c. Related: Redoubled; redoubling.


redoubt (n.)

also redout, small, enclosed military work, c.1600, from French redoute (17c.), from Italian
ridotto, earlier ridotta, place of retreat, from Medieval Latin reductus place of refuge, retreat,
noun use of past participle of reducere to lead or bring back (see reduce). The -b- was added by
influence of unrelated English redoubt (v.) to dread, fear (see redoubtable). As an adjective, Latin
reductus meant withdrawn, retired; remote, distant.


redoubtable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French redoutable (12c.), from redouter to dread, from re-, intensive prefix, +
douter be afraid of (see doubt (v.)).


redound (v.)

late 14c., to overflow, from Old French redonder overflow, abound, be in profusion (12c.), from
Latin redundare to overflow (see redundant). Meaning to flow or go back (to a place or person) is
from late 14c.; hence to rebound (c.1500), and to contribute to (the credit, honor, etc.), early
15c. Related: Redounded; redounding.


redox (n.)

1928, from red(uction) + ox(idation).


redress (v.)

mid-14c., to correct, reform; late 14c., restore, put right (a wrong, error, offense); repair;
relieve; improve; amend, from Old French redrecier reform, restore, rebuild (Modern French
redresser), from re- again (see re-) + drecier to straighten, arrange (see dress (v.)). Formerly
used in many more senses than currently. Related: Redressed; redressing.


redressal (n.)

a setting right again, 1800, from redress + -al (2). An earlier noun was simply redress reparation,
compensation, adjustment (late 14c.), from Anglo-French redresce, Old French redrece, redresse


redshirt (v.)

to withdraw (a player) from the varsity team to add a year to his or her eligibility, 1955, in
reference to the red shirts worn by athletes on the scrimmage squad; from red (adj.1) + shirt (n.).


redskin (n.)

American Indian, 1690s, from red (adj.1) + skin (n.). Red as the skin color of Native Americans is
from 1580s; red man is from 1580s. Also see red cent.


redstart (n.)

type of bird, 1560s, from red (adj.1) + start tail, from Old English  steort. Similar formation in
German Rotsterz.


redtail (n.)

1812 in reference to a type of North American hawk; earlier used of various smaller European birds
with red tail feathers (1550s); from red (adj.1) + tail (n.).


reduce (v.)

late 14c., bring back, from Old French reducer (14c.), from Latin reducere lead back, bring back,
figuratively restore, replace, from re- back (see re-) + ducere bring, lead (see duke (n.)). Meaning
bring to an inferior condition is 1570s; that of bring to a lower rank is 1640s (military reduce to
ranks is from 1802); that of subdue by force of arms is 1610s. Sense of to lower, diminish, lessen
is from 1787. Related: Reduced; reducing.


reducible (adj.)

mid-15c.; see reduce + -ible. Compare Old French redusible.


reductio ad absurdum

Latin, literally reduction to the absurd. Absurdum is neuter of absurdus. See reduction + absurd.
The tactic is useful and unobjectionable in proofs in geometry.


reduction (n.)

early 15c., a restoring to a former state; a subjugation (of a people, etc.), from Middle French
reducion (13c., Modern French r&eacute;duction) and directly from Latin reductionem (nominative
reductio) a leading back, restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of reducere (see
reduce). Meaning diminution, a lessening is from 1670s; chemical sense of reversion to a simpler
form is from 1660s.


reductionism (n.)

1948, in philosophy, from reduction in specialized sense in philosophy (1914) + -ism. Related:
Reductionist.


reductionist (n.)

1861 and after in various senses, from reduction + -ist. Philosophical sense, related to
reductionism is from 1934.


reductive (adj.)

1630s, that reduces; 1650s, that leads or brings back, from Medieval Latin reductivus, from reduct-,
past participle stem of Latin reducere (see reduce). Related: Reductively.


redundance (n.)

1610s, from Latin redundantia an overflowing, superfluity, excess, from redundare (see redundant).


redundancy (n.)

c.1600; see redundant + -ancy. Sense in employment is from 1931, chiefly British.


redundant (adj.)

1590s, from Latin redundantem (nominative redundans), present participle of redundare, literally
overflow, pour over; be over-full; figuratively be in excess, from re- again (see re-) + undare rise
in waves, from unda a wave (see water (n.1)). Of persons, in employment situations, from 1928,
chiefly British. Related: Redundantly.


reduplicate (v.)

1560s, from Medieval Latin reduplicatus, past participle of reduplicare to redouble, from re- back,
again (see re-) + Latin duplicare to double (see duplicate (adj.)). Related: Reduplicated;
reduplicating; reduplicative.


reduplication (n.)

1580s, from French r&#233;duplication (16c.), from Late Latin reduplicationem (nominative
reduplicatio), noun of action from past participle stem of reduplicare (see reduplicate).


redux (adj.)

restored, brought back, Latin, from reducere (see reduce). In book titles at least since 1662
(Dryden, Astraea Redux, written on the restoration of Charles II).


redware (n.)

also red ware, type of pottery, 1690s, from red (adj.1) + ware (n.).


redwood (n.)

1610s, wood that has a red hue, from red (adj.1) + wood (n.). Of various types of New World trees
that yield such wood, from 1716; specifically of the California Sequoia sempervirens from 1819. In
Scottish English 16c.-18c. the same word as an adjective meant completely deranged, raving, stark
mad, from wood (adj.).


reebok (n.)

South African antelope, 1775, from Dutch form of roebuck.


reed (n.)

tall, broad-leafed grass growing in wet places, Old English hreod reed, rush, from Proto-Germanic
*kreut- reed (cognates: Old Saxon hraid, Old Frisian hriad, Middle Dutch ried, Dutch riet, Old High
German hriot, German Ried), with no known cognates beyond Germanic.    Meaning musical pipe made
from a reed stem is from late 14c. (reed-pipe is from c.1300). As part of the mouthpiece of a
musical instrument it is attested from 1520s. Meaning a reed instrument is from 1838.


reedy (adj.)

late 14c., full of reeds, from reed + -y (2), or from Old English hreodig. Of tones, from 1811 in
reference to musical reeds. Related: Reediness.


reef (n.1)

rock ridge underwater, 1580s, riffe, probably via Dutch riffe, from a Scandinavian source such as
Old Norse rif ridge in the sea; reef in a sail, literally rib (see rib (n.)).


reef (n.2)

horizontal section of sail, late 14c. (mid-14c. in rif-rope), from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse rif reef of a sail, probably a transferred use of rif ridge under the sea; rib (see rib (n.)
and compare reef (n.1)). German reff, Swedish ref, Norwegian riv, Danish reb likely all are from the
Old Norse word.


reef (v.)

1660s, take in, roll up (as a sail on a ship), from reef (n.2). Related: Reefed; reefing.


reefer (n.)

marijuana cigarette, 1920s, perhaps an alteration of Mexican Spanish grifo marijuana, drug addict
[OED]; or perhaps from reef (v.), on resemblance to a rolled sail. It also meant pickpocket in
criminal slang (1935). Reefer also was a nickname for midshipman (1818) because they attend in the
tops during the operation of reefing [Century Dictionary], which is the source of the meaning coat
of a nautical cut (1878) worn by sailors and fishermen but copied for general use in the fashions of
1888-90 [CD].


reek (n.)

Old English rec (Anglian), riec (West Saxon), smoke from burning material, probably from a
Scandinavian source such as Old Norse reykr, Danish r&#511;g, Swedish r&#246;k smoke, steam,  from
Proto-Germanic *raukiz (cognates: Old Frisian rek, Middle Dutch rooc, Old High German rouh, German
Rauch smoke, steam), from PIE *reug- to vomit, belch; also smoke, cloud. Sense of stench is attested
1650s, via the notion of that which rises (compare reek (v.)).


reek (v.)

Old English recan (Anglian), reocan (West Saxon) emit smoke, from Proto-Germanic *reukan (cognates:
Old Frisian reka smoke, Middle Dutch roken, Dutch rieken to smoke, Old High German riohhan to smoke,
steam, German rauchen to smoke, riechen to smell).    Originally a strong verb, with past tense
reac, past participle gereocen, but occasionally showing weak conjugation in Old English. Meaning to
emit smoke; meaning to emit a bad smell is recorded from 1710 via sense be heated and perspiring
(early 15c.). Related: Reeked; reeking.


reeky (adj.)

c.1400, giving out offensive vapors, from reek (n.) + -y (2). Meaning smoky is c.1600. Related:
Reekily; reekiness.


reel (n.1)

frame turning on an axis, especially one on which thread is wound, late Old English hreol reel for
winding thread, from Proto-Germanic *hrehulaz; probably related to hr&aelig;gel garment, and Old
Norse hr&aelig;ll spindle, from PIE *krek- to weave, beat (cognates: Greek krokus nap of cloth).
Specifically of the fishing rod attachment from 1726; of a film projector apparatus from 1896. Reel-
to-reel type of tape deck is attested from 1958.


reel (n.2)

lively Highland dance, 1580s, probably a special use of reel (n.1), which had a secondary sense of a
whirl, whirling movement (1570s) or from reel (v.1). Applied to the music for such a dance from
1590s.


reel (v.1)

to whirl around, late 14c., also sway, swing, rock, become unsteady (late 14c.), stagger as a result
of a blow, etc. (c.1400), probably from reel (n.1), on notion of spinning. Of the mind, from 1796.
Related: Reeled; reeling.


reel (v.2)

to wind on a reel, late 14c., from reel (n.1). Verbal phrase reel off recite without pause or effort
is from 1837. Fishing sense is from 1849. Related: Reeled; reeling.


reem (n.)

Hebrew name of an animal in the Old Testament (Job xxxix:9, etc.), now identified with the wild ox,
but formerly translated in Latin as rhinoceros and in English as unicorn.


reet (adj.)

good, proper, excellent, 1934, jazz slang, from American English dialectal pronunciation of right
(adj.).


reeve (n.)

steward, Old English gerefa king's officer, of unknown origin and with no known cognates. Not
connected to German Graf (see margrave). An Anglo-Saxon official of high rank, having local
jurisdiction under a king. Compare sheriff.


ref

1899 (n.), 1929 (v.); short for referee. Related: Reffed; reffing.


refashion (v.)

1788 (implied in refashioned), from re- + fashion (v.). Related: Refashioning.


refectory (n.)

dining hall, especially one in a monastery, early 15c., from Medieval Latin refectorium, from past
participle stem of reficere to remake, restore, from re- (see re-) + facere (see factitious).


refer (v.)

late 14c., to trace back (to a first cause), attribute, assign, from Old French referer (14c.) and
directly from Latin referre to relate, refer, literally to carry back, from re- back (see re-) +
ferre carry (see infer). Meaning to commit to some authority for a decision is from mid-15c.; sense
of to direct (someone) to a book, etc. is from c.1600. Related: Referred; referring.


referee (n.)

1620s, person who examines patent applications (see refer). Sporting use recorded by 1820
(specifically of baseball from 1856).


referee (v.)

1883, originally colloquial, from referee (n.). Related: Refereed; refereeing.


reference (n.)

1580s, act of referring, from refer + -ance, or else from French r&#233;f&#233;rence, from Medieval
Latin *referentia, from Latin referentem (nominative referens), present participle of referre (see
refer). Meaning direction to a book or passage is recorded from 1610s. Meaning testimonial is from
1895. Reference book dates from 1808. Phrase in reference to is attested from 1590s.


reference (v.)

1620s, to assign; as to provide with a reference, 1837 (implied in referenced), from reference (n.).
Related: Referencing.


referendum (n.)

1847, a submitting of a question to the voters as a whole (originally chiefly in reference to
Switzerland), from French or German, from Latin referendum that which must be referred, literally
thing brought back, neuter gerundive of referre to bring or take back (see refer). As a gerundive,
it has no plural in Latin; referendums is preferred in English.


referent (adj.)

1838, from Latin referentem (nominative referens), present participle of referre (see refer). As a
noun from 1844.


referential (adj.)

1650s, from reference (n.) on model of inferential, etc. Related: Referentially.


referral (n.)

1920, act of referring, from refer + -al (2). Especially to an expert or specialist (a sense
attested from 1955). Earlier word was referment (1550s).


refill (v.)

1680s, from re- back, again + fill (v.). Related: Refilled; refilling.


refill (n.)

1884, from refill (v.). Meaning a second drink is from 1929.


refinance (v.)

1901, from re- again + finance (v.). Related: Refinanced; refinancing.


refine (v.)

1580s, of metals, c.1590 of manners, from re-, intensive prefix, + obsolete fine (v.) make fine,
from fine (adj.) delicate. Compare French raffiner, Italian raffinare, Spanish refinar. General and
figurative sense is recorded from 1590s; of sugar, from 1610s. Related: Refined; refining.


refined (adj.)

1570s, subtle; 1580s, elegant; 1590s, purified, past participle adjective from refine (v.).


refinement (n.)

1610s, act or process of refining; state of being pure, from refine + -ment. Meaning fineness of
feeling is from 1708.


refinery (n.)

1727, from refine + -ery. Originally in metallurgy and sugar-making; of petroleum by 1865.


refit (v.)

1660s, from re- again + fit (v.). Originally nautical. Related: Refitted; refitting.


reflect (v.)

late 14c., turn or bend back; early 15c., to divert, to turn aside, deflect, from Old French
reflecter (14c.), from Latin reflectere bend back, turn back (see reflection). Of mirrors or
polished surfaces, to shine back light rays or images, early 15c.; meaning to turn one's thoughts
back on is c.1600. Related: Reflected; reflecting.


reflection (n.)

late 14c., reflexion, in reference to surfaces throwing back light or heat, from Late Latin
reflexionem (nominative reflexio) a reflection, literally a bending back, noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin reflectere to bend back, bend backwards, turn away, from re- back (see re-)
+ flectere to bend (see flexible). Of the mind, from 1670s. Meaning remark made after turning back
one's thought on some subject is from 1640s. Spelling with -ct- recorded from late 14c., established
18c., by influence of the verb.


reflective (adj.)

1620s, from reflect + -ive. Related: Reflectively; reflectiveness.


reflectivity (n.)

1849, from reflective + -ity.


reflector (n.)

also reflecter, 1660s, agent noun in Latin form from reflect. As an attachment to a vehicle, etc.,
from 1909. As a type of telescope, 1767.


reflex (n.)

c.1500, reflection of light, from verb reflex meaning refract, deflect (late 14c.), from Late Latin
reflexus a bending back, noun use of past participle of reflectere (see reflection). Meaning
involuntary nerve stimulation first recorded 1877, from reflex action (1833).


reflexive (adj.)

1580s, reflective, capable of bending or turning back, from Medieval Latin reflexivus, from Late
Latin reflexus (see reflect). Meaning of the nature of a reflex is from 1839 (implied in
reflexively). Grammatical sense from 1837. Related: Reflexiveness; reflexivity.


reflexology (n.)

1927, as a psychological theory, from German reflexologie (1912); see reflex + -ology. As a foot
massage technique, first recorded 1976.


reflux (n.)

early 15c., a flowing back (of the sea, etc.), from Medieval Latin refluxus, from Latin re- back,
again (see re-) + fluxus a flowing (see flux). Digestive sense is recorded from 1937.


refocus (v.)

1858, from re- + focus (v.). Related: Refocused; refocusing.


reforest (v.)

to restore to a wooded condition, 1831, from re- back, again + verb use of forest (n.). Related:
Reforested; reforesting.


reform (v.)

c.1300, to convert into another and better form, from Old French reformer rebuild, reconstruct,
recreate (12c.), from Latin reformare to form again, change, transform, alter, from re- again (see
re-) + formare to form (see form (n.)). Intransitive sense from 1580s.    Meaning to bring (a
person) away from an evil course of life is recorded from early 15c.; of governments, institutions,
etc., from early 15c. Related: Reformed; reforming. Reformed churches (1580s) usually are Calvinist
as opposed to Lutheran. Reformed Judaism (1843) is a movement initiated in Germany by Moses
Mendelssohn (1729-1786). Reform school is attested from 1859.


reform (n.)

any proceeding which brings back a better order of things, 1660s, from reform (v.) and in some uses
from French r&#233;forme. As a branch of Judaism from 1843.


reformable (adj.)

late 15c., from reform (v.) + -able.


reformation (n.)

improvement, alteration for the better, late 14c., restoration; mid-15c., improvement, from Old
French reformacion and directly from Latin reformationem (nominative reformatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of reformare (see reform (v.)). In reference to the European religious
movement, it is attested by 1540s, borrowed from Luther. The movement began as a bid to reform
doctrines and practices of the Church of Rome.


reformatory (adj.)

1704, from past participle stem of Latin reformare to transform, change (see reform (v.)). As a
noun, house of correction for juveniles, from 1758.


reformer (n.)

1540s, agent noun from reform (v.).


reformist (n.)

1580s, originally religious; from reform + -ist. Political sense is from 1640s. Related: Reformism.


reformulate (v.)

1882, from re- + formulate. Related: Reformulated; reformulating.


refract (v.)

to bend (light, sound, heat, etc.), 1610s, back-formation from refraction, and in part from Latin
refractus, past participle of refringere. Related: Refracted; refracting.


refraction (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin refractionem (nominative refractio) a breaking up, noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin refringere to break up, from re- back (see re-) + comb. form of frangere to
break (see fraction).


refractive (adj.)

1670s, from Late Latin refractivus, or from refract + -ive.


refractor (n.)

1769, as a type of telescope, agent noun from refract.


refractory (adj.)

stubborn, obstinate, perverse, 1610s (earlier refractorious, 1550s, refractary, c.1600), from Latin
refractarius obstinate, stubborn, from past participle stem of refringere (see refraction). Related:
Refractorily; refractoriness.


refrain (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French refraigner restrain, repress, keep in check (12c., Modern French
R&#233;fr&#233;ner), from Latin refrenare to bridle, hold in with a bit, check, curb, keep down,
control, from re- back (see re-) + frenare restrain, furnish with a bridle, from frenum a bridle.
Related: Refrained; refraining.


refrain (n.)

late 14c., from Old French refrain chorus (13c.), alteration of refrait, noun use of past participle
of refraindre repeat, also break off, from Vulgar Latin *refrangere break off, alteration of Latin
refringere break up, break open (see refraction) by influence of frangere to break. Influenced in
French by cognate Proven&ccedil;al refranhar singing of birds, refrain. The notion is of something
that causes a song to break off then resume. OED says not common before 19c.


reframe (v.)

1580s, from re- + frame (v.). Related: Reframed; reframing.


refrangible (adj.)

1670s, from stem of Vulgar Latin *refrangere, from re- back (see re-) + Latin frangere to break (see
fraction).


refresh (v.)

late 14c., from Old French refreschier refresh, renew (12c.; Modern French rafra&icirc;chir), from
re- again (see re-) + fresche fresh (Modern French frais), from a Germanic source (such as Old High
German frisc fresh, see fresh (adj.)). Related: Refreshed; refreshing.


refreshing (adj.)

1570s, present participle adjective from refresh (v.). Mental or spiritual sense is attested from
1690s. Related: Refreshingly.


refreshment (n.)

late 14c., act or fact of refreshing, originally mental and spiritual, from Old French refreschement
(Modern French rafra&icirc;chissement, from refreschier (see refresh). Refreshments, of food and
drink only, from 1660s.


refrigerant (adj.)

1590s, originally in medicine; from Latin refrigerans, present participle of refrigerare make cool
or cold (see refrigeration). As a noun from 1670s.


refrigerate (v.)

1530s, back-formation from refrigeration, or else from Latin refrigeratus, past participle of
refrigerare make cool or cold. Related: Refrigerated; refrigerating. Earlier words in the same sense
of to make cold, to cool were infrigiden, infrigidate (both early 15c.).


refrigeration (n.)

late 15c., act of cooling or freezing, from Latin refrigerationem (nominative refrigeratio) a
cooling, mitigation of heat, especially in sickness, noun of action from past participle stem of
refrigerare, from re- again (see re-) + frigerare make cool, from frigus (genitive frigoris) cold
(see frigid). Specifically freezing provisions as a means of preserving them from 1881.


refrigerator (n.)

1610s, something that cools, agent noun from refrigerate. As cabinet for keeping food cool, 1824,
originally in the brewery trade, in place of earlier refrigeratory (c.1600). The electric-powered
household device was available from c.1918.


refry (v.)

1957, in refried beans, which translates Spanish frijoles refritos. From re- + fry (v.).


reft

past participle of reave.


refuel (v.)

also re-fuel, 1811, from re- again + fuel (v.). Originally in a spiritual sense. Related: Refueled;
refuelling.


refuge (n.)

shelter or protection from danger or distress, late 14c., from Old French refuge hiding place
(12c.), from Latin refugium a taking refuge; place to flee back to, from re- back (see re-) + fugere
to flee (see fugitive) + -ium place for.


refugee (n.)

1680s, from French refugi&eacute;, noun use of past participle of refugier to take shelter, protect,
from Old French refuge (see refuge). First applied to French Huguenots who migrated after the
revocation (1685) of the Edict of Nantes. The word meant one seeking asylum, till 1914, when it
evolved to mean one fleeing home (first applied in this sense to civilians in Flanders heading west
to escape fighting in World War I). In Australian slang from World War II, reffo.


refulgence (n.)

1630s, from Latin refulgentia reflected luster, splendor, from refulgens (see refulgent). Related:
Refulgency (1610s).


refulgent (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French refulgent or directly from Latin refulgentem (nominative refulgens),
present participle of refulgere flash back, shine brilliantly, from re- back (see re-) + fulgere to
shine (see bleach (v.)).


refund (v.)

to give back, restore, early 15c. (earlier to pour back, late 14c.), from Old French refunder
restore and directly from Latin refundere give back, restore, return, literally pour back, flow
back, from re- back (see re-) + fundere to pour (see found (v.2)). Specifically of money from 1550s.
Related: Refunded; refunding.


refund (n.)

a return of money paid, 1782, from refund (v.).


refurbish (v.)

1610s, from re- again + furbish, on model of French refourbir. Related: Refurbished; refurbishing.


refusal (n.)

late 15c., from refuse + -al (2).


refuse (v.)

c.1300, from Old French refuser reject, disregard, avoid (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *refusare,
frequentative form from past participle stem of Latin refundere pour back, give back (see refund
(v.)). Related: Refused; refusing.


refuse (n.)

mid-14c., an outcast; mid-14c., a rejected thing, waste material, trash, from Old French refus waste
product, rubbish; refusal, denial, rejection, a back-formation from the past participle of refuser
(see refuse (v.)). As an adjective from late 14c., despised, rejected; early 15c., of low quality.


Refusenik (n.)

Soviet Jew who has been refused permission to emigrate to Israel, 1975, a partial translation of
Russian otkaznik, from otkazat to refuse; with English refuse (v.). Also see -nik.


refutation (n.)

1540s, from Middle French r&#233;futation (16c.) and directly from Latin refutationem (nominative
refutatio) disproof of a claim or argument, noun of action from past participle stem of refutare
(see refute).


refute (v.)

1510s, refuse, reject, from Middle French r&#233;futer (16c.) and directly from Latin refutare drive
back; rebut, disprove; repress, repel, resist, oppose, from re- back (see re-) + -futare to beat,
probably from PIE root *bhau- to strike down (see bat (n.1)).    Meaning prove wrong dates from
1540s. Since c.1964 linguists have frowned on the subtle shift in meaning towards to deny, as it is
used in connection with allegation. Related: Refuted; refuting.


reg (n.)

1952 as a shortening of regulation.


regain (v.)

1540s, from Middle French regaigner (Modern French regagner), from re- again (see re-) + gaginer,
from Old French gaaignier (see gain (v.)). Related: Regained; regaining.


regal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French regal royal (12c.) or directly from Latin regalis royal, kingly; of or
belonging to a king, worthy of a king, from rex (genitive regis) king, from PIE root *reg- move in a
straight line, hence, direct in a straight line, rule, guide (cognates: Sanskrit raj- a king, a
leader; Avestan razeyeiti directs; Persian rahst right, correct; Latin regere to rule, rex a king, a
leader, rectus right, correct; Old Irish ri, Gaelic righ a king; Gaulish -rix a king, in personal
names, such as Vircingetorix; Gothic reiks a leader; Old English rice kingdom, -ric king, rice rich,
powerful, riht correct; Gothic raihts, Old High German recht, Old Swedish reht, Old Norse rettr
correct). Related: Regally.


regale (v.)

entertain splendidly, 1650s, from French r&eacute;galer to entertain or feast, from Old French
regale, rigale, from gale merriment, from galer make merry (see gallant (adj.)). Influenced in Old
French by se rigoler amuse oneself, rejoice, of unknown origin. Italian regalo is from French.
Related: Regaled; regaling.


regalia (n.)

1530s, rights and powers of a king, royal privilege, from Latin regalia royal things, noun use of
neuter plural of regalis (see regal). Meaning decorations or insignia of an order first recorded
1670s.


regard (n.)

mid-14c., a consideration; a judgment, from Old French regard, from regarder take notice of, from
re-, intensive prefix + garder look, heed, from Germanic (see guard (n.)). Meanings a look,
appearance; respect, esteem, favor, kindly feeling which springs from a consideration of estimable
qualities all recorded late 14c. Phrase in regard to is from mid-15c. (Chaucer uses at regard of).


regard (v.)

mid-14c., consider (that something is so), from Middle French regarder to look at, from regard (see
regard (n.)). Meaning look upon, observe is from 1520s, as is that of observe a certain respect
toward. Related: Regarded; regarding.


regardless (adj.)

indifferent, 1590s, from regard (n.) + -less. Elliptical for regardless of consequences, expenses,
etc., from 1872.


regards (n.)

plural of regard (n.). In letters, from 1775, from regard in the sense of esteem, affection (late
14c.).


regatta (n.)

1650s, name of a boat race among gondoliers held on the Grand Canal in Venice, from Italian
(Venetian dialect) regatta, literally contention for mastery, from rigattare to compete, haggle,
sell at retail. [Klein's sources, however, suggest a source in Italian riga row, rank, from a
Germanic source and related to English row (v.).] The general meaning of boat race, yacht race is
usually considered to have begun with a race on the Thames by that name June 23, 1775 (see OED), but
there is evidence that it was used as early as 1768.


regency (n.)

early 15c., government by regents, from Medieval Latin regentia, from Latin regens (see regent).
Notable instances were: France 1715-1723 (under Philip, Duke of Orleans), Britain 1811-1820 (under
George, Prince of Wales, Prince Regent), in each case with suggestion of debauchery [Weekley]. In
reference to the style of that time, attested from 1880 (there is an unexplained use in Jane Austen
from 1793). Compare French equivalent R&eacute;gence, attested in English from 1919. U.S. Albany
Regency refers to dominant political faction in New York state c.1820-1850.


regeneracy (n.)

1620s; see regenerate + -cy.


regenerate (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin regeneratus, past participle of regenerare bring forth again (see
regeneration).


regenerate (v.)

1550s, back-formation from regeneration or else from Latin regeneratus, past participle of
regenerare bring forth again (see regeneration). Originally religious; of body parts from 1590s.
Related: Regenerated; regenerating. Replaced earlier regeneren (c.1400), from Old French regenerer.


regeneration (n.)

mid-14c., from Late Latin regenerationem (nominative regeneratio) a being born again, noun of action
from past participle stem of Latin regenerare make over, generate again, from re- again (see re-) +
generare to produce (see generation). Originally spiritual; of animal tissue, early 15c.; of
forests, 1888.


regenerative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French regeneratif or directly from Medieval Latin regenerativus, from
regeneratus, past participle of regenerare bring forth again (see regeneration).


regent (n.)

one who rules during the minority or absence of a sovereign, c.1400, from the adjective (now
archaic, attested in English late 14c.), from Old French regent and directly from Medieval Latin
regentem (nominative regens), from Latin regens ruler, governor, noun use of present participle of
regere to rule, direct (see regal). Senses of university faculty member is attested from mid-15c.,
originally Scottish.


reggae (n.)

1968, Jamaican English (first in song title Do the Reggay by Toots &amp; the Maytals), perhaps [OED,
Barnhart] related to rege-rege a quarrel, protest, literally ragged clothes, variant of raga-raga,
alteration and reduplication of English rag (n.).


regicide (n.)

1540s, man who kills a king, formed from Latin rex (genitive regis) king (see regal) on model of
suicide. Meaning crime of killing a king is from c.1600.


regime (n.)

system of government or rule, 1792, from French r&eacute;gime, from Old French regimen (14c.), from
Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder, from regere (see regal).
Earlier course of diet, exercise, late 15c. In French, l'ancien r&eacute;gime refers to the system
of government before the revolution of 1789.


regimen (n.)

c.1400, medical, course of diet, exercise, etc. for sake of health; mid-15c., act of governing, from
Old French regimen (14c.), from Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder,
from regere to rule (see regal).


regiment (n.)

late 14c., government, rule, control, from Old French regiment government, rule (14c.), from Late
Latin regimentum rule, direction, from Latin regere to rule (see regal). Meaning unit of an army
first recorded 1570s (originally the reference was to permanent organization and discipline), from
French. The exact number in the unit varies over time and place.


regiment (v.)

to form into a regiment, 1610s, from regiment (n.). General sense of organize systematically is from
1690s. Related: Regimented; regimenting.


regimental (adj.)

1650s, from regiment (n.) + -al (1). As a noun, regimentals, dress proper to a particular regiment,
military uniform, is from 1742.


regimentation (n.)

1856, noun of action from regiment (v.).


Regina

fem. proper name, from Latin, literally queen; related to rex (genitive regis) king (see regal).
Cognate with Sanskrit rajni queen, Welsh rhyain maiden, virgin. The city in Canada was named 1882 by
the then-governor general of Canada, Marquess of Lorne, in honor of Queen Victoria.


Reginald

masc. proper name, from Old High German Reginald, literally ruling with power (see Reynard).


region (n.)

c.1300, tract of land of a considerable but indefinite extent, from Anglo-French regioun, Old French
region land, region, province (12c.), from Latin regionem (nominative regio) a district, portion of
a country, territory, district; a direction, line; boundary line, limit, noun of state from past
participle stem of regere to direct, rule (see regal). Phrase in the region of about (of numbers,
etc.) is recorded from 1961.


regional (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin regionalis of or belonging to a region or province, from stem of regio
(see region). Related: Regionally.


regionalism (n.)

1878, originally of Italy, tendency toward regional loyalties (opposed to nationalism), from
regional + -ism. As a word or phrase of local use is from 1953.


register (n.1)

late 14c., from Old French registre (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin registrum, alteration of
Late Latin regesta list, matters recorded, noun use of Latin regesta, neuter plural of regestus,
past participle of regerere to record; retort, literally to carry back, bring back from re- back
(see re-) + gerere carry, bear (see gest).    Also borrowed in Dutch, German, Swedish, Danish. Some
senses influenced by association with Latin regere to rule. Meaning in printing, exact alignment of
presswork is from 1680s. Musical sense is from 1811, compass or range of a voice or instrument,
hence series of tones of the same quality (produced by a voice or instrument). Sense device by which
data is automatically recorded is 1830, from the verb; hence Cash register (1875).


register (v.)

late 14c. (transitive), enter in a listing, from Old French registrer note down, include (13c.) and
directly from Medieval Latin registrare, from registrum (see register (n.)). Intransitive sense, of
instruments, from 1797; of persons and feelings, make an impression, from 1901. Meaning to enter
one's name in a list for some purpose is from 1940. Related: Registered; registering. Registered
nurse attested from 1879.


register (n.2)

assistant court officer in administrative or routine function, 1530s, now chiefly U.S., alteration
of registrar (q.v) due to influence of register.


registrant (n.)

1879; see register + -ant.


registrar (n.)

1670s, shortening of registrary (1540s), from Medieval Latin registrarius one who keeps a record
(related to register (n.)). Earlier were registerer (mid-15c.), registrer (late 14c.).


registration (n.)

1560s, from Middle French registration and directly from Medieval Latin registrationem (nominative
registratio) a registering, noun of action from past participle stem of registrare (see register
(v.)).


registry (n.)

late 15c., act of registering; see register + -y (4). Meaning book of record is from 1620s.


regnant (adj.)

reigning, exercising authority, c.1600, from Latin regnantem (nominative regnans) reigning, present
participle stem of regnare to reign (see reign). Adjective regnal (1610s) means pertaining to a
reign, especially in reference to the day or year a reign began.


regolith (n.)

1897, from Greek rhegos rug, blanket, from PIE *reg- (3) to dye (see raga) + lithos stone (see
litho-).


regress (n.)

late 14c., act of going back, from Latin regressus a return, retreat, a going back, noun use of past
participle of regredi to go back, from re- back (see re-) + gradi to step, walk (see grade (n.)).


regress (v.)

1550s, to return to a former state, from Latin regressus (see regress (n.)). Meaning to move
backward is from 1823. The psychological sense of to return to an earlier stage of life is attested
from 1926. Related: Regressed; regressing.


regression (n.)

early 15c., from Latin regressionem (nominative regressio) a going back, a return, noun of action
from past participle stem of regredi (see regress (n.)).


regressive (adj.)

1630s; see regress + -ive. In reference to taxation, it is attested from 1889. Related:
Regressively.


regret (v.)

to look back with distress or sorrowful longing; to grieve for on remembering, late 14c., from Old
French regreter long after, bewail, lament someone's death; ask the help of (Modern French
regretter), from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + -greter, possibly from Frankish or some other
Germanic source (compare Old English gr&aelig;tan to weep; Old Norse grata to weep, groan), from
Proto-Germanic *gretan weep. Not found in other Romance languages, and variously explained [Century
Dictionary].    Related: Regretted; regretting. Replaced Old English of&thorn;yncan, from of- off,
away, here denoting opposition, + &thorn;yncan seem, seem fit (as in methinks).


regret (n.)

pain or distress in the mind at something done or left undone, 1530s, from the verb, or from Middle
French regret, back-formation from regreter (see regret (v.)).


regretful (adj.)

1640s, full of regret, from regret + -ful. Regretfully, properly with regret, incorrectly used in
place of regrettably it is to be regretted that; calling for regret since at least 1965. A
regrettable use, prob. after HOPEFULLY adv.2 [OED].


regrettable (adj.)

c.1600, deserving of regret, from regret + -able. Related: Regrettably.


regroup (v.)

also re-group, 1838, from re- again + group (v.). Related: Regrouped; regrouping.


regrowth (n.)

1741, from re- + growth.


regular (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reguler ecclesiastical (Modern French r*#233;gulier), from Late Latin
regularis containing rules for guidance, from Latin regula rule, from PIE *reg- move in a straight
line (see regal).    Earliest sense was of religious orders (the opposite of secular). Extended from
late 16c. to shapes, etc., that followed predictable or uniform patterns; sense of normal is from
1630s; meaning real, genuine is from 1821. Old English borrowed Latin regula and nativized it as
regol rule, regulation, canon, law, standard, pattern; hence regolsticca ruler (instrument);
regollic (adj.) canonical, regular.


regular (n.)

c.1400, member of a religious order, from regular (adj.). Sense of soldier of a standing army is
from 1756. Meaning regular customer is from 1852; meaning leaded gasoline is from 1978.


regularity (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French regularite, from Medieval Latin *regularitas, from Latin regularis (see
regular (adj.)).


regularize (v.)

1620s, from regular (adj.) + -ize. Related: Regularized; regularizing.


regularly (adv.)

1520s, at proper times, from regular + -ly (2). Meaning in accordance with rules is from 1560s.


regulate (v.)

early 15c., adjust by rule, control, from Late Latin regulatus, past participle of regulare to
control by rule, direct, from Latin regula rule (see regular). Meaning to govern by restriction is
from 1620s. Related: Regulated; regulating.


regulation (n.)

1670s, act of regulating; state of being reduced to order, noun of action from regulate. Meaning
rule for management is from 1715. Related: Regulations.


regulator (n.)

1650s, agent noun in Latin form from regulate. In English history, from 1680s; in American history,
from 1767, applied to local posses that kept order (or disturbed it) in rural regions. As a
mechanical device or clock used to set the time of other pieces, from 1758.


Regulus (n.)

bright star in constellation Leo, 1550s, Modern Latin, apparently first so-called by Copernicus,
literally little king, diminutive of rex king; probably a translation of Basiliskos little king, a
Hellenistic Greek name for the star, mentioned in Geminos and Ptolemy (in the Almagest, though
elsewhere in his writings it is usually the star on the heart of Leo); perhaps a translation of
Lugal king, said to have been the star's Babylonian name. Klein holds it to be a corruption of
Arabic rijl (al-asad) paw of the lion (compare Rigel).


regurgitate (v.)

1640s (intransitive), 1753 (transitive), back formation from regurgitation, or else from Medieval
Latin regurgitatus, past participle of regurgitare. Meaning to vomit first attested 1753. Related:
Regurgitated; regurgitating.


regurgitation (n.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin regurgitationem (nominative regurgitatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of regurgitare to overflow, from re- back (see re-) + Late Latin gurgitare engulf,
flood (found in Latin ingurgitare to pour in), from gurges whirlpool, gorge, abyss (see gurges).


rehab

1948 as a shortening of rehabilitation (originally of service members returning from World War II).
As a verb in reference to houses, by 1975, short for rehabilitate. Related: Rehabbed; rehabbing.


rehabilitate (v.)

1570s, to bring back to a former condition after decay or damage, back-formation from rehabilitation
and in part from Medieval Latin rehabilitatus, past participle of rehabilitare. Meaning to restore
one's reputation or character in the eyes of others is from 1847. Related: Rehabilitated;
rehabilitating.


rehabilitation (n.)

1530s, from Middle French r&eacute;habilitation and directly from Medieval Latin rehabilitationem
(nominative rehabilitatio) restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of rehabilitare,
from re- again (see re-) + habitare make fit, from Latin habilis easily managed, fit (see able).
Specifically of criminals, addicts, etc., from 1940.


rehash (v.)

1822, from re- again + hash (v.). Related: Rehashed; rehashing.


rehash (n.)

1849, from rehash (v.); old material worked up anew, usually of literary productions.


rehearsal (n.)

late 14c., restatement, repetition of the words of another, from rehearse + -al (2), or from Old
French rehearsal a repeating. Sense in theater and music, act of rehearsing, is from 1570s. Pre-
wedding rehearsal dinner attested by 1953.


rehearse (v.)

c.1300, to give an account of, from Anglo-French rehearser, Old French rehercier (12c.) to go over
again, repeat, literally to rake over, turn over (soil, ground), from re- again (see re-) + hercier
to drag, trail (on the ground), be dragged along the ground; rake, harrow (land); rip, tear, wound;
repeat, rehearse; from herse a harrow (see hearse (n.)). Meaning to say over again, repeat what has
already been said or written is from mid-14c. in English; sense of practice a play, part, etc. is
from 1570s. Related: Rehearsed; rehearsing.


reheat (v.)

1727, from re- again + heat (v.). Related: Reheated; reheating.


Rehoboth

Hebrew Rehobhoth, literally wide places (Gen. xxvi:22).


rehouse (v.)

also re-house, 1820, from re- + house (v.). Related: Rehoused; rehousing.


rehydrate (v.)

1923, from re- + hydrate (v.). Related: Rehydrated; rehydrating.


rehydration (n.)

1853, from re- + hydration.


Reich (n.)

German, kingdom, realm, state, from Old High German rihhi, related to Old English rice, from Proto-
Germanic *rikja rule (cognates: Old Norse riki, Danish rige, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch rike,
Dutch rijk, Gothic reiki), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a straight line, hence, direct in a straight
line, rule, guide (see regal). Don Ringe, From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic [Oxford 2006]
identifies it as a Celtic loan-word in Germanic rather than a direct evolution from PIE, based on
the vowel. Used in English from 1871-1945 to refer to the German state, Germany. Most notoriously in
Third Reich (see third); there never was a First or Second in English usage.


Reichstag (n.)

German imperial parliament (1871-1918), earlier used of the chief deliberative body of the North
German Confederacy, 1867, from German Reichstag, from Reich (see Reich) + Tag assembly, literally
day (see day). The Reichstag Fire was Feb. 27, 1933.


reification (n.)

1846, act of materializing, from Latin re-, stem of res thing + -fication. In Marxist jargon,
translating German Verdinglichung.


reify (v.)

make into a thing; make real or material; consider as a thing, 1854, back-formation from
reification, or else from re-, stem of  Latin res thing, object, matter, affair, event,
circumstance, condition, from PIE *re- to bestow, endow + -fy. Related: Reified; reifying.


reign (n.)

early 13c., kingdom, from Old French reigne kingdom, land, country (Modern French r&#232;gne), from
Latin regnum kingship, dominion, rule, realm, related to regere (see regal). Meaning period of rule
first recorded mid-14c.


reign (v.)

to hold or exercise sovereign power, late 13c., from Old French regner rule, reign (12c.), from
Latin regnare have royal power, be king, rule, reign, from regnum (see reign (n.)). Related:
Reigned; reigning; regnal.


reimburse (v.)

1610s, from re- back + imburse to pay, enrich, literally put in a purse (c.1530), from Middle French
embourser, from Old French em- in + borser to get money, from borse purse, from Medieval Latin bursa
(see purse (n.)). Related: Reimbursed; reimbursing.


reimbursement (n.)

1610s, from reimburse + -ment.


reimprison (v.)

also re-imprison, 1610s, from re- + imprison. Related: Re-imprisoned; re-imprisoning.


Reims

city in northeastern France, named for the Remi, a Gaulish people whose name is said to mean
dominant ones. The former French spelling was with an Rh-.


rein (n.)

c.1300, strap fastened to a bridle, from Old French rene, resne reins, bridle strap, laces (Modern
French r&#234;ne), probably from Vulgar Latin *retina a bond, check, back-formation from Latin
retinere hold back (see retain). To give something free rein is originally of horses.


rein (v.)

c.1300, from rein (n.). Figurative extension put a check on first recorded 1580s. Related: Reined;
reining. To rein up halt (1550s) is from the way to make a horse stop by pulling up on the reins.


reincarnate (v.)

1858, from re- + incarnate. Related: Reincarnated; reincarnating. As an adjective from 1882.


reincarnation (n.)

1829, fact of repeated incarnation, from re- back, again + incarnation. Meaning a new embodiment is
from 1854.


reindeer (n.)

c.1400, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse hreindyri reindeer, from dyr animal (see deer)
+ hreinn, by itself the usual name for the animal, from Proto-Germanic *khrinda- (cognates: Old
English hran reindeer; German Renn reindeer, which was altered by folk etymology influence of rennen
to run; Swedish ren-ko female reindeer, with ko cow (n.)).    Probably from PIE *krei-, from base
*ker- (1) horn, head, with derivatives referring to horned animals (both male and female reindeer
have horns; those of the male are remarkable), and thus perhaps cognate with Greek krios ram (see
kerato-). Older sources connect it to words in Lapp or Finnish. French renne, Spanish reno, Italian
renna ultimately are from Germanic.


reinforce (v.)

c.1600, originally in military sense, from re- again + enforce (compare re-enforce). Related:
Reinforced; reinforcing.


reinforcement (n.)

c.1600, act of reinforcing, from reinforce + -ment. Meaning an augmentation, that which reinforces
is from 1650s. Related: Reinforcements.


reins (n.)

see rein (n.). Figurative sense means of controlling; control, check, restraint is from early 14c.


reinstall (v.)

also re-install, 1590s, from re- + install. Related: Re-installed; re-installing.


reinstate (v.)

1590s, from re- + instate. Related: Reinstated; reinstating.


reinstatement (n.)

1700, from reinstate + -ment. Reinstation is recorded from 1680s.


reintegrate (v.)

1580s, from re- + integrate. Also in classically correct form redintegrate. Related: Reintegrated;
reintegrating.


reintegration (n.)

c.1600, from French r&eacute;integration (15c.) or directly from Medieval Latin reintegrationem; see
reintegrate + -ion. Also in classically correct form redintegration.


reintroduce (v.)

1660s, from re- + introduce. Related: Reintroduced; reintroducing.


reintroduction (n.)

1660s, from re- + introduction.


reinvent (v.)

1680s, from re- + invent. Related: Reinvented; reinventing. Phrase reinvent the wheel do redundant
work attested by 1971.


reinvention (n.)

1719, from re- + invention.


reinvest (v.)

1610s, of money 1848, also re-invest, 1610s of vestments, etc.; 1848 of money; from re- + invest.
Related: Reinvested; reinvesting.


reinvigorate (v.)

1650s, from re- + invigorate. Related: Reinvigorated; reinvigorating.


reinvite (v.)

also re-invite, 1610s, from re- + invite (v.). Related: Reinvited; reinviting.


reissue (v.)

1610s, from re- back, again + issue (v.). Related: Reissued; reissuing. The noun is attested from
1805.


reiterate (v.)

early 15c., repeat again and again, from Late Latin reiteratus, past participle of reiterare to
repeat, from re- again (see re-) + iterare to repeat, from iterum again (see iteration). Related:
Reiterated; reiterating.


reiteration (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French reiteration and directly from Latin reiterationem (nominative
reiteratio) repetition, noun of action from past participle stem of reiterare (see reiterate).


reject (v.)

early 15c., from Old French rejecter and directly from Latin reiectus, past participle of reiectare
throw away, cast away, vomit, frequentative of reicere to throw back, from re- back (see re-) +
-icere, comb. form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Related: Rejected; rejecting.


reject (n.)

1550s, a castaway (rare), from reject (v.). Modern use probably a re-formation of the same word:
thing cast aside as unsatisfactory (1893); person considered low-quality and worthless (1925, from
use in militaries).


rejection (n.)

1550s, from French r&eacute;jection (16c.) or directly from Latin reiectionem (nominative reiectio)
act of throwing back, noun of action from past participle stem of reicere (see reject). In 19c., it
also could mean excrement. Medical transplant sense is from 1954. In the psychological sense,
relating to parenting, from 1931.


rejoice (v.)

c.1300, to own, possess, enjoy the possession of, have the fruition of, from Old French rejoiss-,
present participle stem of rejoir, resjoir gladden, rejoice, from re-, which here is of obscure
signification, perhaps an intensive (see re-), + joir be glad, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy).
Originally sense in to rejoice in. Meaning to be full of joy is recorded from late 14c. Middle
English also used simple verb joy to feel gladness; to rejoice (mid-13c.) and rejoy (early 14c.).
Related: Rejoiced; rejoicing.


rejoicing (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from rejoice (v.). Related: Rejoicingly.


rejoin (v.1)

also re-join, 1520s, unite again, unite after separation (transitive), from re- again + join (v.).
Meaning join the company of again is from 1610s. Related: Rejoined; rejoining.


rejoin (v.2)

to answer, mid-15c., legal term, from Middle French rejoin-, stem of rejoindre to answer to a legal
charge, from Old French re- back (see re-) + joindre to join (see join). General (non-legal) meaning
first recorded 1630s.


rejoinder (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French noun use of rejoindre (see rejoin (v.2)). Originally defendant's answer
to the replication (the fourth stage in the pleadings in an action at common law). For noun use of
infinitive in French law terms, see waiver.


rejuvenate (v.)

1807, irregular formation from re- again + Latin juvenis (see young (adj.)) + -ate (2). Related:
Rejuvenated; rejuvenating.


rejuvenation (n.)

1834, noun of action from rejuvenate.


rejuvenescence (n.)

renewal of youth, 1630s, from Latin rejuvenescere, from re- again (see re-) + juvenescere become
young, from juvenis young (see young (adj.)) + -ence.


rejuvenescent (adj.)

1763, from Medieval Latin rejuvenescentem (nominative rejuvenescens), present participle of
rejuvenescere (see rejuvenescence).


rekindle (v.)

1590s, from re- back, again + kindle (v.). Figurative use from 1650s. Related: Rekindled;
rekindling.


relapse (v.)

early 15c., renounce; 1560s, fall into a former state, from Latin relapsus, past participle of
relabi slip back, slide back, sink back, from re- back (see re-) + labi to slip (see lapse (n.)).
Related: Relapsed; relapsing.


relapse (n.)

mid-15c., from relapse (v.).


relate (v.)

1520s, to recount, tell, from Middle French relater refer, report (14c.) and directly from Latin
relatus, used as past participle of referre bring back, bear back (see refer), from re- back, again
+ latus (see oblate (n.)).    Meaning stand in some relation; have reference or respect is from
1640s; transitive sense of bring (something) into relation with (something else) is from 1690s.
Meaning to establish a relation between is from 1771. Sense of to feel connected or sympathetic to
is attested from 1950, originally in psychology jargon. Related: Related; relating.


related (adj.)

connected by blood or marriage, 1702, past participle adjective from relate (v.). Related:
Relatedness.


relation (n.)

late 14c., connection, correspondence; also act of telling, from Anglo-French relacioun, Old French
relacion report, connection (14c.), from Latin relationem (nominative relatio) a bringing back,
restoring; a report, proposition, from relatus (see relate). Meaning person related by blood or
marriage first attested c.1500. Stand-alone phrase no relation not in the same family is attested by
1930.


relational (adj.)

1660s, from relation + -al (1).


relationship (n.)

1640s, sense or state of being related, from relation + -ship. Specifically of romantic or sexual
relationships by 1944.


relative (n.)

late 14c., a relative pronoun, from Old French relatif (13c.), from Late Latin relativus having
reference or relation, from Latin relatus, past participle of referre to refer (see refer). Meaning
person in the same family first recorded 1650s.


relative (adj.)

early 15c., having reference, from Middle French relatif and directly from Late Latin relativus (see
relative (n.)). Meaning compared to each other is from 1590s; that of depending on a relationship to
something else is from 1610s.


relatively (adv.)

in relation to something else, 1560s, from relative (adj.) + -ly (2).


relativism (n.)

1865, in philosophy, from relative (adj.) + -ism. Compare relativist.


relativist (n.)

1857, from relative + -ist. As an adjective from 1914. Related: Relativistic.


relativity (n.)

1834, fact or condition of being relative (apparently coined by Coleridge, of God, in Notes on
Waterland's Vindication of Christ's Divinity), from relative (adj.) + -ity. In scientific use,
connected to the theory of Albert Einstein (1879-1955), published 1905 (special theory of
relativity) and 1915 (general theory of relativity), but the word was used in roughly this sense by
J.C. Maxwell in 1876.


relator (n.)

informer, c.1600, from Latin relator, agent noun; see relate.


relaunch (v.)

1745, from re- + launch (v.). Related: Relaunched; relaunching. As a noun from 1970.


relax (v.)

late 14c., to make (something) less compact or dense, from Old French relaschier set free; soften;
reduce (14c.), from Latin relaxare relax, loosen, open, stretch out, widen again; make loose, from
re- back (see re-) + laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax). Of persons, to become less formal,
from 1837. Meaning decrease tension is from early 15c.; intransitive sense of to become less tense
is recorded from 1935. Related: Relaxed; relaxing.


relaxant (adj.)

1771, from Latin relaxantem (nominative relaxans), present participle of relaxare (see relax). As a
noun from 1832.


relaxation (n.)

late 14c., rupture; mid-15c., remission of a burden or penalty, from Old French relaxacion (14c.)
and directly from Latin relaxationem (nominative relaxatio) an easing, mitigation, relaxation, noun
of action from past participle stem of relaxare (see relax). Meaning relief from hard work or
ordinary cares is from 1540s.


relay (n.)

late 14c., hounds placed along a line of chase, from Middle French relai reserve pack of hounds or
other animals (13c.), from Old French relaier to exchange tired animals for fresh, literally leave
behind, from re- back (see re-) + laier to leave (see delay (v.)). The etymological sense is to
leave (dogs) behind (in order to take fresh ones). Of horses, 1650s. Electromagnetic sense first
recorded 1860. As a type of foot-race, it is attested from 1898.


relay (v.)

c.1400, to set a pack of (fresh) hounds after a quarry; also change horses, from Old French
relaiier, from relai (see relay (n.)). Related: Relayed; relaying.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


release (n.)

early 14c., abatement of distress; means of deliverance, from Old French relais, reles (12c.), a
back-formation from relesser, relaissier (see release (v.)). In law, mid-14c., transferring of
property or a right to another; late 14c. as release from an obligation; remission of a duty,
tribute, etc. Meaning act and manner of releasing (a bow, etc.) is from 1871. Sense of action of
publication is from 1907.


relegate (v.)

1590s to banish, send into exile, from Latin relegatus, past participle of relegare remove, dismiss,
banish, send away, schedule, put aside, from re- back (see re-) + legare send with a commission (see
legate). Meaning place in a position of inferiority is recorded from 1790. Related: Relegated;
relegating; relegable.


relegation (n.)

1580s, from Latin relegationem (nominative relegatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
relegare (see relegate).


relent (v.)

late 14c., to melt, soften, dissolve, from re- + Latin lentus slow, viscous, supple (see lithe),
perhaps on model of Old French rallentir. Sense of become less harsh or cruel first recorded 1520s.
The notion probably is of a hard heart melting with pity. Related: Relented; relenting.


relentless (adj.)

1590s, from relent + -less. Related: Relentlessly; relentlessness.


relevance (n.)

1733; see relevant + -ance. Related: Relevancy (1560s).


relevant (adj.)

pertinent to the matter at hand, 1550s, from Middle French relevant depending upon, originally
helpful, from Medieval Latin relevantem (nominative relevans), from stem of Latin relevare to
lessen, lighten (see relieve). Not generally used until after 1800.


releve (n.)

1825 as a dish; 1930 in ballet, from French relev&eacute;, 19th century verbal noun from past
participle of relever (see relieve), so, literally raised up.


reliability (n.)

1816, from reliable + -ity.


reliable (adj.)

1560s, raliabill, Scottish; see rely + -able. Not common before 1850; and sometimes execrated
thereafter in Britain as an Americanism because it involves a use of -able different from its use in
provable, etc., but defended (by OED, Century Dictionary, etc.) on grounds of use of the suffix in
available, laughable, etc.. Related: Reliably.


reliance (n.)

c.1600, from rely + -ance.


reliant (adj.)

1856; see rely + -ant. Because it means dependent (on) it would seem an odd name for an automobile,
but Chrysler (Plymouth) nonetheless chose it as one in 1981.


relic (n.)

early 13c., body part or other object from a holy person, from Old French relique (11c., plural
reliques), from Late Latin reliqui&aelig; (plural) remains of a martyr, in classical Latin remains,
remnants, noun use of fem. plural of reliquus remaining, that which remains, related to relinquere
(perfective reliqui) to leave behind (see relinquish). Sense of remains, ruins is from early 14c.
Old English used reliquias, directly from Latin.


relict (n.)

a widow, mid-15c., from Old French relict, fem. relicte person or thing left behind (especially a
widow) and directly from Medieval Latin relicta a widow, noun use of fem. of relictus abandoned,
left behind, past participle adjective from Latin relinquere to leave behind (see relinquish).


reliction (n.)

in law, a recession of the sea from the land, 1670s, from Latin relictionem (nominative relictio),
noun of action from past participle stem of relinquere (see relinquish).


relief (n.1)

late 14c., alleviation of distress, hunger, sickness, etc; state of being relieved; that which
mitigates or removes (pain, grief, evil, etc.), from Anglo-French relif, from Old French relief
assistance, literally a raising, that which is lifted, from stressed stem of relever (see relieve).
Meaning aid to impoverished persons is attested from c.1400; that of deliverance of a besieged town
is from c.1400. Earlier in English as that which is left over or left behind, also feudal payment to
an overlord made by an heir upon taking possession of an estate (both c.1200).


relief (n.2)

projection of figure or design from a flat surface, c.1600, from French relief, from Italian
rilievo, from rilevare to raise, from Latin relevare to raise, lighten (see relieve).


relieve (v.)

late 14c., alleviate (pain, etc.), mitigate; afford comfort; allow respite; diminish the pressure
of, also give alms to, provide for; also figuratively, take heart, cheer up; from Old French relever
to raise, relieve (11c.) and directly from Latin relevare to raise, alleviate, lift up, free from a
burden, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + levare to lift up, lighten, from levis not heavy
(see lever).    The notion is to raise (someone) out of trouble. From c.1400 as advance to the
rescue in battle; also return from battle; recall (troops). Meaning release from duty is from early
15c. Related: relieved; relieving.


reliever (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from relieve. Baseball sense (relief pitcher) is attested by 1945.


religate (v.)

bind together, 1590s from Latin religatus, past participle of religare fasten, bind fast (see rely).
Related: Religated; religating.


religieuse (n.)

a nun, a religious woman, 1690s, from French, fem. of religieux monk, noun use of adjective meaning
religious (see religious). As a type of pastry, attested from 1929.


religion (n.)

c.1200, state of life bound by monastic vows, also conduct indicating a belief in a divine power,
from Anglo-French religiun (11c.), Old French religion piety, devotion; religious community, and
directly from Latin religionem (nominative religio) respect for what is sacred, reverence for the
gods; conscientiousness, sense of right, moral obligation; fear of the gods; divine service,
religious observance; a religion, a faith, a mode of worship, cult; sanctity, holiness, in Late
Latin monastic life (5c.).    According to Cicero derived from relegere go through again (in reading
or in thought), from re- again (see re-) + legere read (see lecture (n.)). However, popular
etymology among the later ancients (Servius, Lactantius, Augustine) and the interpretation of many
modern writers connects it with religare to bind fast (see rely), via notion of place an obligation
on, or bond between humans and gods. In that case, the re- would be intensive. Another possible
origin is religiens careful, opposite of negligens. In English, meaning particular system of faith
is recorded from c.1300; sense of recognition of and allegiance in manner of life (perceived as
justly due) to a higher, unseen power or powers is from 1530s.   To hold, therefore, that there is
no difference in matters of religion between forms that are unlike each other, and even contrary to
each other, most clearly leads in the end to the rejection of all religion in both theory and
practice. And this is the same thing as atheism, however it may differ from it in name. [Pope Leo
XIII, Immortale Dei, 1885]


religiosity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French religiosete and directly from Late Latin religiositas religiousness, from
religiosus (see religious).


religious (adj.)

c.1200, devout, pious, imbued with or expressive of religious devotion, from Anglo-French religius,
Old French religious (12c., Modern French religieux) and directly from Latin religiosus, from
religio (see religion). Meaning pertaining to religion is from 1530s. Transferred sense of
scrupulous, exact is recorded from 1590s. Related: Religiousness.


religiously (adv.)

late 14c., in a religous manner, from religious + -ly (2). Transferred sense of strictly,
scrupulously attested by 1570s.


relinquish (v.)

mid-15c., desert, abandon; late 15c., give up, desist, from Old French relinquiss-, present
participle stem of relinquir (12c.), from Latin relinquere leave behind, forsake, abandon, give up,
from re- back (see re-) + linquere to leave, from PIE *linkw-, from root *leikw- to leave behind
(cognates: Sanskrit reknas inheritance, wealth, rinakti leaves; Greek leipein to leave; Gothic
leihvan, Old English l&aelig;nan to lend; Old High German lihan to borrow; Old Norse lan loan).
Related: Relinquished; relinquishing.


reliquary (n.)

receptacle for keeping relics, 1650s, from French reliquaire (14c.), from relique (see relic).


relique (n.)

Frenchified spelling of relic (q.v.).


reliquiae (n.)

remains, 1650s, Latin plural of reliquus remainder, residue, noun use of adjective meaning that is
left, remaining, left over, related to relinquere (perfective reliqui) to leave behind (see
relinquish).


relish (v.)

1560s give flavor to (implied in relished), from relish (n.). The transferred sense of to enjoy,
take pleasure in is from 1590s. Related: Relishing.


relish (n.)

1520s, taste, flavor, alteration of reles scent, taste, aftertaste, (c.1300), from Old French
relais, reles, something remaining, that which is left behind, from relaisser to leave behind (see
release (v.)). Meaning enjoyment of the taste or flavor of something is attested from 1640s. Sense
of condiment, that which imparts flavor is first recorded 1797. The stuff you put on hot dogs is a
sweet green pickle relish.


relive (v.)

1540s, to come to life again (also to restore to life again), from re- back, again + live (v.).
Meaning to experience over again is attested from c.1711. Related: Relived; reliving.


reload (v.)

1778, from re- back, again + load (v.). Of a firearm from 1853. Related: Reloaded; reloading.


relocate (v.)

1822, transitive, to move (something, originally a road) to another place, from re- back, again +
locate (v.). Intransitive sense of settle again is from 1841. Related: Relocated; relocating.


relocation (n.)

1746, in Scottish law, renewal of a lease, noun of action from relocate. Meaning act of relocating
is from 1837.


reluctance (n.)

1640s, act of struggling against, from obsolete verb reluct to struggle or rebel against (1520s),
from Latin reluctari to struggle against, resist, make opposition, from re- against (see re-) +
luctari to struggle, wrestle, perhaps shares a common origin with Greek lygos pliant twig, lygizein
to bend, twist, Old English locc twist of hair (see lock (n.2)). Meaning unwillingness is first
attested 1660s. Related: Reluctancy (1620s.).


reluctant (adj.)

unwilling, 1660s, from Latin reluctantem (nominative reluctans), present participle of reluctari
(see reluctance). Related: Reluctantly. The Latin word is also the source of Spanish reluchante,
Italian riluttante.


rely (v.)

early 14c., to gather, assemble (transitive and intransitive), from Old French relier assemble, put
together; fasten, attach, rally, oblige, from Latin religare fasten, bind fast, from re-, intensive
prefix (see re-), + ligare to bind (see ligament). Sense of depend, trust is from 1570s, perhaps via
notion of rally to, fall back on. Typically used with on, perhaps by influence of lie (v.2).
Related: Relied; relying.


rem (n.)

unit for measuring radiation, 1947, acronym of roentgen equivalent man.


remain (v.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French remayn-, Old French remain-, stressed stem of remanoir stay, dwell,
remain; be left; hold out, from Latin remanere to remain, to stay behind; be left behind; endure,
abide, last (source also of Spanish remaner, Italian rimanere), from re- back (see re-) + manere to
stay, remain (see mansion). Related: Remained; remaining.


remain (n.)

those left over or surviving, mid-15c., from Middle French remain, back-formation from Old French
remanoir, remaindre, or else formed in Middle English from remain (v.). But the more usual noun in
English has been remainder except in remains, euphemism for corpse, attested from c.1700, from
mortal remains.


remainder (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French remainder, Old French remaindre, noun use of infinitive, a variant of
Old French remanoir (see remain (v.)). The verb meaning dispose of (books) at a reduced price is
from 1904. Related: Remaindered.


remake (v.)

1630s, from re- back, again + make (v.). Related: Remade; remaking. As a noun, of movies, from 1936.


remand (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French remander send for again (12c.) or directly from Late Latin remandare to
send back word, repeat a command, from Latin re- back (see re-) + mandare to consign, order, commit
to one's charge (see mandate (n.)). Specifically in law, send back (a prisoner) on refusing an
application for discharge. Related: Remanded; remanding.


remanence (n.)

1660s, that which remains, from remanent + -ence. Meaning continuance, permanence is from 1810.


remanent (adj.)

remaining, mid-15c., from Latin remanentem (nominative (see remanens), present participle of
remanere (see remain (v.)).


remark (v.)

1630s, to mark out, distinguish modeled on French remarquer to mark, note, heed, formed in Middle
French from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + marquer to mark, probably from a Germanic source such
as Old High German marchon to delimit (see mark (n.1)).    Meaning take notice of is from 1670s;
that of make a comment is first attested 1690s, from notion of make a verbal observation or call
attention to specific points. Related: Remarked; remarking.


remark (n.)

1650s, act of noticing; fact of being worthy of comment, from remark (v.). Meaning a notice or
comment is from 1670s.


remarkable (adj.)

c.1600, from remark (v.) + -able, or from or based on French remarquable (16c.), from remarquer.
Observable, worthy of notice, hence extraordinary, exceptional, conspicuous. Related: Remarkably.


remarriage (n.)

1610s, from re- + marriage.


remarry (v.)

1520s, from re- back, again + marry. Related: Remarried; remarrying.


rematch (n.)

1941, from re- back, again + match (n.) contest.


rematch (v.)

also re-match to match again, 1856, from re- + match (v.). Related: Rematched; rematching.


rematerialize (v.)

1871, from re- + materialize. Related: Rematerialized; rematerializing.


remediable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French rem&#233;diable, from Latin remediabilis that may be healed, curable, from
stem of remediare, from remedium (see remedy (n.)).


remedial (adj.)

1650s, curing, relieving, affording a remedy, from Late Latin remedialis healing, curing, from Latin
remedium (see remedy (n.)). Educational sense of concerned with improving skills is first recorded
1924.


remediate (v.)

1969, back-formation from remediation. Related: Remediated; remediating.


remediation (n.)

1818, noun of action from stem of Latin remediare, from span class=foreign&gt;remedium (see remedy
(n.)). In educational jargon from c.1975.


remedy (n.)

c.1200, cure for a disease or disorder; means of counteracting an evil, from Anglo-French remedie,
Old French remede remedy, cure (12c., Modern French rem&#232;de) and directly from Latin remedium a
cure, remedy, medicine, antidote, that which restores health, from re-, intensive prefix (or perhaps
literally, again; see re-), + mederi to heal (see medical (adj.)). Figurative use from c.1300.


remedy (v.)

c.1400, from Old French remedier or directly from Latin remediare, from remedium (see remedy (n.)).
Related: Remedied; remedying.


remember (v.)

early 14c., keep in mind, retain in the memory, from Old French remembrer remember, recall, bring to
mind (11c.), from Latin rememorari recall to mind, remember, from re- again (see re-) + memorari be
mindful of, from memor mindful (see memory). Meaning recall to mind is late 14c.; sense of to
mention is from 1550s. Also in Middle English to remind (someone). An Anglo-Saxon verb for it was
gemunan.


remembrance (n.)

c.1300, a memory, recollection, from Old French remembrance (11c.), from remembrer (see remember).
From late 14c. as consideration, reflection; present consciousness of a past event; store of
personal experiences available to recollection, capacity to recall the past. Also late 14c. as
memento, keepsake, souvenir, and a commemoration, remembering, ritual of commemoration. Meaning
faculty of memory, capability of remembering is early 15c.    British Remembrance Day, the Sunday
nearest Nov. 11 (originally in memory of the dead of World War I) is attested from 1921. A
remembrancer (early 15c.) was a royal official of the Exchequer tasked with recording and collecting
debts due to the Crown; hence also, figuratively Death (late 15c.).


remilitarize (v.)

1920, originally of Soviet Russia, from re- + militarize.  Related: remilitarized; remilitarizing.


remind (v.)

1640s, to remember, from re- again + mind (v.). Meaning to put (someone) in mind of (something) is
first recorded 1650s. Related: Reminded; reminding.


reminder (n.)

something which reminds, 1650s, agent noun from remind.


Remington (n.)

type of firearms (1865) and typewriter (produced from 1874), from Eliphalet Remington (1793-1861)
and his son Philo (1816-1889), gunsmiths of Ilion, N.Y.


reminisce (v.)

1829, to recollect, back-formation from reminiscence. Meaning indulge in reminiscences is from 1871.
Somewhat colloquial [OED]. Related: Reminisced; reminiscing.


reminiscence (n.)

1580s, act of remembering, from Middle French reminiscence (14c.) and directly from Late Latin
reminiscentia remembrance, recollection (a loan-translation of Greek anamnesis), from Latin
reminiscentem (nominative reminiscens), present participle of reminisci remember, recall to mind,
from re- again (see re-) + minisci to remember, from root of mens mind, from PIE root *men- mind,
understanding, reason (see mind (n.)). Meaning a recollection of something past is attested from
1811.


reminiscent (adj.)

1705, from Latin reminiscentem (nominative reminiscens), present participle of reminisci call to
mind, remember (see reminiscence). Related: Reminiscential (1640s).


remise (v.)

in law, give up, surrender, make over to another, late 15c., from noun remise, from Old French
remise, past participle of remettre to send back, from Latin remittere (see remit). Related:
Remised; remising.


remiss (adj.)

early 15c., weak, dissolved, from Latin remissus relaxed, languid; negligent, past participle of
remittere slacken, abate, let go (see remit). Meaning characterized by lack of strictness is
attested from mid-15c.; that of characterized by negligence is from mid-15c.


remission (n.)

c.1200, forgiveness or pardon (of sins), from Old French remission forgiveness (of sins), relief
(12c.), from Latin remissionem (nominative remissio) relaxation, diminishing, lit. a sending back,
sending away, noun of action from past participle stem of remittere slacken, let go, abate (see
remit). Used of diseases since early 15c.


remit (v.)

late 14c., to forgive, pardon, from Latin remittere send back, slacken, let go back, abate, from re-
back (see re-) + mittere to send (see mission). Meaning allow to remain unpaid is from mid-15c.
Meaning send money (to someone) first recorded 1630s. Related: Remitted; remitting.


remittance (n.)

1705; see remit + -ance. Earlier in same sense were remitment (1610s of offenses; 1670s of money
sent); remital (1590s).


remitter (n.)

1540s, a legal principle, from Old French remitter, noun use of infinitive, from Latin remittere
send back (see remit). For legalese noun use of French infinitives, see waiver.


remnant (n.)

late 14c., contraction of remenant (c.1300), from Old French remanant rest, remainder, surplus, noun
use of present participle of remanoir to remain (see remain (v.)). Specific sense of end of a piece
of drapery, cloth, etc. is recorded from early 15c. An Old English word for remnant was endlaf.


remodel (v.)

1789, from re- back, again + model (v.). Related: Remodeled; remodeling.


remonstrance (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French remonstrance (15c., Modern French remontrance), from Medieval Latin
remonstrantia, from present participle stem of remonstrare point out, show, from re-, intensive
prefix (see re-), + Latin monstrare to show (see monster).


remonstrate (v.)

1590s, make plain, back-formation from remonstration, or else from Medieval Latin remonstratus, past
participle of  remonstrare to demonstrate (see remonstrance). Meaning to exhibit or present strong
reasons against is from 1690s. Related: Remonstrated; remonstrating.


remonstration (n.)

late 15c., from Medieval Latin remonstrationem (nominative remonstratio), noun of action from past
participle stem of remonstrare (see remonstrance).


remora (n.)

1560s, from Latin remora sucking fish, literally delay, hindrance, from re- back (see re-) + mora
delay (see moratorium); so called because the fish were believed by the ancients to retard a vessel
to which they attached themselves. Hence, in 17c.-18c., an obstacle, an impediment (the first sense
of the word in Johnson's dictionary). In Greek, ekheneis, from ekhein to hold + naus (dative nei)
ship. Pliny writes that Antony's galley was delayed by one at Actium. Sometimes called in English
stayship or stopship.


remorse (n.)

late 14c., from Old French remors (Modern French remords), from Medieval Latin remorsum, noun use of
neuter past participle of Latin remordere to vex, disturb, literally to bite back, from re- back
(see re-) + mordere to bite (see mordant).    The sense evolution was via the Medieval Latin phrase
remorsus conscienti&aelig; (translated into Middle English as ayenbite of inwit). Middle English
also had a verb, remord to strike with remorse, touch with compassion, prick one's conscience.


remorseful (adj.)

1590s, from remorse + -ful. Related: Remorsefully; remorsefulness.


remorseless (adj.)

1590s, from remorse + -less. Related: Remorselessly; remorselessness.


remote (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French remot or directly from Latin remotus afar off, remote, distant in
place, past participle of removere move back or away (see remove (v.)). Related: Remotely;
remoteness. Remote control fact of controlling from a distance is recorded from 1904; as a device
which allows this from 1920.


remoulade (n.)

type of French salad dressing, 1845, from French r&eacute;moulade (17c.), from remolat, a dialect
word for horseradish; compare Italian ramolaccio horseradish, by dissimilation from ramoraccio, from
Latin armoracia.


remount (v.)

also re-mount, late 14c., put on horseback again, also return to a former state, from Old French
remonter to climb up, ascend again, from re- (see re-) + monter (see mount (v.)). From late 15c. as
to go up again, 1620s as to raise (something) up again. Related: Remounted; remounting.


removable (adj.)

1530s, from remove (v.) + -able. Related: Removability.


removal (n.)

1590s; see remove (v.) + -al (2).


remove (v.)

early 14c., move, take away, dismiss, from Old French removoir move, stir; leave, depart; take away,
from Latin removere move back or away, take away, put out of view, subtract, from re- back, away
(see re-) + movere to move (see move (v.)). Related: Removed; removing.


remove (n.)

1550s, act of removing, from remove (v.). Sense of distance or space by which any thing is removed
from another is attested from 1620s.


removed (adj.)

distant in relationship (by some expressed degree), 1540s, from past participle of remove (v.).
Meaning remote, separated, secluded is from 1610s.


remunerate (v.)

1520s, pay for work or services, back-formation from remuneration or else from Latin remuneratus,
past participle of remunerari (later remunerare) repay, reward (see remuneration). Related:
Remunerated; remunerating.


remuneration (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French remuneration and directly from Latin remunerationem (nominative
remuneratio) a repaying, recompense, noun of action from past participle stem of remunerari to pay,
reward, from re- back (see re-) + munerari to give, from munus (genitive muneris) gift, office, duty
(see municipal).


remunerative (adj.)

1620s, inclined to remunerate, from remunerate + -ive. From 1670s as rewarding; 1859 as profitable.
Related: Remuneratively; remunerativeness.


Remy Martin (n.)

from French R&eacute;my Martin, proprietary name of a type of cognac, from the name of the founder
(1724).


Renaissance (n.)

great period of revival of classical-based art and learning in Europe that began in the fourteenth
century, 1840, from French renaissance des lettres, from Old French renaissance, literally rebirth,
usually in a spiritual sense, from renastre grow anew (of plants), be reborn (Modern French
rena&icirc;tre), from Vulgar Latin *renascere, from Latin renasci be born again, rise again,
reappear, be renewed, from re- again (see re-) + nasci be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus).    An
earlier term for it was revival of learning (1785). In general usage, with a lower-case r-, a
revival of anything that has long been in decay or disuse (especially of learning, literature, art),
it is attested from 1872. Renaissance man is first recorded 1906.


renal (adj.)

1650s, from French r&#233;nal and directly from Late Latin renalis of or belonging to kidneys, from
Latin ren (plural renes) kidneys.


renascence (n.)

rebirth; state of being reborn, 1727, from renascent + -ence. As a native alternative to The
Renaissance, first used in 1869 by Matthew Arnold. Related: Renascency (1660s).


renascent (adj.)

1727, from Latin renascentem (nominative renascens), present participle of renasci be born again
(see renaissance).


rend (v.)

Old English rendan, hrendan to tear, cut down, from West Germanic *randijan (cognates: Old Frisian
renda to cut, break, Middle Low German rende anything broken, German Rinde bark, crust), probably
related to rind. Related: Rended; rent; rending.


render (v.)

late 14c., repeat, say again, from Old French rendre give back, present, yield (10c.), from Vulgar
Latin *rendere (formed by dissimilation or on analogy of its antonym, prendre to take), from Latin
reddere give back, return, restore, from red- back (see re-) + comb. form of dare to give (see date
(n.1)).    Meaning hand over, deliver is recorded from late 14c.; to return (thanks, a verdict,
etc.) is attested from late 15c.; meaning represent, depict is first attested 1590s. Irregular
retention of -er in a French verb in English is perhaps to avoid confusion with native rend (v.) or
by influence of a Middle English legalese noun render a payment of rent, from French noun use of the
infinitive. Related: Rendered; rendering.


render (n.)

1580s, agent noun from rend (v.).


rendering (n.)

mid-15c., action of restoring, verbal noun from render (v.). Meaning a translation is from 1640s;
that of extracting or melting of fat is from 1792. Visual arts sense of reproduction, representation
is from 1862.


rendezvous (n.)

1590s, place for assembling of troops, from Middle French rendez-vous, noun use of rendez vous
present yourselves, from rendez, plural imperative of rendre to present (see render (v.)) + vous
you, from Latin vos, from PIE *wos- you (plural). General sense of appointed place of meeting is
attested from 1590s.


rendezvous (v.)

1640s, from rendezvous (n.).


rendition (n.)

c.1600, surrender of a place or possession, from obsolete French rendition a rendering, noun of
action from Old French rendre to deliver, to yield (see render (v.)). Meaning translation first
recorded 1650s; that of an acting, a performing first recorded 1858, American English.


renegade (n.)

1580s, apostate, probably (with change of suffix) from Spanish renegado, originally Christian turned
Muslim, from Medieval Latin renegatus, noun use of past participle of renegare deny (see renege).
General sense of turncoat is from 1660s. The form renegate, directly from Medieval Latin, is
attested in English from late 14c. As an adjective from 1705.


renege (v.)

1540s, deny, renounce, abandon, from Medieval Latin renegare, from Latin re-, here probably an
intensive prefix, + negare deny (see deny). Meaning change one's mind is from 1784. Related:
Reneged; reneging.


renegotiate (v.)

1934, from re- again + negotiate. Related: Renegotiated; renegotiating.


renew (v.)

late 14c., from re- again + Middle English newen resume, revive, renew (see new); formed on analogy
of Latin renovare. Related: Renewed; renewing.


renewable (adj.)

1727, from renew + -able. In reference to energy sources, attested by 1971.


renewal (n.)

1680s, from renew + -al (2). Specific meaning urban redevelopment is from 1965, American English.
Earlier noun was simply renew (early 15c.).


renin (n.)

enzyme found in kidneys, 1894, from German Renin, from Latin renes kidneys + -in (2).


renminbi (n.)

currency introduced 1948 in China, from Chinese renminbi, from renmin people + bi currency.


rennet (n.1)

inner membrane of a calf's fourth stomach, c.1400, probably from an unrecorded Old English *rynet,
related to gerennan cause to run together, because it makes milk run or curdle; from Proto-Germanic
*rannijanan, causative of *renwanan to run (see run (v.)). Compare German rinnen to run, gerinnen to
curdle.


rennet (n.2)

variety of apple, 1560s, from French reinette, literally little queen, diminutive of reine queen,
from Latin regina (see Regina).


rennin (n.)

milk-curdling enzyme, 1897, from rennet + -in (2).


renounce (v.)

late 14c., from Old French renoncier give up, cede (12c., Modern French renoncer), from Latin
renuntiare bring back word; proclaim; protest against, renounce, from re- against (see re-) +
nuntiare to report, announce, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). Related: Renounced; renouncing.


renovate (v.)

1520s, back-formation from renovation, or else from Latin renovatus, past participle of renovare
renew, restore (see renovation). Related: Renovated; renovating.


renovation (n.)

c.1400, renovacyoun spiritual rebirth, also rebuilding, reconstruction, from Middle French
renovation (13c.), or directly from Latin renovationem (nominative renovatio) a renewing, renewal; a
rest, noun of action from past participle stem of renovare renew, restore, from re- again (see re-)
+ novare make new, from novus new (see new).


renown (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French renoun, Old French renon renown, fame, reputation, from renomer make
famous, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + nomer to name, from Latin nominare to name (see nominate).
The Middle English verb reknouen make known, acknowledge has been assimilated to the noun via
renowned. In old German university slang, a reknowner (German renommist) was a boaster, a swaggerer.


renowned (adj.)

celebrated, famous, late 14c., past participle adjective from renown.


rent (n.1)

payment for use of property, mid-12c., a legal sense, originally income, revenue (late Old English),
from Old French rente payment due; profit, income, from Vulgar Latin *rendita, noun use of fem. past
participle of rendere to render (see render (v.)).


rent (v.)

mid-15c., to rent out property, grant possession and enjoyment of in exchange for a consideration
paid, from Old French renter pay dues to, or from rent (n.1). Related: Rented; renting. Earlier
(mid-14c.) in the more general sense of provide with revenue. Sense of to take and hold in exchange
for rent is from 1520s. Intransitive sense of be leased for rent is from 1784. Prefix rent-a- first
attested 1921, mainly of businesses that rented various makes of car (Rentacar is a trademark
registered in U.S. 1924); extended to other temporary uses since 1961.


rent (n.2)

torn place, 1530s, noun use of Middle English renten to tear, rend (early 14c.), variant of renden
(see rend (v.)).


rental (n.)

mid-14c., rent roll; late 14c., income from rents, from Anglo-French rental, Medieval Latin rentale;
see rent (n.1) + -al (2). Meaning amount charged for rent is from 1630s; that of a car or house let
for rent is from 1952, American English.


renter (n.)

late 14c., one who lets or rents to others, proprietor, agent noun from rent (v.). Meaning lessee,
tenant, holder of property by payment of rent is from 1650s.


rentier (n.)

1847, from French rentier, holder of rental properties or investments that pay income, from rente
profit, income (see rent (n.1)).


renumber (v.)

early 15c., from re- + number. Related: Renumbered; renumbering.


renumerate (v.)

count over, 1650s, from re- again + numerate. Related: Renumerated; renumerating.


renunciation (n.)

late 14c., action of renouncing, from Latin renuntiationem (nominative renuntiatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of renuntiare renounce (see renounce).


reobtain (v.)

also re-obtain, 1580s, from re- + obtain. Related: Reobtained; reobtaining.


reoccupy (v.)

also re-occupy, 1731, from re- back, again + occupy (v.). Related: Reoccupied; reoccupying.


reoccur (v.)

also re-occur, 1803; see re- + occur. Related: Reoccurred; reoccurring.


reoccurrence (n.)

also re-occurrence, 1804, from re- again + occurrence.


reopen (v.)

1733 (transitive), from re- again + open (v.). Intransitive sense from 1830. Related: Reopened;
reopening.


reorder (v.)

also re-order, c.1600, to set in order again, from re- + order (v.). From 1810 as repeat an order.
Related: Reordered; reordering.


reorganization (n.)

also re-organization, 1801, in translations from French, noun of action from reorganize.


reorganize (v.)

also re-organize, 1680s, from re- again + organize (v.). Related: Reorganized; reorganizing.


reorient (v.)

also re-orient, 1897 (transitive), 1937 (intransitive), from re- back, again + orient (v.). Related:
Reoriented; reorienting. Alternative reorientate also is recorded from 1913.


reorientation (n.)

also re-orientation, 1893, from re- + orientation.


reovirus (n.)

1959, coined by U.S. medical researcher Dr. Albert B. Sabin (1906-1993), acronym for respiratory
enteric orphan virus; orphan because it was not connected to any of the diseases it is associated
with.


rep

1705 as abbreviation of reputation (n.); upon rep I swear it was a common 18c. slang asseveration.
As a shortening of repetition (n.) it is recorded from 1864, originally school slang; as a
shortening of representative (n.), especially sales representative, it is attested from 1896. As an
abbreviation of repertory (company) it is recorded from 1925.


repaint (v.)

1700, from re- + paint (v). Related: Repainted; repainting.


repair (v.1)

to mend, to put back in order, mid-14c., from Old French reparer repair, mend (12c.), from Latin
reparare restore, put back in order, from re- again (see re-) + parare make ready, prepare (see
pare). Related: Repaired; repairing.


repair (v.2)

go (to a place), c.1300, from Old French repairer to frequent, return (to one's country), earlier
repadrer, from Late Latin repatriare return to one's own country (see repatriate). Related:
Repaired; repairing.


repair (n.)

1590s, act of restoring, restoration after decay, from repair (v.1). Meaning state or condition in
respect to reparation is from c.1600.


repairable (adj.)

able to be fixed, late 15c., from repair (v.1) + -able.


reparable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French reparable (16c.), from Latin reparabilis able to be restored or regained,
from reparare restore (see repair (v.1)).


reparation (n.)

late 14c., reconciliation, from Old French reparacion and directly from Late Latin reparationem
(nominative reparatio) act of repairing, restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin reparare restore, repair (see repair (v.1)). Meaning act of repairing or mending is attested
from c.1400. Reparations compensation for war damaged owed by the aggressor is attested from 1921,
with reference to Germany, from French r&eacute;parations (1919).


repart (v.)

1570s, divide up, from re- + part (v.). Related: Reparted; reparting.


repartee (n.)

1640s, quick remark, from French repartie an answering blow or thrust (originally a fencing term),
noun use of fem. past participle of Old French repartir to reply promptly, start out again, from re-
back (see re-) + partir to part, depart, start (see part (n.)). In 17c. often spelled reparty (see
-ee). Meaning a series of sharp rejoinders exchanged is from 1680s.


repass (v.)

mid-15c., pass again in returning, from Old French repasser; see re- again + pass (v.). Related:
Repassed; repassing.


repassage (n.)

early 15c., from Old French repassage; see re- + passage.


repast (n.)

late 14c., from Old French repast (Modern Frech repas) a meal, food, from Late Latin repastus meal
(also source of Spanish repasto, noun use of past participle of repascere to feed again, from Latin
re- repeatedly (see re-) + pascere to graze (see pastor). The verb (intransitive) is from late 15c.


repatriate (v.)

1610s, from Late Latin repatriatus, past participle of repatriare return to one's country (see
repatriation). Related: Repatriated; repatriating.


repatriation (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin reparationem (nominative repatriatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of repatriare return to one's own country, from Latin re- back (see re-) + patria native land
(see patriot).


repay (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French repaier pay back, give in return, from re- back (see re-) + payer to pay
(see pay (v.)). Related: Repaid; repaying.


repayment (n.)

early 15c., from re- + payment.


repayment (n.)

late 15c., from re- + payment.


repeal (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French repeler, Old French rapeler call back, call in, call after, revoke
(Modern French rappeler), from re- back (see re-) + apeler to call (see appeal (v.)). Related:
Repealed; repealing.


repeal (n.)

late 15c., from repeal (v.), or from Anglo-French repel, Old French rapel (Modern French rappel) a
recall appeal, back-formation from rapeler.


repeat (v.)

late 14c., to say what one has already said, from Old French repeter say or do again, get back,
demand the return of (13c., Modern French r&#233;p&#233;eter), from Latin repetere do or say again;
attack again, from re- again (see re-) + petere to go to; attack; strive after; ask for, beseech
(see petition (n.)).    Meaning say what another has said is from 1590s. As an emphatic word in
radio broadcasts, 1938. Meaning do over again is from 1550s; specific meaning to take a course of
education over again is recorded from 1945, American English. Related: Repeated; repeating.


repeat (n.)

mid-15c., of music passages, from repeat (v.). From 1937 of broadcasts.


repeated (adj.)

frequent, 1610s, past participle adjective from repeat (v.). Related: Repeatedly.


repeater (n.)

1570s, agent noun from repeat (v.). As a type of firearm from 1868; as a frequent offender from
1884.


repel (v.)

early 15c., to drive away, remove, from Old French repeller or directly from Latin repellere to
drive back, from re- back (see re-) + pellere to drive, strike (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to affect
(a person) with distaste or aversion is from 1817. Related: Repelled; repelling.


repellent (adj.)

also repellant, 1640s, from Latin repellentem (nominative repelens), present participle of repellere
(see repel). Originally of medicines (that reduced tumors); meaning distasteful, disagreeable first
recorded 1797.


repellent (n.)

also repellant, 1660s, medicine that reduces tumors, from repellent (adj.). As substance that repels
insects, 1908.


repent (v.)

c.1300, to feel such regret for sins or crimes as produces amendment of life, from Old French
repentir (11c.), from re-, here probably an intensive prefix (see re-), + Vulgar Latin *penitire to
regret, from Latin poenitire make sorry, from poena (see penal). The distinction between regret
(q.v.) and repent is made in many modern languages, but the differentiation is not present in older
periods. Related: Repented; repenting.


repentance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French repentance penitence (12c.), from present participle stem of repentir (see
repent).   Repentance goes beyond feeling to express distinct purposes of turning from sin to
righteousness; the Bible word most often translated repentance means a change of mental and
spiritual attitude toward sin. [Century Dictionary]


repentant (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French repentant penitent (12c.), present participle of repentir (see repent).


repercussion (n.)

early 15c., act of driving back, from Middle French r&eacute;percussion (14c.) or directly from
Latin repercusionem (nominative repercussio), from past participle stem of repercutere to strike or
beat back; shine back, reflect; echo, from re- back (see re-) + percutere to strike or thrust
through (see percussion). Meaning reverberation, echo first recorded 1590s; the metaphoric extension
is recorded from 1620s.


repercussive (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French repercussif, from Latin repercuss-, past participle stem of repercutere
(see repercussion). Related: Repercussively; repercussiveness.


repertoire (n.)

a stock of plays, songs, etc., which a performer or company has studied and is ready to perform,
1847, from French r&eacute;pertoire, literally index, list (14c.), from Late Latin repertorium
inventory (see repertory).


repertory (n.)

1550s, an index, list, catalogue, from Late Latin repertorium inventory, list, from Latin repertus,
past participle of reperire to find, get, invent, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + parire,
archaic form of paerere produce, bring forth, from PIE root *per- attempt (see parent (n.)).
Meaning list of performances is first recorded 1845, from Anglicized use of repertoire; repertory
theater is attested from 1896. Related: Repertorial.


repetition (n.)

early 15c., act of saying over again, from Old French repetition and directly from Latin
repetitionem (nominative repetitio) a repeating, noun of action from past participle stem of
repetere do or say again (see repeat (v.)). Of actions, attested from 1590s.


repetitious (adj.)

employing repetition, often with suggestions of tiresomeness, 1670s, from Latin repetit-, past
participle stem of repetere do or say again (see repeat (v.)) + -ous. Related: Repetitiously;
repetitiousness.


repetitive (adj.)

1805, from Latin repetit-, past participle stem of repetere do or say again (see repeat (v.)) +
-ive. Related: Repetitively; repetitiveness.


rephrase (v.)

1872, from re- again + phrase (v.). Related: Rephrased; rephrasing.


repine (v.)

to be fretfully discontented, mid-15c., probably from re-, here likely an intensive prefix, + pine
(v.) yearn. Related: Repined; repining.


replace (v.)

1590s, to restore to a previous place or position, from re- back, again + place (v.). Meaning to
take the place of is recorded from 1753; that of to fill the place of (with something else) is from
1765. Related: Replaced; replacing.


replaceable (adj.)

1805, from replace (v.) + -able. Related: Replaceability.


replacement (n.)

act or fact of being replaced, 1790, from replace (v.) + -ment. Meaning something that replaces
another is attested from 1894.


replant (v.)

1570s, from re- back, again + plant (v.). Related: Replanted; replanting.


replay (v.)

1862, in sporting jargon, from re- again + play (v.). Of recordings, attested from 1917. Related:
Replayed; replaying. The noun is from 1895, a replayed match (in sports).


replenish (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French repleniss-, extended present participle stem of replenir to fill up, from
re-, here probably an intensive prefix, + -plenir, from Latin plenus full (see plenary). Related:
Replanished; replenishing.


replete (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French replet filled up (14c.), from Latin repletus filled, full, past
participle of replere to fill; fill again, re-fill, from re- (see re-) + plere to fill (see pleio-).


repletion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French repletion, replection (early 14c.) or directly from Late Latin
repletionem (nominative repletio), noun of action from past participle stem of replere to fill (see
replete).


replevin (n.)

recovery of goods (by someone) taken from him, upon posting of security, mid-15c., from Anglo-French
replevin (14c.) and Anglo-Latin (13c.) replevina, from Old French replevir (v.) to pledge, protect,
warrant, from re- back, again (see re-) + plevir, of uncertain origin; perhaps related to pledge
(v.). The corresponding verb is replevy (1550s).


replica (n.)

1824, from Italian replica copy, repetition, reply, from replicare to duplicate, from Latin
replicare to repeat (see reply (v.)). Properly, a copy of a work of art made by the original artist.


replicable (adj.)

1520s, that may be replied to, from Latin stem of reply + -able. Meaning that may be duplicated is
from 1953, from replicate (v.). Related: Replicability.


replicate (v.)

early 15c., repeat, from Latin replicatus, past participle of replicare (see reply). Meaning to
copy, reproduce, make a replica of is from 1882, a back-formation from replication. Genetic sense is
first recorded 1957. Related: Replicated; replicating.


replication (n.)

late 14c., action of folding back, also legal reply (third step in the pleadings in a common-law
action), rejoinder, from Anglo-French replicacioun, Old French replicacion reply, answer, from Latin
replicationem (nominative replicatio) a reply, repetition, a folding back, from past participle stem
of replicare to repeat, reply, literally to fold back (see reply (v.)). Meaning a copy, reproduction
first recorded 1690s. Sense in genetics is from 1948.


reply (v.)

late 14c., to make an answer, from Old French replier to reply, turn back, from Late Latin replicare
to reply, repeat, in classical Latin fold back, fold over, bend back, from re- back, again (see re-)
+ plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)). Latin literal sense of to fold back is attested from mid-15c. in
English but is not now used. Modern French r&eacute;pliquer (Middle French replier) is directly from
Late Latin. Related: Replied; replying.


reply (n.)

1550s, from reply (v.).


repo (adj.)

by 1972 (in repo man), American English, short for repossess or repossession.


repoint (v.)

1849, from re- again + point (v.). Related: Repointed; repointing.


repopulate (v.)

1590s, from re- + populate (v.). Related: Repopulated; repopulating.


report (n.)

late 14c., an account brought by one person to another, rumor, from Old French report pronouncement,
judgment (Modern French rapport), from reporter to tell, relate (see report (v.)).    Meaning
resounding noise, sound of an explosion is from 1580s. Meaning formal statement of results of an
investigation first attested 1660s; sense of teacher's official statement of a pupil's work and
behavior is from 1873 (report card in the school sense first attested 1919).


report (v.)

late 14c., to make known, tell, relate, from Old French reporter to tell, relate; bring back, carry
away, hand over, from Latin reportare carry back, bear back, bring back, figuratively report, in
Medieval Latin write (an account) for information or record, from re- back (see re-) + portare to
carry (see port (n.1)). Early 15c. as to submit (to an authority, etc.). Meaning to name someone as
having offended somehow is from 1885. Related: Reported; reporting.


reportable (adj.)

1858, worthy, from report (v.) + -able. Of accidents, etc., 1942. Related: Reportably.


reportage (n.)

the describing of events, 1877; see report (v.) + -age. From 1881 as a French word in English.


reported (adj.)

according to report, 1812, past participle adjective from report (v.). Related: Reportedly.


reporter (n.)

late 14c., reportour, one who gives an account, agent noun from report (v.), or from Old French
reporteur (Modern French rapporteur). In the newspaper sense, from 1798. French reporter in this
sense is a 19c. borrowing from English.


reportorial (adj.)

irregular formation, 1852, American English, from Latinized form of reporter + -ial.


repose (v.1)

lie at rest, mid-15c., from Middle French reposer, from Old French repauser (10c.), from Late Latin
repausare cause to rest, from Latin re-, here probably an intensive prefix (see re-), + Late Latin
pausare to stop (see pause (v.)). Related: Reposed; reposing.


repose (v.2)

put, place, mid-15c., from Latin repos-, stem of reponere put back, set back, replace, restore; put
away, lay out, stretch out, from re- back, away (see re-) + ponere to put, place (see position
(n.)). Or perhaps [Klein] formed in Middle English from Old French poser, on model of disposen
dispose.


repose (n.)

rest, c.1500, from Middle French repos (11c.), back-formation from reposer (see repose (v.1)).


reposeful (adj.)

1852, full of repose, from repose (n.) + -ful. Earlier it meant responsible (1620s), from repose
(v.2).


reposition (n.)

1580s, act of replacing, from Late Latin repositionem (nominative repositio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin reponere (see repose (v.2)). Meaning act of laying up in safety is
from 1610s.


reposition (v.)

also re-position, 1859, from re- again + position (v.). Related: Repositioned; repositioning.


repository (n.)

late 15c., vessel, etc., for storage, Middle French repositoire or directly from Late Latin
repositorium store, in classical Latin, a stand on which food is placed, from noun use of repositus,
past participle of reponere put away, store (see repose (v.2)). Figurative use is recorded from
1640s.


repossess (v.)

late 15c., to reoccupy; see re- back, again + possess. Meaning take back from a purchaser who
defaults on payments first recorded 1933. Related: Repossessed; repossessing.


repossession (n.)

1580s, from re- + possession.


repost (v.)

1963, with reference to letters, from re- + post (v.3). Related: Reposted; reposting.


repot (v.)

put in fresh pots, 1845, from re- + pot (v.). Related: Repotted; repotting.


repour (v.)

c.1600, from re- + pour (v.). Related: Repoured; repouring.


repousse (adj.)

formed in relief, in reference to a type of decorative pattern, 1852, from French repouss&eacute;,
past participle of repousser to thrust back, beat back, from re- (see re-) + pousser (see push
(v.)).


reprehend (v.)

mid-14c., from Latin reprehendere blame, censure, rebuke; seize, restrain, literally pull back, hold
back, from re- back (see re-) + prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile).


reprehensible (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reprehensible (14c.) or directly from Late Latin reprehensibilis, from
reprehens-, past participle stem of Latin reprehendere (see reprehend). Related: Reprehensibly;
reprehensibility.


reprehension (n.)

late 14c., from Old French reprehension (12c.) or directly from Latin reprehensionem (nominative
reprehensio) blame, a censure, reprimand, literally a taking again, noun of action from past
participle stem of reprehendere (see reprehend).


reprehensive (adj.)

1580s, from Latin stem of reprehend + -ive, perhaps on model of comprehensive.


represent (v.)

late 14c., to bring to mind by description, also to symbolize, serve as a sign or symbol of; serve
as the type or embodiment of; from Old French representer present, show, portray (12c.), from Latin
repraesentare make present, set in view, show, exhibit, display, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + praesentare to present, literally to place before (see present (v.)). Legislative sense is
attested from 1650s. Related: Represented; representing.


representation (n.)

c.1400, image, likeness, from Old French representacion (14c.) and directly from Latin
representationem (nominative representatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
repraesentare (see represent). Meaning statement made in regard to some matter is from 1670s.
Legislative sense first attested 1769.


representational (adj.)

1855, from representation + -al (1). Specifically of visual arts from 1923. Related:
Representationally.


representative (adj.)

serving to represent, late 14c., from Old French representatif (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin
repraesentativus, from stem of Latin repraesentare (see represent). Meaning standing for others is
from 1620s; in the political sense of holding the place of the people in the government, having
citizens represented by chosen persons is first recorded 1620s. Meaning pertaining to or founded on
representation of the people is from 1640s.


representative (n.)

1640s, example, type, from representative (adj.); 1690s in sense of member of a legislative body.


repress (v.)

late 14c., to check, restrain, from Latin repressus, past participle of reprimere hold back, curb,
figuratively check, confine, restrain, refrain, from re- back (see re-) + premere to push (see press
(v.1)).    Used of feelings or desires from late 14c.; in the purely psychological sense, it
represents German verdr&auml;ngen (Freud, 1893), first attested 1904 (implied in repressed). Meaning
to put down (a rebellion, etc.) is from late 15c. Related: Repressed; repressing.


repressed (adj.)

1660s, past participle adjective from repress (v.). Psychological sense by 1904.


repression (n.)

late 14c., noun of action from repress (v.), or else from Medieval Latin repressionem (nominative
repressio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin reprimere. Psychological sense is from
1908; biochemical sense is from 1957.


repressive (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French repressif, from Latin repress-, past participle stem of reprimere
(see repress). Related: Repressively.


reprieve (v.)

1570s, reprive, take back to prison, alteration (perhaps by influence of reprove) of Middle English
repryen to remand, detain (late 15c.), probably from Middle French repris, past participle of
reprendre take back (see reprise). Meaning to suspend an impending execution is recorded from 1590s;
this sense evolved because being sent back to prison was the alternative to being executed. Spelling
with -ie- is from 1640s, perhaps by analogy of achieve, etc. Related: Reprieved; reprieving.


reprieve (n.)

1590s, from reprieve (v.).


reprimand (n.)

1630s, from French r&eacute;primande (16c.), from Middle French reprimende reproof, from Latin
reprimenda that is to be repressed (as in reprimenda culpa fault to be checked), fem. singular of
reprimendus, gerundive of reprimere reprove (see repress). Spelling influenced in French by mander
to summon.


reprimand (v.)

1680s, from reprimand (n.) or else from French r&#233;primander (17c.), from r&#233;primande.
Related: Reprimanded; reprimanding.


reprint (v.)

1550s, from re- back, again + print (v.). Related: Reprinted; reprinting.


reprint (n.)

1610s, from reprint (v.).


reprisal (n.)

early 15c., seizing property or citizens of another nation in retaliation for loss inflicted on
one's own, from Anglo-French reprisaille (14c.), from Old French reprisaille (Modern French
repr&#233;saille), from early Italian ripresaglia, from ripreso, past participle of riprendere take
back, from Latin reprendere, earlier reprehendere (see reprehend). General sense of retaliation is
from 1710.


reprise (n.)

late 14c., yearly deduction from charges upon a manor or estate, from Old French reprise act of
taking back (13c.), fem. of repris, past participle of reprendre take back, from Latin reprendere,
earlier reprehendere, earlier reprehendere (see reprehend). Meaning resumption of an action is from
1680s. Musical sense is from 1879.


reprise (n.)

early 15c., from Old French repris, past participle of reprendre (see reprise (v.)).


repro

1946 as a shortening of reproduction.


reproach (n.)

mid-14c., a rebuke, blame, censure; also object of scorn or contempt; c.1400, as disgrace, state of
disgrace, from Old French reproche blame, shame, disgrace (12c.), from reprochier to blame, bring up
against, said by some French etymologists to be from Vulgar Latin *repropiare, from Latin re-
opposite of + prope near (see propinquity), with suggestions of bring near to as in modern get in
(someone's) face. But others would have it from *reprobicare, from Latin reprobus/reprobare (see
reprobate (adj.)).


reproach (v.)

mid-14c., reprochen to rebuke, reproach, from  Anglo-French repruchier, Old French reprochier
upbraid, blame, accuse, speak ill of, from reproche (see reproach (n.)). Related: Reproached;
reproaching.


reproachful (adj.)

1540s, expressing reproach, also worthy of reproach, from reproach + -ful. Related: Reproachfully;
reproachfulness.


reprobate (adj.)

early 15c., rejected as worthless, from Late Latin reprobatus, past participle of reprobare
disapprove, reject, condemn, from Latin re- opposite of, reversal of previous condition (see re-) +
probare prove to be worthy (see probate (n.)). Earliest form of the word in English was a verb,
meaning to disapprove (early 15c.).


reprobate (n.)

1540s, one rejected by God, from reprobate (adj.). Sense of abandoned or unprincipled person is from
1590s.


reprobation (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin reprobationem (nominative reprobatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of reprobare (see reprobate (adj.)).


reprocess (v.)

1939, from re- back, again + process (v.). Related: Reprocessed; reprocessing.


reproduce (v.)

1610s, to produce again, from re- again + produce (v.), probably on model of French reproduire
(16c.). Sense of make a copy is first recorded 1850; that of produce offspring is from 1894.
Related: Reproduced; reproducing.


reproduceable (adj.)

1825, from reproduce + -able. Alternative form reproductable attested from 1834.


reproductible (adj.)

1834; see reproduction + -able.


reproduction (n.)

1650s, act of forming again, noun of action from reproduce. Of generation of living things, from
1782; of sounds, from 1908. Meaning a copy is from 1807.


reproductive (adj.)

1753; see reproduce + -ive. In U.S., reproductive rights attested from 1970.


reprogram (v.)

also reprogramme, 1945, from re- back, again + program (v.). Related: Reprogrammed; reprogramming.


reproof (n.)

mid-14c., a shame, a disgrace, also a censure, a rebuke, from Old French reprove reproach,
rejection, verbal noun from reprover to blame, accuse (see reprove).


reprove (v.)

c.1300, from Old French reprover accuse, blame (12c.), from Late Latin reprobare disapprove, reject,
condemn (see reprobate). Related: Reproved; reproving.


reptile (n.)

late 14c., creeping or crawling animal, from Old French reptile (early 14c.) and directly from Late
Latin reptile, noun use of neuter of reptilis (adj.) creping, crawling, from rept-, past participle
stem of repere to crawl, creep, from PIE root *rep- to creep, crawl (cognates: Lithuanian replioju
to creep). Used of persons of low character from 1749.    Precise scientific use began to develop
mid-18c., but the word was used as well at first of animals now known as amphibians, including
toads, frogs, salamanders; separation of Reptilia (1835 as a distinct class) and Amphibia took place
early 19c.; popular use lagged, and reptile still was used late 18c. with sense An animal that
creeps upon many feet [Johnson, who calls the scorpion a reptile], sometimes excluding serpents.
And the terrestrial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or beasts, reptiles, which have many
feet, and serpents, which have no feet at all. [Locke, Elements of Natural Philosophy, 1689]   <hr
/>   An inadvertent step may crush the snail  That crawls at ev'ning in the public path ;  But he
that has humanity, forewarn'd,  Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.  [Cowper, The Task,
1785]    The Old English word for reptile was slincend, related to slink.


Reptilia (n.)

mid-17c., from Latin plural of reptile (see reptile).


reptilian (adj.)

1846, from reptile + -ian. Transferred meaning malignant, cold, underhanded is from 1859.


republic (n.)

c.1600, state in which supreme power rests in the people via elected representatives, from Middle
French r&eacute;publique (15c.), from Latin respublica (ablative republica) the common weal, a
commonwealth, state, republic, literally res publica public interest, the state, from res affair,
matter, thing + publica, fem. of publicus public (see public (adj.)). Republic of letters attested
from 1702.


republican (adj.)

1712, belonging to a republic, of the nature of a republic, consonant to the principles of a
republic, from republic + -an. The French republican calendar was in use from Nov. 26, 1793 to Dec.
31, 1805.


republican (n.)

one who favors a republic or republican principles (or, as Johnson puts it, One who thinks a
commonwealth without monarchy the best government), 1690s; see from republican (adj.). With capital
R-, in reference to a member of a specific U.S. political party (the Anti-Federalists) from 1782,
though this was not the ancestor of the modern U.S. Republican Party, which dates from 1854.


republicanism (n.)

1680s, from republican (adj.) + -ism. In reference to the U.S. Republican Party from 1856.


republication (n.)

1730, from re- + publication.


Republicrat (n.)

in U.S. political jargon, usually meaning moderate; independent, 1881, from elements of the names of
the two dominant parties; see from republican (n.) and democrat (n.).


republish (v.)

1620s, from re- + publish. Related: Republished; republishing.


repudiate (v.)

1540s, to cast off by divorce,     from Latin repudiatus, past participle of repudiare to cast off,
put away, divorce, reject, scorn, disdain, from repudium divorce, rejection, a putting away,
dissolution of marriage, from re- back, away (see re-) + pudium, probably related to pes-/ped- foot
[Barnhart]. If this is so, the original notion may be of kicking something away, but folk etymology
commonly connects it with pudere cause shame to. Of opinions, conduct, etc., to refuse to
acknowledge, attested from 1824. Earliest in English as an adjective meaning divorced, rejected,
condemned (mid-15c.). Related: Repudiated; repudiating.


repudiation (n.)

1540s, divorce (of a woman by a man), from Latin repudiationem (nominative repudiatio) a rejection,
refusal, noun of action from past participle stem of repudiare (see repudiate). Meaning action of
disowning is from 1840s.


repudiatory (adj.)

1820; see repudiate + -ory.


repugn (v.)

late 14c., from Old French repugner, from Latin repugnare fight against, resist (see repugnant).
Related: Repugned; repugning.


repugnance (n.)

late 14c., from Old French repugnance opposition, resistance (13c.) or directly from Latin
repugnantia incompatibility, from stem of repugnare resist, disagree, be incompatible (see
repugnant).


repugnant (adj.)

late 14c., contrary, contradictory, from Old French repugnant contradictory, opposing or directly
from Latin repugnantem (nominative repugnans), present participle of repugnare to resist, fight
back, oppose; disagree, be incompatible, from re- back (see re-) + pugnare to fight (see
pugnacious). Meaning distasteful, objectionable is from 1777.


repulse (v.)

early 15c., from Latin repulsus, past participle of repellere drive back, reject (see repel).
Related: Repulsed; repulsing.


repulse (n.)

1530s, from Latin repulsa refusal, denial, noun use of fem. past participle of repellere (see
repel).


repulsion (n.)

early 15c., repudiation, from Late Latin repulsionem (nominative repulsio) a repelling, noun of
action from past participle stem of repellere (see repel). Meaning action of forcing or driving back
is attested from 1540s. Sense of strong dislike is from 1751.


repulsive (adj.)

early 15c., able to repel, from Middle French repulsif (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
repulsivus, from repuls-, past participle stem of repellere (see repel). The sense of causing
disgust is first recorded 1816. Related: Repulsively; repulsiveness.


repurchase (v.)

1590s, from re- + purchase (v.). Related: Repurchased; repurchasing.


repurpose (v.)

by 1983, from re- + purpose (v.). Related: Repurposed; repurposing.


reputable (adj.)

1610s, from repute + -able. Meaning having a good reputation is from 1670s. Related: Reputably.


reputation (n.)

mid-14c., credit, good reputation, from Latin reputationem (nominative reputatio) consideration, a
thinking over, noun of action from past participle stem of reputare reflect upon, reckon, count
over, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + putare to reckon, consider (see putative).


repute (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French reputer (late 13c.) or directly from Latin reputare to count over,
reckon; think over (see reputation). Related: Reputed; reputing.


repute (n.)

1550s, from repute (v.).


reputed (adj.)

1540s, held in repute, past participle adjective from repute (v.). Meaning supposed to be is from
1570s. Related: Reputedly.


request (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French requeste (Modern French requ&ecirc;te) a request, from Vulgar Latin
*requaesita, from Latin requisita a thing asked for, fem. of requisitus requested, demanded, from
past participle stem of requirere (see require).


request (v.)

1530s, from request (n.) or from Middle French requester, from Old French requester ask again,
request, reclaim, from requeste. Related: Requested; requesting.


requiem (n.)

mass for repose of the soul of the dead, c.1300, from Latin requiem, accusative singular of requies
rest (after labor), repose, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + quies quiet (see quiet (adj.)).
It is the first word of the Mass for the Dead in the Latin liturgy: Requiem &aelig;ternam dona eis,
Domine .... [Grant them eternal rest, O Lord ....]


requiescat (n.)

name of a prayer for the repose of the dead, from Latin phrase requiescat in pace (often abbreviated
R.I.P.), literally may he (or she) begin to rest in peace, from third person singular inceptive of
requies rest, repose (see requiem).


require (v.)

late 14c., to ask a question, inquire, from Old French requerre seek, procure; beg, ask, petition;
demand, from Vulgar Latin *requaerere, from Latin requirere seek to know, ask, from re-, here
perhaps meaning repeatedly (see re-), + quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).    The original sense
of this word has been taken over by request (v.). Sense of demand (someone) to do (something) is
from 1751, via the notion of to ask for imperatively, or as a right (late 14c.). Related: Required;
requiring.


required (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from require (v.). Required reading attested from 1881.


requirement (n.)

1520s, request, requisition, from require + -ment. Meaning things required, a need is from 1660s.
Meaning that which must be accomplished, necessary condition is from 1841. Related: Requirements.


requisite (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin requisitus, past participle of requirere (see require). As a noun from c.1600.


requisition (n.)

c.1400, from Old French requisicion (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin requisitionem
(nominative requisitio) a searching, from past participle stem of requirere (see require).


requisition (v.)

1837, from requisition (n.). Related: Requisitioned; requisitioning.


requisitioner (n.)

1877, agent noun from requisition (v.). Earlier was requisitionist (1819).


requital (n.)

1570s, from requite + -al (2).


requite (v.)

c.1400, repay (for good or ill), from re- back + Middle English quite clear, pay up, earlier variant
of quit (see quit). Related: Requited; requiting.


reredos (n.)

screen behind an altar, late 14c., from Anglo-French rere-, archaic comb. form of rear (n.), + dos
back (see dossier). Klein's sources suggest it is aphetic of Anglo-French areredos, from Old French
arere at the back (Modern French arri&#232;re).


rerun (v.)

also re-run, 1804, in reference to races, from re- back, again + run (v.). The noun, in reference to
film, is recorded from 1934; of television programs from 1955. Related: Reran; rerunning.


res ipsa loquitur

Latin, the thing speaks for itself.


res judicata (n.)

Latin, a point decided by competent authority.


resale (n.)

1620s, from re- back, again + sale (n.).


reschedule (v.)

1912, from re- back, again + schedule (v.). Related: Rescheduled; rescheduling.


rescind (v.)

1630s, from French rescinder cut off, cancel (15c.), and directly from Latin rescindere to cut off,
tear off, abolish, from re- back (see re-) + scindere to cut, split (see shed (v.)). Related:
Rescinded; rescinding.


rescission (n.)

1610s, action of cutting off; 1650s, action of annulling, from Late Latin rescissionem (nominative
rescisio) annulment, noun of action from past participle stem of rescindere to cut off; abolish (see
rescind).


rescue (n.)

late 14c., from rescue (v.). Earlier noun was rescous (early 14c.), from Old French rescous.


rescue (v.)

c.1300, from stem of Old French rescorre protect, keep safe; free, deliver (Modern French recourre),
from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + escourre to cast off, discharge, from Latin excutere to
shake off, drive away, from ex- out (see ex-) + -cutere, combining form of quatere to shake (see
quash). Related: Rescued; rescuing.


research (n.)

1570s, act of searching closely, from Middle French recerche (1530s, Modern French recherche), back-
formation from Old French recercher (see research (v.)). Meaning scientific inquiry is first
attested 1630s. Phrase research and development is recorded from 1923.


research (v.)

1590s, from Middle French recercher, from Old French recercher seek out, search closely, from re-,
intensive prefix (see re-), + cercher to seek for (see search (v.)). Related: Researched;
researching.


reseat (v.)

to seat again, 1630s, from re- + seat (v.). Related: Reseated; reseating.


resect (v.)

1650s, from Latin resectus, past participle of resecare to cut off, cut loose, curtail, from re-,
intensive prefix (see re-), + secare to cut (see section (n.)). Surgical sense is from 1846.
Related: Resected; resecting.


resection (n.)

1610s, from Latin resectionem (moninative resectio), noun of action from past participle stem of
resecare cut off, cut loose (see resect). Surgical sense is from 1775.


resemblance (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French resemblance (c.1300), from Old French resembler (see resemble) + -ance.


resemble (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French resembler belike (12c., Modern French ressemble), from re-, intensive
prefix, + sembler to appear, to seem, be like, from Latin simulare to copy (see similar (adj.)).
Related: Resembled; resembling.


resend (v.)

1550s, from re- + send. Related: Resent; resending.


resent (v.)

take (something) ill; be in some degree angry or provoked at, c.1600, from French ressentir feel
pain, regret, from Old French resentir feel again, feel in turn (13c.), from re-, intensive prefix,
+ sentir to feel, from Latin sentire (see sense (n.)). Related: Resented; resenting.


resentful (adj.)

1650s, from resent + -ful. Related: Resentfully; resentfulness.


resentment (n.)

1610s, from French ressentiment (16c.), verbal noun from ressentir (see resent).    Ridicule often
parries resentment, but resentment never yet parried ridicule. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary
Conversations]


reservation (n.)

late 14c., act of reserving, from Old French reservation (14c.) and directly from Late Latin
reservationem (nominative reservatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin reservare
(see reserve (n.)). Mental sense is from c.1600. U.S. sense tract of public land set aside for some
special use is recorded from 1789, originally in reference to the Six Nations in New York State.
Meaning act or fact of engaging a room, a seat, etc. is from 1904, originally American English.


reserve (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French reserver set aside, withhold (12c.) and directly from Latin reservare keep
back, save up; retain, preserve, from re- back (see re-) + servare to keep, save, preserve, protect
(see observe). Meaning to book is from 1935. Related: Reserved; reserving.


reserve (n.)

something stored up, 1610s, from reserve (v.) or from French r&#233;serve, a Middle French back-
formation from reserver. Meaning self-imposed restraint on freedom of words or actions; habit of
keeping back the feelings is from 1650s.


reserved (adj.)

guarded (in manner), c.1600, past participle adjective from reserve (v.). Of seats, tables from
1858.


reservist (n.)

soldier who belongs to the reserves, 1872, from French r&#233;serviste, from reserver (see reserve
(v.)).


reservoir (n.)

1680s, a place where something tends to collect, originally figurative, from French r&eacute;servoir
storehouse, from Old French reserver to reserve (see reserve (n.)). Specific meaning artificial
basin to collect and store a large body of water is from 1705.


reset (v.)

also re-set, 1650s, place (a gem) in a new setting, from re- + set (v.). Related: Resetting. Meaning
cause a device to return to a former condition is from 1847; intransitive sense from 1897. As a
noun, from 1847.


resettle (v.)

1540s (transitive), of places, from re- + settle (v.). Intransitive sense from 1821. Meaning Bring
into order again is from 1610s. Related: Resettled; resettling.


resettlement (n.)

1630s, from resettle + -ment. In a South African context from 1954.


reshape (v.)

also re-shape, 1798, from re- + shape (v.). Related: Reshaped; reshaping.


reshuffle (v.)

1816 of cards; 1890 of organizations; from re- back, again + shuffle (v.). Related: Reshuffled;
reshuffling. As a noun from 1861.


reside (v.)

late 15c., to settle, from Middle French resider (15c.) and directly from Latin residere sit down,
settle; remain behind, rest, linger; be left, from re- back, again (see re-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary). Meaning to dwell permanently first attested 1570s. Related: Resided; residing. Also from
the French word are Dutch resideren, German residiren.


residence (n.)

late 14c., act of dwelling; dwelling place, from Old French residence, from Medieval Latin
residentia, from Latin residentem (nominative residens) residing, dwelling, present participle of
residere reside (see reside). Also borrowed into German (Residenz), Dutch (residentie).


residency (n.)

1570s, residence; see resident + -cy. Hospital sense is from 1924.


resident (n.)

mid-15c., an inhabitant, one who resides, from resident (adj.). Meaning medical graduate in practice
in a hospital as training first attested 1892, American English.


resident (adj.)

late 14c., dwelling, residing, from Old French resident and directly from Latin residentem
(nominative residens), present participle of residere to sit down, settle (see reside).


residential (adj.)

1650s, serving as a residence, from resident (n.) + -ial. Meaning having to do with housing is from
1856.


residual (adj.)

1560s, from residue + -al (1), or from French r&#233;siduel, from Latin residuum.


residual (n.)

1550s, in mathematics, from residual (adj.) or from residue + -al (2). Residuals royalties attested
by 1960.


residue (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French residu (14c.), from Latin residuum a remainder, that which is left behind,
noun use of neuter of adjective residuus remaining, left over, from residere remain behind (see
reside).


resign (v.)

late 14c., give up, surrender, abandon, submit; relinquish, from Old French resigner renounce,
relinquish (13c.), from Latin resignare to check off, annul, cancel, give back, give up, from re-
opposite (see re-) + signare to make an entry in an account book, literally to mark (see sign (v.)).
The sense is of making an entry (signum) opposite -- on the credit side -- balancing the former mark
and thus canceling the claim it represents. The specific meaning of give up a position is first
recorded late 14c. Sense of to give (oneself) up to some emotion or situation is from 1718. Related:
Resigned; resigning.


resignation (n.)

late 14c., act of resigning (an office, etc.), from Old French resignation (14c.) and directly from
Medieval Latin resignationem (nominative resignatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin resignare (see resign). Meaning submission, acquiescence is from 1640s.


resigned (adj.)

submissive, full of resignation, 1690s, past participle adjective from resign (v.). Related:
Resignedly.


resile (v.)

1520s, draw back, from obsolete French resiler withdraw from an agreement, or directly from Latin
resilire to jump back (see resilience). Meaning spring back, start back, recoil (of material things)
from 1708. Related: Resiled; resiling.


resilience (n.)

1620s, act of rebounding, from Latin resiliens, present participle of resilire to rebound, recoil,
from re- back (see re-) + salire to jump, leap (see salient (adj.)). Compare result (v.). Meaning
elasticity is from 1824.


resiliency (n.)

1660s, tendency to rebound; see resilience + -cy. Meaning power of recovery is from 1857.


resilient (adj.)

1640s, springing back, from Latin resilientem inclined to leap or spring back, present participle of
resilire (see resilience). Figuratively, of persons, from 1830. Related: Resiliently.


resin (n.)

late 14c., from Old French resine gum, resin, and directly from Latin resina resin, from Greek
rhetine resin of the pine, of unknown origin.


resinate (v.)

impregnate with resin, 1891, from resin + -ate (2). Related: Resinated; resinating.


resinous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin resinosus, from resina (see resin).


resist (v.)

late 14c., from Old French resister hold out against (14c.), from Latin resistere to make a stand
against, oppose; to stand back; withstand, from re- against (see re-) + sistere take a stand, stand
firm (see assist). Related: Resisted; resisting.


resistance (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French resistance, earlier resistence, from Late Latin resistentia, from present
participle stem of Latin resistere make a stand against, oppose (see resist). Meaning organized
covert opposition to an occupying or ruling power [OED] is from 1939. Electromagnetic sense is from
1860. Path of least resistance is from 1825, originally a term in science and engineering.


resistant (adj.)

c.1600, from French r&eacute;sistant, present participle of r&eacute;sister (see resist). In
reference to diseases or drugs from 1897.


resistible (adj.)

1640s, from resist (v.) + -ible. Alternative resistable attested from c.1600.


resistor (n.)

late 14c., one who resists; 1580s, that which resists; agent noun in Latin form from resist.
Specifically in electricity from 1905; resister was used in this sense from 1759.


resoluble (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin resulubilis, from re-, (see re-) + solubilis (see soluble).


resolute (adj.)

early 15c., dissolved, of loose structure, also morally lax, from Latin resolutus, past participle
of resolvere untie, unfasten, loose, loosen (see resolution). Meaning determined, decided, absolute,
final is from c.1500, especially in resolute answer, a phrase common in 16th c. [OED]. From 1530s of
persons. The notion is of breaking (something) into parts as the way to arrive at the truth of it
and thus make the final determination (compare resolution). Related: Resolutely; resoluteness.


resolution (n.)

late 14c., a breaking into parts, from Old French resolution (14c.) or directly from Latin
resolutionem (nominative resolutio) process of reducing things into simpler forms, from past
participle stem of resolvere loosen (see resolve). Sense of a solving (as of mathematical problems)
first recorded 1540s, as is that of power of holding firmly (compare resolute). Sense of decision or
expression of a meeting is from c.1600. Meaning effect of an optical instrument is from 1860. New
Year's resolutions in reference to a specific intention to better oneself is at least from 1780s,
and through 19c. generally of a pious nature.


resolvable (adj.)

1640s, from resolve (v.) + -able.


resolve (v.)

late 14c., melt, dissolve, reduce to liquid; intransitive sense from c.1400; from Old French
resolver or directly from Latin resolvere to loosen, loose, unyoke, undo; explain; relax; set free;
make void, dispel, from re-, perhaps intensive, or back (see re-), + solvere loosen (see solve).
Early 15c. as separate into components, hence the use in optics (1785). Meaning determine, decide
upon is from 1520s, hence pass a resolution (1580s). For sense evolution, compare resolute (adj.).
Related: Resolved; resolving.


resolve (n.)

determination, firmness or fixedness of purpose; a determination, 1590s, from resolve (v.).


resolved (adj.)

determined, 1520s, past participle adjective from resolve (v.). Related: Resolvedly.


resonance (n.)

mid-15c., in acoustics, prolongation of sound by reverberation; 1660s, act of resonating; from
Middle French resonance (15c.), from Latin resonantia echo, from resonare to sound again (see
resound). Earlier in same sense was resonation (early 15c.).


resonant (adj.)

1590s, from Latin resonantem (nominative resonans), present participle of resonare (see resonance).


resonate (v.)

1873, from Latin resonatus, past participle of resonare to sound again (see resonance). Literal at
first; figurative sense, of feelings, emotions, etc., by 1978. Related: Resonated; resonating.


resonator (n.)

instrument or chamber formed to respond to a single tone, 1869, agent noun in Latin form from
resonate (v.).


resorb (v.)

1630s, from French r&#233;sorber or directly from Latin resorbere to suck back, from re- back, again
(see re-) + sorbere to suck (see absorb). Related: Resorbed; resorbing.


resorption (n.)

1670s, noun of action from resorb.


resort (n.)

late 14c., that to which one has recourse for aid or assistance, from Old French resort resource, a
help, an aid, a remedy, back-formation from resortir to resort, literally to go out again, from re-
again (see re-) + sortir go out (see sortie). Meaning place people go for recreation is first
recorded 1754. Phrase in the last resort (1670s) translates French en dernier ressort, originally of
legal appeals.


resort (v.)

c.1400, issue; come out again; mid-15c., to go to (someone) for aid, from Old French resortir, from
resort (see resort (n.)). Related: Resorted; resorting.


resound (v.)

late 14c., resownen, from Old French resoner reverberate (12c., Modern French r&#233;sonner), from
Latin resonare sound again, resound, echo, from re- back, again (see re-) + sonare to sound (see
sonata). Spelling influenced from mid-15c. by sound (v.). Related: Resounded; resounding.


resounding (adj.)

late 14c., present participle adjective from resound (v.). Figurative use from 1630s. Related:
Resoundingly.


resource (n.)

1610s, means of supplying a want or deficiency, from French resourse a source, spring, noun use of
fem. past participle of Old French resourdre to rally, raise again, from Latin resurgere rise again
(see resurgent). Resources a country's wealth first recorded 1779.


resource (v.)

1975, from resource (n.). Related: Resourced; resourcing.


resourceful (adj.)

1807, from resource + -ful. Related: Resourcefully; resourcefulness.


respect (n.)

late 14c., relationship, relation; regard, consideration, from Old French respect and directly from
Latin respectus regard, a looking at, literally act of looking back (or often) at one, noun use of
past participle of respicere look back at, regard, consider, from re- back (see re-) + specere look
at (see scope (n.1)). Meanings feeling of esteem excited by actions or attributes of someone or
something; courteous or considerate treatment due to personal worth or power are from 1580s, as is
sense of point, particular feature.


respect (v.)

1540s, to regard, from Middle French respecter look back; respect; delay, from Latin respectere,
frequentative of respicere (see respect (n.). Meaning treat with deferential regard or esteem is
from 1550s. Sense of refrain from injuring is from 1620s. Meaning have reference to is from 1560s.
Related: Respected; respecting.    To respect the person was show undue bias toward (or against)
based on regard for the outward circumstances of a person; hence respecter of persons, usually with
negative, from Acts x:34, in the 1611 translation.


respectability (n.)

1785, from respectable + -ity.


respectable (adj.)

worthy of esteem, 1580s; see respect (v.) + -able. Sense of having an honest reputation is from
1755. That of occupying a fairly good position in society is c.1800. Related: Respectably.


respectful (adj.)

1580s, characterized by respect (implied in respectfully), from respect (n.) + -ful. Meaning full of
outward civility attested from 1680s. Related: Respectfulness.


respective (adj.)

mid-15c., regardful, observing or noting with attention, from Medieval Latin respectivus having
regard for, from Latin respect- past participle stem of respicere (see respect (n.)). Meaning
relating or pertaining severally each to each is from 1640s.


respectively (adv.)

mid-15c., relatively; 1620s, relatively to each singly, from respective + -ly (2).


respects (n.)

expressions or signs of esteem, deference, or compliment, 1610s; see respect (n.). Earlier (late
14c.) as aspects, particular respects.


respiration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin respirationem (nominative respiratio) breathing, respiration, noun of action
from past participle stem of respirare (see respire).


respirator (n.)

1836, as an aid to breathing (originally a sort of gauze mask, agent noun from respire. As machine
to provide artificial respiration from 1929.


respiratory (adj.)

1660s, from Modern Latin respiratorius or French respiratoire; see respiration + -ory.


respire (v.)

late 14c., from Old French respirer (12c.), from Latin respirare breathe again, breathe in and out,
from re- again (see re-) + spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)). Related: Respired; respiring.


respite (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French respit delay, respect (Modern French r&#233;pit), from Latin respectus
consideration, recourse, regard (see respect (n.)).


resplendence (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin resplendentia, from stem of Latin resplendens (see resplendent).


resplendent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin resplendentem (nominative resplendens) brilliant, radiant, present participle
of resplendere to glitter, shine, from re-, intensive prefix, + splendere to shine, be splendid (see
splendid). Related: Resplendently.


respond (v.)

c.1300, respound, from Old French respondere respond, correspond, from Latin respondere respond,
answer to, promise in return, from re- back (see re-) + spondere to pledge (see spondee). Modern
spelling and pronunciation is from c.1600. Related: Responded; responding.


respondent (n.)

1520s, one who answers, from Latin respondentem (nominative respondens), present participle of
respondere (see respond).


responder (n.)

1845 of devices, 1871 of persons, agent noun from respond (v.).


response (n.)

c.1300, from Old French respons (Modern French r&#233;ponse) and directly from Latin responsum an
answer, noun use of neuter past participle of respondere to respond (see respond).


responsibility (n.)

condition of being responsible, 1787, from responsible + -ity. Meaning that for which one is
responsible is from 1796. Related: Responsibilities.


responsible (adj.)

1590s, answerable (to another, for something), from obsolete French responsible (13c., Modern French
responsable, as if from Latin *responsabilis), from Latin respons-, past participle stem of
respondere to respond (see respond). Meaning accountable for one's actions is attested from 1640s;
that of reliable, trustworthy is from 1690s. Retains the sense of obligation in the Latin root word.
Related: Responsibly.


responsive (adj.)

early 15c., making answer, from Middle French responsif and directly from Late Latin responsivus
answering, from Latin respons-, past participle stem of respondere (see respond). Meaning responding
to influence or action is from 1762. Related: Responsively; responsiveness.


ressentiment (n.)

1943, a word from Nietzsche, from German ressentiment, from French ressentiment (see resentment).
The French word also was borrowed as obsolete English resentiment (16c.) feeling or sense (of
something); state of being deeply affected by (something); resentment.


rest (n.1)

sleep, Old English r&aelig;ste, reste rest, bed, intermission of labor, mental peace, common
Germanic (Old Saxon resta resting place, burial-place, Dutch rust, Old High German rasta, German
Rast rest, peace, repose), of uncertain origin.    Original sense seems to be a measure of distance
(compare Old High German rasta, which in addition to rest meant league of miles, Old Norse rost
league, distance after which one rests, Gothic rasta mile, stage of a journey), perhaps a word from
the nomadic period. Unless the original sense is repose, thence extended secondarily to distance
between two resting place.    The meaning support, thing upon which something rests is attested from
1580s. At rest dead is from mid-14c., on the notion of last rest. Rest stop is from 1973. Colloquial
expression to give (something) a rest to stop talking about it is first recorded 1927, American
English.


rest (v.2)

to be left, remain, mid-15c., from Old French rester to remain, from Latin restare stand back, be
left, from re- back (see re-) + stare to stand (see stet). Partially confused and merged with the
other verb rest. Sense of to continue to be is in rest assured. Transitive sense of to keep, cause
to continue to remain was common in 16c.-17c., used with a predicate adjective following and
qualifying the object [Century Dictionary], hence phrase rest you merry (1540s);  God rest you
merry, gentlemen, often is mis-punctuated.


rest (n.2)

remainder, that which is left after a separation, early 15c., from Middle French reste remnant, from
rester to remain (see rest (v.2)). Meaning others, those not included in a proposition is from
1530s.


rest (v.1)

repose, cease from action, Old English r&aelig;stan, restan take repose by lying down; lie in death
or in the grave; cease from motion, work, or performance; be without motion; be undisturbed, be free
from what disquiets; stand or lie as upon a support or basis, from root of rest (n.1). Transitive
senses give repose to; lay or place, as on a support or basis are from early 13c. Meaning cease
from, have intermission is late 14c., also rely on for support. Related: Rested; resting. Common
Germanic, with cognates in Old Frisian resta, Dutch rusten, Old High German raston, German rasten,
Swedish rasta, Danish raste to rest. Resting place is from mid-14c.


restart (v.)

also re-start, 1845, from re- + start (v.). Related: Restarted; restarting. As a noun from 1881.


restate (v.)

also re-state, 1713, from re- + state (v.). Related: Restated; restating.


restatement (n.)

1785, from restate + -ment.


restaurant (n.)

1821, from French restaurant a restaurant, originally food that restores, noun use of present
participle of restaurer to restore or refresh, from Old French restorer (see restore).    In 1765 a
man by the name of Boulanger, also known as Champ d'Oiseaux or Chantoiseau, opened a shop near the
Louvre (on either the rue des Poulies or the rue Bailleul, depending on which authority one chooses
to believe). There he sold what he called restaurants or bouillons restaurants--that is, meat-based
consomm&#233;s intended to restore a person's strength. Ever since the Middle Ages the word
restaurant had been used to describe any of a variety of rich bouillons made with chicken, beef,
roots of one sort or another, onions, herbs, and, according to some recipes, spices, crystallized
sugar, toasted bread, barley, butter, and even exotic ingredients such as dried rose petals,
Damascus grapes, and amber. In order to entice customers into his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on
his window a line from the Gospels: Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego vos restaurabo.
He was not content simply to serve bouillon, however. He also served leg of lamb in white sauce,
thereby infringing the monopoly of the caterers' guild. The guild filed suit, which to everyone's
astonishment ended in a judgment in favor of Boulanger. [Jean-Robert Pitte, The Rise of the
Restaurant, in Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present, English editor Albert
Sonnenfeld, transl. Clarissa Botsford, 1999, Columbia University Press]    Italian spelling
ristorante attested in English by 1925.


restaurateur (n.)

1796, from French restaurateur, agent noun from restaurer to restore (see restaurant) on model of
Late Latin restaurator restorer. Native form restauranter is recorded from 1877.


rested (adj.)

refreshed by sleep, c.1400, past participle adjective from rest (v.).


restful (adj.)

mid-14c., characterized by rest; late 14c., quiet, peaceful; from rest (n.1) + -ful. Related:
Restfully; restfulness.


restitute (v.)

late 14c., from French restituer (14c.) or from Latin restitutus, past participle of restituere
restore, replace (see restitution).


restitution (n.)

early 14c., from Old French restitucion or directly from Latin restitutionem (nominative restitutio)
a restoring, noun of action from past participle stem of restituere set up again, restore, rebuild,
replace, revive, reinstate, re-establish, from re- again (see re-) + statuere to set up, from PIE
root *sta- to stand, with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet).


restive (adj.)

early 15c., restyffe not moving forward, from Middle French restif motionless, brought to a
standstill (Modern French r&#233;tif), from rester to remain (see rest (n.2)). Sense of unmanageable
(1680s) evolved via notion of a horse refusing to go forward.


restless (adj.)

late 14c., from rest (n.1) + -less. A general Germanic compound (Frisian restleas, Dutch rusteloos,
German rastlos, Danish rastl&ouml;s). Meaning stirring constantly, desirous of action is attested
from late 15c. Related: Restlessly; restlessness. Old English had restleas deprived of sleep.


restock (v.)

also re-stock, 1670s, from re- + stock (v.). Related: Restocked; restocking.


restoration (n.)

late 14c., a means of healing or restoring health; renewing of something lost, from Old French
restoration (Modern French restauration) and directly from Late Latin restorationem (nominative
restoratio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin restaurare (see restore).    Mid-15c.
as the repairing of a building; c.1500 as a restoring to a former state. With a capital R-, in
reference to the reestablishment of the English monarchy under Charles II in 1660, from 1718. As a
period in English theater, attested from 1898. In French history, it refers to 1814. An earlier word
in this sense was restauration (late 14c.), from French.


restorative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French restoratif from restorer (see restore).


restorative (n.)

early 15c., from restorative (adj.), or from Medieval Latin restaurativum a restorative.


restore (v.)

c.1300, to give back, also, to build up again, repair, from Old French restorer, from Latin
restaurare repair, rebuild, renew, from re- back, again (see re-) + -staurare, as in instaurare
restore, from PIE *stau-ro-, from root *sta- to stand, set down, make or be firm, with derivatives
meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Restored; restoring.


restrain (v.)

mid-14c., from stem of Old French restreindre press, push together; curb, bridle; bandage (12c.),
from Latin restringere draw back tightly, confine, check (see restriction). Related: Restrained;
restraining.    That which we restrain we keep within limits; that which we restrict we keep within
certain definite limits; that which we repress we try to put out of existence. [Century Dictionary,
1902]


restrained (adj.)

repressed, kept under control, 1570s, past participle adjective from restrain.


restraint (n.)

action of restraining; means of restraint, early 15c., from Old French restreinte, noun use of fem.
past participle of restraindre (see restrain). Sense of reserve is from c.1600.


restrict (v.)

1530s, from Latin restrictus, past participle of restringere (see restriction). Regarded 18c. as a
Scottishism. Related: Restricted; restricting.


restricted (adj.)

limited, 1830, past participle adjective from restrict; of documents, etc., secret, not for public
release it is recorded from 1944. In U.S., restricted was a euphemism for off-limits to Jews
(1947).Manager: I'm sorry, Mr. Marx, but we can't let you use the pool; this country club is
restricted.Groucho: Well, my daughter's only half-Jewish; could she go in up to her knees? [there
are many versions and variations of this story, dating back to 1970s]


restriction (n.)

early 15c., that which restricts, from Middle French restriction (14c.) and directly from Late Latin
restrictionem (nominative restrictio) limitation, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
restringere restrict, bind fast, restrain, from re- back (see re-) + stringere draw tight (see
strain (v.)). Meaning act of restricting is from 1620s.


restrictive (adj.)

early 15c., serving to bind or draw together, from Middle French restrictif, from Late Latin
restrictivus, from Latin restrict-, past participle stem of restringere (see restriction). Meaning
imposing restriction is from 1570s. Related: Restrictively; restrictiveness.


restring (v.)

1809, from re- + string (v.). Related: Restrung; restringing.


restroom (n.)

also rest-room, 1897, as a room with a toilet, from rest (n.1) + room (n.).


restructure (v.)

1951, from re- back, again + structure (v.). Related: Restructured; restructuring.


resubmission (n.)

1640s; see re- + submission.


resubmit (v.)

1831, from re- + submit. Related: Resubmitted; resubmitting.


result (v.)

early 15c., occur as a result, arise as a consequence, from Medieval Latin resultare to result, in
classical Latin to spring forward, rebound, frequentative of past participle of resilire to rebound
(see resilience). Related: Resulted; resulting.


result (n.)

1620s, action of springing back; 1640s, outcome, effect, from result (v.). Related: Results.
Mathematical sense from 1771.


resultant (n.)

early 15c., from French r&#233;sultant and directly from Medieval Latin resultantem (nominative
resultans), present participle of resultare (see result (v.)).


resultant (adj.)

1630s, from resultant (adj.) and from Medieval Latin resultantem (nominative resultans), present
participle of resultare (see result (v.)).


resume (v.)

early 15c., to regain, take back; mid-15c., recommence, continue, begin again after interruption,
from Middle French resumer (14c.) and directly from Latin resumere take again, take up again, assume
again, from re- again (see re-) + sumere take up (compare assume). Meaning begin again is mid-15c.
Intransitive sense proceed after interruption is from 1802. Related: Resumed; resuming.


resume (n.)

also r&eacute;sum&eacute;, 1804, a summary, from French r&eacute;sum&eacute;, noun use of past
participle of Middle French resumer to sum up, from Latin resumere (see resume (v.)). Meaning
biographical summary of a person's career is 1940s.


resumption (n.)

mid-15c., repossessing by grant, from Middle French resumption and directly from Late Latin
resumptionem (nominative resumptio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin resumere (see
resume (v.)).


resupply (v.)

also re-supply, 1630s, from re- + supply (v.). Related: Resupplied; resupplying. As a noun by 1875.


resurface (v.)

1886, to provide with a fresh surface, from re- back, again + surface (v.). Meaning to come to the
surface again is recorded from 1953. Related: Resurfaced; resurfacing.


resurge (v.)

1887 in modern use, back-formation from resurgent. The verb also was in use in 17c., from Latin
resurgere, but it became obsolete. An older verb form was resourd (mid-15c.). Related: Resurged;
resurging.


resurgence (n.)

1834; see resurgent + -ence.


resurgent (adj.)

1808, from obsolete verb resurge to rise again (1570s), from Latin resurgere rise again, lift
oneself, be restored, from re- again (see re-) + surgere to rise (see surge).


resurrect (v.)

1772, back-formation from resurrection. Related: Resurrected; resurrecting. The correct form is
resurge, which, however, is intransitive only, whereas the verb resurrect can be used both as
transitive and intransitive ... [Klein]. Related: Resurrected; resurrecting.


resurrection (n.)

c.1300, originally the name of a Church festival commemorating Christ's rising from death, from
Anglo-French resurrectiun, Old French resurrection the Resurrection of Christ (12c.) and directly
from Church Latin resurrectionem (nominative resurrectio) a rising again from the dead, noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin resurgere rise again, appear again (see resurgent).
Replaced Old English &aelig;riste.    Generalized sense of revival is from 1640s. Also used in
Middle English of the rising again of the dead on the Last Day (c.1300). Resurrectionist, euphemism
for grave-robber is attested from 1776. Resurrection pie was mid-19c. English schoolboy slang for a
pie made from leftovers of previous meals; first attested 1831 as a Sheffield dialect term.    There
was a dreadful pie for dinner every Monday; a meat-pie with a stony crust that did not break; but
split into scaly layers, with horrible lumps of gristle inside, and such strings of sinew
(alternated by lumps of flabby fat) as a ghoule might use as a rosary. We called it kitten pie--
resurrection pie--rag pie--dead man's pie. We cursed it by night we cursed it by day; we wouldn't
stand it, we said; we would write to our friends; we would go to sea. [How I Went to Sea, Harper's
Magazine, December 1852]


resurvey (v.)

1590s, from re- + survey (v.). Related: Resurveyed; resurveying. As a noun from 1660s.


resuscitate (v.)

early 15c., revive, restore, from Latin resuscitatus, past participle of resuscitare rouse again,
revive, from re- again (see re-) + suscitare to raise, revive, from sub (up from) under (see sub-) +
citare to summon (see cite). Intransitive use from 1650s. Related: Resuscitated; resuscitating.
Earlier was resuscen restore (someone) to life, resurrect (c.1400).


resuscitation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French resuscitation or directly from Late Latin resuscitationem (nominative
resuscitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of resuscitare (see resuscitate).


ret (v.)

to soak stems of fibrous plants (flax, hemp, jute, etc.) to soften them, mid-15c., probably from
Middle Dutch roten (or an unrecorded cognate Old Norse word that is related to Norwegian r&#248;yta,
Swedish r&#246;ta, Danish r&#248;de); considered to be related to Old English rotian to rot (see rot
(v.)), but the vowel is difficult.


retail (v.)

mid-14c. sell in small quantities or parcels, from Old French retaillier cut back, cut off, pare,
clip, reduce, circumcise, from re- back (see re-) + taillier to cut, trim (see tailor (n.)).
Sometimes also to deal out (information, etc.) in small quantities; hand down by report; recount,
tell over again (1590s). Related: Retailed; retailing.


retail (n.)

early 15c., sale of commodities in small quantities or parcels or at second hand (opposed to
wholesale), from Old French retail piece cut off, shred, scrap, paring (Modern French retaille),
from retaillier (see retail (v.)). The notion of the English word is a selling by the piece. This
sense is not in French, however, and comes perhaps from cognate Italian ritaglio, which does have
that sense. As an adjective, of or pertaining to sale at retail, c.1600.


retailer (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from retail (v.).


retailing (n.)

mid-14c., verbal noun from retail (v.).


retain (v.)

late 14c., hold back, restrain; c.1400, continue keeping, keep possession of, from Old French
retenir keep, retain; take into feudal service; hold back; remember (12c.), from Latin retinere hold
back, keep back, detain, restrain, from re- back (see re-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning
keep (another) attached to one's person, keep in service is from mid-15c.; specifically of lawyers
from 1540s. Meaning keep in the mind is from c.1500. Related: Retained; retaining.


retainer (n.1)

fee to secure services, mid-15c., originally act of keeping for oneself from retain, or perhaps from
or influenced by Middle French retenir, infinitive used as a noun. Meaning fee paid to an attorney
to secure his services is from 1818.


retainer (n.2)

servant, 1530s, agent noun from retain (v.). Also one who retains or holds (1540s). Meaning dental
structure used to hold a bridge in place is recorded from 1887.


retake (v.)

mid-15c., to take back, from re- back, again + take (v.). Meaning to recapture is recorded from
1640s; sense of to record a second time is attested from 1962. Related: Retook; retaking; retaken.
As a noun from 1918; figurative use from 1937.


retaliate (v.)

1610s, from Latin retaliatus, past participle of retaliare requite, retaliate (see retaliation).
Related: Retaliated; retaliating.


retaliation (n.)

1580s, noun of action from Late Latin retaliare pay back in kind, from re- back (see re-) + Latin
talio exaction of payment in kind, from or influenced by talis suchlike (see that). Originally used
both in good and evil senses.


retaliatory (adj.)

1783; see retaliate + -ory. Alternative retaliative attested from 1819.


retard (v.)

late 15c., make slow or slower, from French retarder restrain, hold (someone) back, keep (someone
from doing something); come to a stop (13c.) or directly from Latin retardare make slow, delay, keep
back, hinder (see retardation). Related: Retarded; retarding.    The noun is recorded from 1788 in
the sense retardation, delay; from 1970 in offensive meaning retarded person, originally American
English, with accent on first syllable. Other words used for one who is mentally retarded include
retardate (1956), retardee (1971).


retardance (n.)

1550s, retardation, from Middle French retardance, from retarder (see retard (v.)). In reference to
resistance to fire, 1948.


retardant (adj.)

1640s, from retard (v.) + -ant or from Latin retardantem (nominative retardans), present participle
of retardare. From 1952 as a noun, retardant substance.


retardation (n.)

early 15c., fact or action of making slower in movement or time, from Latin retardationem
(nominative retardatio) a delaying, noun of action from past participle stem of retardare to make
slow, delay, keep back, hinder, from re- (see re-), + tardare to slow, related to tardus slow,
sluggish (see tardy). Sense of educational slowness is from 1907.


retarded (adj.)

1810, delayed, past participle adjective from retard (v.). In childhood development sense, mentally
slow, attested from 1895 (perhaps inspired by Italian tardivi).


retarder (n.)

1640s, agent noun from retard (v.). Of railway braking mechanisms from 1937.


retch (v.)

1540s, originally to clear the throat, to cough up phlegm, from Old English hr&aelig;can to cough
up, spit (related to hraca phlegm), from Proto-Germanic *khr&aelig;kijan (cognates: Old High German
rahhison to clear one's throat), of imitative origin (compare Lithuanian kregeti to grunt). Meaning
to make efforts to vomit is from 1850; sense of to vomit is first attested 1888. Related: Retched;
retching.


rete (n.)

late 14c., in anatomy, from Latin rete net (see reticulate (adj.)). Plural is retia.


retell (v.)

1590s, from re- back, again + tell (v.). Related: Retold; retelling.


retention (n.)

late 14c., from Latin retentionem (nominative retentio) a retaining, a holding back, noun of action
from past participle stem of retinere (see retain). Originally medical; mental sense is from late
15c.


retentive (adj.)

late 14c., able to hold or keep (mental or physical), from Old French retentif, from Medieval Latin
retentivus, from past participle stem of Latin retinere (see retain). Related: Retentively;
retentiveness.


rethink (v.)

1700, from re- back, again + think (v.). Related: Rethinking.


reticence (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French r&eacute;ticence (16c.), from Latin reticentia silence, a keeping silent,
from present participle stem of reticere keep silent, from re- (see re-), + tacere be silent (see
tacit). Not in common use until after 1830 [OED].


reticent (adj.)

1834, from Latin reticentem (nominative reticens), present participle of reticere be silent (see
reticence).


reticle (n.)

1650s, from Latin reticulum little net, diminutive of rete net (see reticulate (adj.)).


reticular (adj.)

1590s, from Modern Latin reticularis, from Latin reticulum little net (see reticulate (adj.)).


reticulate (adj.)

1650s, from Latin reticulatus having a net-like pattern, from reticulum little net, diminutive of
rete net, from PIE *ere- (2) to separate (see hermit).


reticulate (v.)

1787, back-formation from reticulated (1728), from reticulate (adj.). Related: Reticulating.


reticulation (n.)

1670s, noun of action or state from reticulate (v.).


reticule (n.)

a ladies' small bag, 1801, from French r&eacute;ticule (18c.) a net for the hair, a reticule, from
Latin reticulum a little net, network bag (see reticulate (adj.)).


reticulum (n.)

1650s, second stomach of a ruminant (so called from the folds of the membrane), from Latin reticulum
a little net (see reticulate (adj.)). The word was later given various uses in biology, cytology,
histology, etc., and made a southern constellation by La Caille (1763).


retina (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin retina the retina, probably from Vulgar Latin (tunica) *retina,
literally net-like tunic, on resemblance to the network of blood vessels at the back of the eye, and
ultimately from Latin rete net (see reticulate (adj.)). The Vulgar Latin phrase might be Gerard of
Cremona's 12c. translation of Arabic (tabaqa) shabakiyyah netlike (layer), itself probably a
translation of Greek amphiblestroeides (khiton).


retinal (adj.)

1838; see retina + -al (1).


retinitis (n.)

1821, from retina + -itis.


retinue (n.)

late 14c., from Old French retenue group of followers, state of service, literally that which is
retained, noun use of fem. past participle of retenir to employ, to retain, hold back (see retain).
Related: Retinular.


retiracy (n.)

1824, American English, irregularly from retire on model of privacy.


retire (v.)

1530s, of armies, to retreat, from Middle French retirer to withdraw (something), from re- back (see
re-) + Old French tirer to draw (see tirade). Related: Retired; retiring.    Meaning to withdraw to
some place, especially for the sake of privacy, is recorded from 1530s; sense of leave an occupation
first attested 1640s (implied in retirement). Meaning to leave company and go to bed is from 1660s.
Transitive sense is from 1540s, originally withdraw, lead back (troops, etc.); meaning to remove
from active service is from 1680s. Baseball sense of to put out is recorded from 1874.


retired (adj.)

1580s, separated from society or public notice, past participle adjective from retire (v.). Meaning
having given up business is from 1824. Abbreviation ret'd. attested from 1942.


retiree (n.)

1945, from retire + -ee.


retirement (n.)

1590s, act of retreating, also act of withdrawing into seclusion, from Middle French retirement
(1570s); see retire + -ment. Meaning privacy is from c.1600; that of withdrawal from occupation or
business is from 1640s.


retiring (adj.)

1580s, departing, retreating, present participle adjective from retire (v.). Also fond of retiring,
disposed to seclusion, hence unobtrusive, modest, subdued (1766).


retool (v.)

1866, to shape again with a tool, from re- back, again + tool (v.). Meaning to furnish a factory
with new equipment is recorded from 1940. Related: Retooled; retooling.


retort (v.)

1550s, make return in kind (especially of an injury), from Old French retort and directly from Latin
retortus, past participle of retorquere turn back, twist back, throw back, from re- back (see re-) +
torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Applied to exchanges of jest or sarcasm by c.1600, hence say or
utter sharply and aggressively in reply (1620s). Related: Retorted; retorting.


retort (n.1)

act of retorting, c.1600, from retort (v.).


retort (n.2)

vessel used in chemistry for distilling or effecting decomposition by the aid of heat, c.1600, from
Middle French retorte, from Medieval Latin *retorta a retort, a vessel with a bent neck, literally a
thing bent or twisted, from past participle stem of Latin retorquere (see retort (v.)).


retortion (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin retortionem (nominative retortio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin retorquere (see retort (v.)).


retouch (v.)

1640s, from French retoucher (13c.) to touch again (with a view to improving), from re- again (see
re-) + toucher (see touch (v.)).


retrace (v.)

1690s, from French retracer to trace again, from Middle French retracier, from re- again (see re-) +
tracier to trace (see trace (v.)). Related: Retraced; retracing.


retract (v.)

early 15c., to draw (something) back, from Old French retracter (14c.) and directly from Latin
retractus, past participle of retrahere to draw back (see retraction). Sense of to revoke, recant,
take back is attested from 1540s, probably a back-formation from retraction. Related: Retracted;
retracting.


retractable (adj.)

capable of being drawn in, 1769; see retract + -able. Meaning capable of being disowned is recorded
from 1610s. Also sometimes spelled retractible.


retraction (n.)

late 14c., withdrawal of an opinion, from Latin retractionem (nominative retractio) a drawing back,
hesitation, refusal, noun of action from past participle stem of retractare revoke, cancel, from re-
back (see re-) + tractere draw violently, frequentative of trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)).
Originally the title of a book by St. Augustine correcting his former writings. Meaning recantation
of opinion with admission of error is from 1540s.


retrain (v.)

1905, from re- back, again + train (v.). Related: Retrained; retraining.


retransmission (n.)

1788, from re- + transmission.


retread (v.)

to put a new tread on (a tire), 1908, from re- back, again (see re-) + tread (q.v.). The noun is
attested from 1914; in World War I it was Australian slang for a re-enlisted soldier.


retreat (n.)

c.1300, a step backward; late 14c., act of retiring or withdrawing; military signal for retiring
from action or exercise, from Old French retret, noun use of past participle of retrere draw back,
from Latin retrahere draw back, withdraw, call back, from re- back (see re-) + trahere to draw (see
tract (n.1)). Meaning place of seclusion is from early 15c.; sense of establishment for mentally ill
persons is from 1797. Meaning period of retirement for religious self-examination is from 1756.


retreat (v.)

early 15c., to draw in, draw back, leave the extremities, from retreat (n.) and in part from Old
French retret, past participle of retrere. Meaning to fall back from battle is mid-15c. Related:
Retreated; retreating.


retrench (v.1)

1590s, dig a new trench as a second line of defense, 1590s, probably a back-formation from
retrenchment in the military sense. Related: Retrenched; retrenching.


retrench (v.2)

cut off, cut down, pare away (expenses, etc.), 1620s, from obsolete French retrencher to cut off,
lessen, shorten (Modern French retrancher, Old French retrenchier), from re- back (see re-) + Old
French trenchier to cut (see trench). Related: Retrenched; retrenching.


retrenchment (n.)

action of lopping off or pruning, c.1600, from obsolete French retrenchement a cutting off or out,
from retrencher (see retrench (v.2)). Military sense is recorded from 1580s; see retrench (v.1).


retrial (n.)

1813, from re- + trial (n.).


retribute (v.)

give in return, 1570s, from Latin retributus, past participle of retribuere give back, restore,
repay (see retribution). Related: Retributed; retributing.


retribution (n.)

late 14c., repayment, from Old French retribution and directly from Latin retributionem (nominative
retributio) recompense, repayment, noun of action from past participle stem of retribuere hand back,
repay, from re- back (see re-) + tribuere to assign, allot (see tribute). Originally that which is
given in return for past good or evil; restricted modern use of evil given for evil done (1560s) is
from day of retribution (1520s), in Christian theology the time of divine reward or punishment.


retributive (adj.)

1670s, from retribute + -ive.


retrievable (adj.)

1711, from retrieve + -able.


retrieval (n.)

1640s, from retrieve + -al (2).


retrieve (v.)

early 15c., retreve, originally in reference to dogs finding lost game, from Middle French retruev-,
stem of Old French retreuver (Modern French retrouver) find again, recover, meet again, recognize,
from re- again (see re-) + trouver to find, probably from Vulgar Latin *tropare to compose (see
trove). Altered 16c. to retrive; modern form is from mid-17c.


retriever (n.)

dog used for retrieving game, late 15c., agent noun from retrieve.


retro (adj.)

1974, from French r&eacute;tro (1973), supposedly first used of a revival c.1968 of Eva Peron-
inspired fashions and short for r&eacute;trograde (see retrograde). There is an isolated use in
English from 1768, and the word apparently was used in 19c. French as a term in billiards. As a
noun, short for retro-rocket (1948) from 1961.


retro-

word-forming element meaning backwards; behind, from Latin retro (prep.) backward, back, behind,
also of time, formerly, in past times, probably originally the ablative form of *reteros, based on
re- back (see re-).    L. retro stands to re- as intro, in, within; to in, in, and as citro, hither,
stands to cis, on this side. [Klein]  Common in combinations in post-classical Latin (the classical
equivalent was post-). Active in English as a word-forming element from mid-20c.


retroactive (adj.)

1610s, from French r&eacute;troactif (16c.) casting or relating back, from Latin retroact-, past
participle stem of retroagere drive or turn back, from retro- back (see retro-) + agere to drive,
set in motion (see act (v.)). Related: Retroactively.


retrocopulation (n.)

copulation from behind, 1640s, from retro- + copulation. Related: Retrocopulate (v.).


retrofit (v.)

1954, from retro- + fit (v.). Related: Retrofitted; retrofitting. As a noun, 1956, from the verb.


retroflex (adj.)

1776, from Modern Latin retroflexus, past participle of retroflectere to bend back, from retro (see
retro-) + flectere to bend (see flexible). The verb (1898) is a back-formation from retroflexed
(1806), from the adjective.


retrograde (adj.)

late 14c., originally of the apparent motions of planets, from Latin retrogradus going back, going
backward, from retrogradi move backward, from retro- backward (see retro-) + gradi to go, step (see
grade (n.)). General sense of tending to revert is recorded from 1530s.


retrogress (v.)

move backward; deteriorate, 1816, probably a back-formation from retrogression. Related:
Retrogressed; retrogressing.


retrogression (n.)

1640s, noun of action, formed on model of progression, from Latin retrogressus, past participle of
retrogradi move backward (see retrograde).


retrogressive (adj.)

tending to move backward, 1785, from Latin retrogress-, past participle stem of retrogradi move
backward, go backward (see retrograde) + -ive. Related: Retrogressively.


retrospect (n.)

c.1600, a regard or reference (to something), from Latin retrospectum, past participle of
retrospicere look back, from retro- back (see retro-) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Meaning
survey of past events is from 1660s.


retrospection (n.)

1630s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin retrospicere (see retrospect).


retrospective (adj.)

1660s, from retrospect + -ive. As a noun, from 1964, short for retrospective exhibition (1908), etc.
Related: Retrospectively.


retrousse (adj.)

turned up (of the nose), 1802, from French retrouss&#233; (16c.) past participle adjective from
retrousser to turn up.


retroversion (n.)

1580s, a tilting or turning backward, noun of action or state from Latin retroversus turned or bent
backwards, from retro (see retro-) + versus turned (see versus).


retrovirus (n.)

1977, earlier retravirus (1974), from re(verse) tra(nscriptase) + virus. So called because it
contains reverse transcriptase, an enzyme that uses RNA instead of DNA to encode genetic
information, which reverses the usual pattern. Remodeled by influence of retro- backwards.


retune (v.)

also re-tune, c.1600 of musical instruments; 1974 of engines, from re- + tune (v.). Related:
Retuned; retuning.


return (v.)

early 14c., to come back, come or go back to a former position (intransitive), from Old French
retorner turn back, turn round, return (Modern French retourner), from re- back (see re-) + torner
to turn (see turn (v.)). Transitive sense of report officially is early 15c.; to send back is mid-
15c.; that of to turn back is from c.1500. Meaning to give in repayment is 1590s; that of give back,
restore c.1600. Related: Returned; returning.


return (n.)

late 14c., act of coming back, also official report of election results, from Anglo-French retorn,
Old French retorne, verbal noun from retorner (see return (v.)). In ball games from 1833;
specifically in tennis from 1886. Meaning a yield, a profit is recorded from 1620s. Meaning a thing
sent back is from 1875. Many happy returns of the day was used by Addison (1716). Mailing return
address attested from 1884.


returnable (adj.)

early 15c., from return (v.) + -able.


Reuben

masc. proper name, Old Testament eldest son of Jacob and name of the tribe descended from him, from
Greek Rouben, from Hebrew Reubhen, probably literally Behold a son, from reu, imperative of ra'ah he
saw + ben a son. As a typical name of a farmer, rustic, or country bumpkin, from 1804. The reuben
sandwich (1956) is Not obviously connected with the sense in rube [OED], possibly from Reuben's
restaurant, a popular spot in New York's Lower East Side.


reunification (n.)

1852; see re- + unification.


reunify (v.)

also re-unify, 1879, from re- + unify. Related: Reunified; reunifying.


reunion (n.)

c.1600, act or fact of coming together again, from re- back, again + union; or from French
r&eacute;union (1540s). Meaning meeting of persons of previous connection is from 1820.    The
island of Reunion, formerly known as Bourbon, was renamed during the French Revolution (1793) in
commemoration of the 1792 union of revolutionaries from Marseille with the National Guard in Paris,
renamed back to Bourbon after 1815, then back to the Revolutionary name after 1848.


reunite (v.)

1590s, from adjective reunit reunited (mid-15c.), from Medieval Latin reunitus, past participle of
reunire unite again, from Latin re- again (see re-) + unire join together (see unite). Related:
Reunited; reuniting.


reupholster (v.)

1872, from re- + upholster. Related: Reupholstered; reupholstering.


reuptake (n.)

also re-uptake, by 1977; see re- + uptake (n.).


reusable (adj.)

1922, from re- back, again + usable. Non-reusable is attested from 1905.


reuse (v.)

also re-use, 1843, from re- + use (v.). Related: Reused; reusing.


reuse (n.)

1850, from re- + use (n.).


Reuters (n.)

news service begun in London 1851 by Baron Paul Julius von Reuter (1816-1899), founder of a
telegraph office and pigeon post bureau in Aachen in 1849.


rev (v.)

1916, from earlier noun (1901), shortening of revolution, in reference to the internal combustion
engine. Related: Revved; revving.


revaluate (v.)

1949, back-formation from revaluation.


revaluation (n.)

1610s; see re- + valuation.


revalue (v.)

1590s, from re- + value (v.). Related: Revalued; revaluing.


revamp (v.)

1850, from re- again + vamp (v.) patch up, replace the upper front part of a shoe. An earlier verb
was new-vamp (1630s). Modern use is typically figurative. Related: Revamped; revamping.


revanche (n.)

revenge, 1858, from French revanche (see revanchist).


revanchist (n.)

a German seeking to avenge Germany's defeat in World War I and recover lost territory, 1926 (on
model of French revanchiste, used in reference to those seeking to reverse the results of the defeat
of France by Prussia in 1871), from revanche revenge, requital, especially in reference to a
national policy seeking return of lost territory, from French revanche revenge, from Middle French
revenche, back-formation from revenchier (see revenge (v.)). Related: Revanchism (1954).


reveal (v.)

late 14c., from Old French reveler reveal (14c.), from Latin revelare reveal, uncover, disclose,
literally unveil, from re- opposite of (see re-) + velare to cover, veil, from velum a veil (see
veil (n.)). Related: Revealed; revealing.


revealed (adj.)

1560s, past participle adjective from reveal. Revealed religion, as opposed to natural religion, is
attested from 1719.


revealing (adj.)

1590s, past participle adjective from reveal (v.). Related: Revealingly.


reveille (n.)

1640s, from French r&eacute;veillez-vous awaken! imperative plural of r&eacute;veiller to awaken, to
wake up, from Middle French re- again (see re-) + eveiller to rouse, from Vulgar Latin *exvigilare,
from Latin ex- out + vigilare be awake, keep watch (see vigil).


revel (n.)

late 14c., riotous merry-making, from Old French revel entertainment, revelry, verbal noun from
reveler be disorderly, make merry (see revel (v.)). Related: Revels; revel-rout.


revel (v.)

early 14c., to feast in a noisy manner; late 14c., take part in revels, from Old French reveler,
also rebeller be disorderly, make merry; rebel, be riotous, from Latin rebellare to rebel (see rebel
(v.)). The meaning take great pleasure in first recorded 1754. Related: Reveled; reveling; revelled;
revelling.


revelation (n.)

c.1300, disclosure of information to man by a divine or supernatural agency, from Old French
revelacion and directly from Latin revelationem (nominative revelatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of revelare unveil, uncover, lay bare (see reveal). General meaning disclosure of
facts is attested from late 14c.; meaning striking disclosure is from 1862. As the name of the last
book of the New Testament (Revelation of St. John), it is first attested late 14c. (see apocalypse);
as simply Revelations, it is first recorded 1690s.


revelator (n.)

1801, agent noun from obsolete verb revelate reveal (1510s), from Latin revelatus, past participle
of revelare (see reveal).


revelatory (adj.)

1882; see revelation + -ory.


reveler (n.)

also reveller, late 14c., from Old French revelour, agent noun from reveler (see revel (v.)).


revelry (n.)

act of reveling; merrymaking, boisterous festivity, amusement, early 15c., from revel (n.) + -ery.


revenant (n.)

one who returns, especially after a long absence; a ghost, 1814 (in Rosanne by Laetitia Matilda
Hawkins), from French revenant (fem. revenante), noun use of present participle of revenir to return
(see revenue).


revenge (v.)

late 14c., from Old French revengier, variant of revenchier take revenge, avenge (13c., Modern
French revancher), from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + vengier take revenge, from Latin
vindicare to lay claim to, avenge, punish (see vindicate).To avenge is to get revenge or to take
vengeance; it suggests the administration of just punishment for a criminal or immoral act. Revenge
seems to stress the idea of retaliation a bit more strongly and implies real hatred as its
motivation. [The Columbia Guide to Standard American English, 1993]


revenge (n.)

1540s, from Middle French revenge, back-formation from revengier (see revenge (v.)).


revengeful (adj.)

1580s; see revenge (n.) + -ful. Related: Revengefully.


revenue (n.)

early 15c., income from property or possessions, from Middle French revenue, in Old French, a
return, noun use of fem. past participle of revenir come back (10c.), from Latin revenire return,
come back, from re- back (see re-) + venire come (see venue). Meaning public income is first
recorded 1680s; revenue sharing popularized from 1971. Revenuer U.S. Department of Revenue agent,
the bane of Appalachian moonshiners, first attested 1880.


reverb (n.)

1961, colloquial shortening of reverberation.


reverberant (adj.)

1570s, from French r&eacute;verb&eacute;rant or directly from Latin reverberantem (nominative
reverberans), present participle of reverberare (see reverberation).


reverberate (v.)

1570s, beat back, drive back, force back, from Latin reverberatus, past participle of reverberare
strike back, repel, cause to rebound (see reverberation). Meaning re-echo is from 1590s. Earlier
verb was reverberen (early 15c.). Related: Reverberated; reverberating.


reverberation (n.)

late 14c., reflection of light or heat, from Old French reverberacion great flash of light; intense
quality, from Medieval Latin reverberationem (nominative reverberatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin reverberare beat back, strike back, repel, cause to rebound, from re- back
(see re-) + verberare to strike, to beat, from verber whip, lash, rod, related to verbena leaves and
branches of laurel, from PIE *werb- to turn, bend (see warp (v.)). Sense of an echo is attested from
1620s.


revere (v.)

1660s, from French r&eacute;v&eacute;rer, from Latin revereri revere, fear (see reverence (n.),
which also was the earlier form of the verb). Related: Revered; revering.


reverence (n.)

late 13c., from Old French reverence respect, awe, from Latin reverentia awe, respect, from revereri
to stand in awe of, respect, honor, fear, be afraid of; revere, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + vereri stand in awe of, fear, respect, from PIE *wer-e-, suffixed form of root *wer- (4) to
be or become aware of, perceive, watch out for (see ward (n.)).


reverence (v.)

late 14c., treat with respect, honor; venerate, pay pious homage to; esteem, value; bow to
(someone); do honor to, from reverence (n.). Related: Reverenced; reverencing.


reverend (adj.)

early 15c., worthy of respect, from Middle French reverend, from Latin reverendus (he who is) to be
respected, gerundive of revereri (see reverence). As a form of address for clergymen, it is attested
from late 15c.; earlier reverent (late 14c. in this sense). Abbreviation Rev. is attested from 1721,
earlier Revd. (1690s). Very Reverend is used of deans, Right Reverend of bishops, Most Reverend of
archbishops.


reverend (n.)

clergyman, c.1500, from reverend (adj.).


reverent (adj.)

late 14c., reverend; late 15c., characterized by reverence, deeply respectful, from Old French
reverent and directly from Latin reverentem (nominative reverens), present participle of revereri
(see reverence). The sense of reverend was common 14c. through 17c. Related: Reverently.


reverential (adj.)

1550s, from Latin reverentia (see reverence) + -al (1). Related: Reverentially.


reverie (n.)

mid-14c., reuerye, wild conduct, frolic, from Old French reverie, resverie revelry, raving, delirium
(Modern French r&#234;verie), from resver to dream, wander, rave (12c., Modern French r&#234;ver),
of uncertain origin (also the root of rave). Meaning daydream is first attested 1650s, a reborrowing
from French. As a type of musical composition, it is attested from 1880. Related: Reverist.


reversal (n.)

late 15c., from reverse (v.) + -al (2).


reverse (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French revers reverse, cross, opposite (13c.), from Latin reversus, past participle
of revertere turn back, turn about, come back, return (see revert). Reverse angle in film-making is
from 1934. Reverse discrimination is attested from 1962, American English.


reverse (n.)

mid-14c., opposite or contrary (of something), from reverse (adj.) or from Old French Related:
revers the opposite, reverse. Meaning a defeat, a change of fortune is from 1520s; meaning back side
of a coin is from 1620s. Of gear-shifts in motor cars, from 1875. As a type of sports play
(originally rugby) it is recorded from 1921.


reverse (v.)

early 14c. (transitive), change, alter; early 15c. (intransitive), go backward, from Old French
reverser reverse, turn around; roll, turn up (12c.), from Late Latin reversare turn about, turn
back, frequentative of Latin revertere (see revert). Related: Reversed; reversing.


reversible (adj.)

1640s, from reverse (v.) + -ible. As a noun, of garments, from 1863. Related: Reversable (1580s).


reversion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French reversion, from Latin reversionem (nominative reversio) act of turning
back, noun of action from past participle stem of revertere (see revert).


revert (v.)

c.1300, to come to oneself again, from Old French revertir return, change back, from Vulgar Latin
*revertire, variant of Latin revertere turn back, turn about; come back, return, from re- back (see
re-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Of position or property from mid-15c.; application to customs
and ideas is from 1610s.


revetment (n.)

1779, from French rev&ecirc;tement, Old French revestiment, from revestir (Modern  French
rev&ecirc;tir), from Late Latin revestire to clothe again, from re- (see re-) + Latin vestire to
clothe (see vest (v.)).


review (n.)

mid-15c., an inspection of military forces, from Middle French reveue a reviewing, review, noun use
of fem. past participle of reveeir to see again, go to see again, from Latin revidere, from re-
again (see re-) + videre to see (see vision). Sense of process of going over again is from 1560s;
that of a view of the past, a retrospective survey is from c.1600. Meaning general examination or
criticism of a recent work is first attested 1640s.


review (v.)

1570s, examine again, from re- + view (v.). Meaning look back on is from 1751; that of consider or
discuss critically is from 1781. Related: Reviewed; reviewing.


reviewer (n.)

1610s, one who reviews (in any sense), agent noun from review (v.). Specifically, one who critically
examines and passes judgment on new publications or productions; a writer of reviews is from 1650s.


revile (v.)

c.1300, from Old French reviler consider vile, despise, scorn, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-),
+ aviler make vile or cheap, disesteem, from vil (see vile). Related: Reviled; reviling.


revilement (n.)

1580s, from revile + -ment.


revise (v.)

1560s, to look at again, from Middle French reviser (13c.), from Latin revisere look at again, visit
again, look back on, frequentative of revidere (past participle revisus), from re- again (see re-) +
videre to see (see vision). Meaning to look over again with intent to improve or amend is recorded
from 1590s. Related: Revised; revising.


revised (adj.)

past participle adjective from revise. Revised Version of the Bible was done 1870-84; so called
because it was a revision of the 1611 (King James) translation, also known as the Authorized
Version.


revision (n.)

1610s, act of revising, from French r&#233;vision, from Late Latin revisionem (nominative revisio) a
seeing again, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin revidere (see revise). Meaning a
product of revision is from 1845.


revisionism (n.)

1903, from revision + -ism. Originally in Marxist jargon, rejection of gradual introduction of
socialism. Revisionist is from 1850 (adj.); 1854 (n.); in the historical sense from 1934, originally
with reference to the causes of World War I.


revisit (v.)

1520s, from Middle French revisiter, from re- (see re-) + visiter to visit (see visit (v.)).
Related: Revisited; revisiting.


revitalization (n.)

1869, noun of action from revitalize.


revitalize (v.)

1840, from re- back, again + vitalize. Related: Revitalized; revitalizing.


revival (n.)

1650s, act of reviving; 1660s, the bringing of an old play back to the stage, from revive + -al (2).
First in sense general religious awakening in a community by Cotton Mather, 1702; revivalist is
first attested 1812.


revive (v.)

early 15c., return to consciousness; restore to health, from Middle French revivre (10c.), from
Latin revivere to live again, from re- again (see re-) + vivere to live (see vital). Meaning bring
back to notice or fashion is from mid-15c. Related: Revived; reviving.


revocable (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French revocable or directly from Latin revocabilis that may be revoked, from
revocare (see revoke). Alternative revokable attested from 1580s.


revocation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French revocacion or directly from Latin revocationem (nominative revocatio) a
calling back, recalling, noun of action from past participle stem of revocare (see revoke).


revoke (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French revoquer (13c.), from Latin revocare rescind, call back, from re- back
(see re-) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)). Related: Revoked; revoking.


revolt (v.)

1540s, from Middle French revolter (15c.), from Italian rivoltare to overthrow, overturn, from
Vulgar Latin *revolvitare to overturn, overthrow, frequentative of Latin revolvere (past participle
revolutus) turn, roll back (see revolve). Related: Revolted; revolting.


revolt (n.)

1550s, from Middle French r&#233;volte (c.1500), back formation from revolter (see revolt (v.)), or
else from Italian rivolta.


revolting (adj.)

1590s, that revolts, given to revolt, rebellious, present participle adjective from revolt (v.).
Sense of repulsive is from 1806. Related: Revoltingly.


revolution (n.)

late 14c., originally of celestial bodies, from Old French revolucion course, revolution (of
celestial bodies) (13c.), or directly from Late Latin revolutionem (nominative revolutio) a
revolving, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin revolvere turn, roll back (see
revolve).    General sense of instance of great change in affairs is recorded from mid-15c.
Political meaning overthrow of an established political system first recorded c.1600, derived from
French, and was especially applied to the expulsion of the Stuart dynasty under James II in 1688 and
transfer of sovereignty to William and Mary.


revolutionary (adj.)

1774; see revolution + -ary. As a noun, from 1850 (cf revolutionist).


revolutionist (n.)

1710; see revolution + -ist.


revolutionize (v.)

1797, to cause to undergo a (political) revolution; see revolution + -ize. Transferred sense of to
change a thing completely and fundamentally is first recorded 1799. Related: Revolutionized;
revolutionizing.


revolve (v.)

late 14c., to change direction, bend around, turn (the eyes) back, from Old French revolver and
directly from Latin revolvere roll back, unroll, unwind; happen again, return; go over, repeat, from
re- back, again (see re-) + volvere to roll (see volvox). In 15c., to turn over (in the mind or
heart), meditate. Meaning travel around a central point first recorded 1660s (earlier cause to
travel in an orbit around a central point, mid-15c.). Related: Revolved; revolving.


revolver (n.)

type of pistol, 1835, agent noun from revolve. So called by U.S. inventor Samuel Colt (1814-1862)
for its revolving chamber cylinder.


revolving (adj.)

1690s, present participle adjective from revolve (v.). Revolving door attested from 1856 in
industrial processes, 1896 in buildings.


revue (n.)

1872, show presenting a review of current events, from French revue, from Middle French, literally
survey, noun use of fem. past participle of revoir to see again (see review (n.)). Later extended to
shows consisting of a series of unrelated scenes.


revulsion (n.)

1540s, as a medical term, from Middle French revulsion (16c.) or directly from Latin revulsionem
(nominative revulsio) a tearing off, act of pulling away, noun of action from past participle stem
of revellere to pull away, from re- away (see re-) + vellere to tear, pull, from PIE *wel-no-,
suffixed form of root *wel- (4) to tear, pull (see svelte). The meaning sudden reaction of disgust
is first attested 1816.


reward (n.)

mid-14c., a regarding, heeding, observation, from Anglo-French and Old North French reward, back-
formation from rewarder (see reward (v.)). Meaning repayment for some service is from late 14c.
Sense of sum of money in exchange for capture is from 1590s.


reward (v.)

c.1300 to grant, bestow; early 14c. to give as compensation, from Old North French rewarder to
regard, reward (Old French regarder) take notice of, regard, watch over, from re-, intensive prefix
(see re-), + warder look, heed, watch, from Germanic (see warder). Originally any form of requital.
A doublet of regard. Related: Rewarded; rewarding.


rewind (v.)

also re-wind, 1717, from re- back, again + wind (v.1). Noun meaning mechanism for rewinding film or
tape is recorded from 1938. Related: Rewound; rewinding.


reword (v.)

to express in other words, c.1600, from re- back, again + word (v.). Related: Reworded; rewording.


rework (v.)

1842, from re- + work (v.). Related: Reworked; reworking.


rewrite (v.)

to write again, 1560s, from re- back, again + write (v.). Related: Rewrote; rewritten; rewriting.
Journalistic rewrite man is recorded from 1901. As a noun from 1926.


rex (n.)

a king, 1610s, from Latin rex (genitive regis) a king, related to regere to keep straight, guide,
lead, rule, from PIE root *reg- to rule, to lead straight, to put right (cognates: Sanskrit raj-
king; Old Irish ri king, genitive rig; see regal).


Reykjavik

capital of Iceland, literally bay of smoke, from Old Norse reykja to smoke (see reek (n.)) + vik bay
(see viking). So called from the natural hot springs there. Settlement said to date from 9c., but
not established as a town until 1786.


Reynard (n.)

quasi-proper name for a fox, c.1300, from Old French Renart, Reynard name of the fox in Roman de
Renart, from Old High German personal name Reginhart strong in counsel, literally counsel-brave. The
first element is related to reckon, the second to hard. The tales were so popular that the name
became the word for fox in Old French. Old French also had renardie craftiness.


Reynold

masc. proper name, from Old French Reinald (Modern French Renaut, Latinized as Reginaldus), a
popular name among the Normans, from Old High German Reginald, the first element related to reckon,
the second to Old English wealdan to rule (see wield). Related: Reynolds.


RFD

also R.F.D.; 1882, American English, it stands for rural free delivery.


Rh factor

1942, from the first letters of rhesus; so called because the blood group, and its effects, were
discovered in the blood of rhesus monkeys (1941).


rh-

consonantal digraph used in Latin (and thus in English words from Latin) to represent Greek initial
aspirated -r-.


rhabdomancy (n.)

1640s, use of divining rod (especially to discover ores or underground water), from Greek rhabdos
rod, wand; magic wand; fishing rod; spear-shaft; a staff of office; a rod for chastisement; twig,
stick + manteia divination, oracle (see -mancy). Greek rhabdos is from PIE *wer-, base of roots
meaning to turn, bend (cognates: Lithuanian virbas twig, branch, scion, rod, Latin verbena leaves
and branches of laurel); see warp (v.); the Greek noun was used to represent Roman fasces. Related:
Rhabdomantic


Rhadamanthus (n.)

1580s, from Latinized form of Greek Rhadamanthos, one of the judges of the lower world (son of Zeus
and Europa); used allusively of inflexible judges. Related: Rhadamantine.


Rhaetian (n.)

c.1600, from Latin Rh&aelig;tia, ancient name of a district in the Alps and of a Roman province
between the Rhine, Danube, and Po; from Rhaeti, Raiti, name of a native people. Hence Rhaeto-Romanic
(1867), Rhaeto-Romance, language of the Tyrol and southern Switzerland.


rhapsodic (adj.)

1782, from Greek rhapsodikos of or for a rhapsodist, from rhapsoidia (see rhapsody). Related:
Rhapsodically (c.1600).


rhapsodist (n.)

1650s, from French rhapsodiste, from rhapsode, from Greek rhapsodos (see rhapsody).


rhapsodize (v.)

c.1600, to piece together; 1806, to talk rhapsodically; see rhapsody + -ize. Related: Rhapsodized;
rhapsodizing.


rhapsodomancy (n.)

divination by means of verses, 1727, from French rhapsodomancie, from Greek rhapsodos a rhapsodist
(see rhapsody) + -manteia (see -mancy).    There were various methods of practicing this
rhapsodomancy. Sometimes they wrote several verses or sentences of a poet on so many pieces of wood,
paper, or the like; shook them together in an urn; and drew out one, which was accounted the lot.
Sometimes they cast dice on a table, on which verses were written; and that on which the die lodged,
contained the prediction. [Rees' Cyclopedia, London, 1819]


rhapsody (n.)

1540s, epic poem, from Middle French rhapsodie, from Latin rhapsodia, from Greek rhapsoidia verse
composition, recitation of epic poetry; a book, a lay, a canto, from rhapsodos reciter of epic
poems, literally one who stitches or strings songs together, from rhaptein to stitch, sew, weave
(see wrap (v.)) + oide song (see ode). Meaning exalted enthusiastic feeling or expression is from
1630s. Meaning sprightly musical composition is first recorded 1850s.


rhea (n.)

South American ostrich, 1801, Modern Latin genus name, for unknown reasons from Greek Rhea, name of
a titaness, mother of Zeus, a name of unknown origin. As a moon of Saturn, discovered 1672.


Rhemish (adj.)

of or pertaining to Rheims (earlier English Rhemes), city in northeastern France (see Reims), 1580s;
specifically in reference to an English translation of the New Testament by Roman Catholics at the
English college there, published 1582.


Rhenish

of or belonging to the Rhine (especially of wine), late 14c., from Anglo-French reneis (13c.), from
Medieval Latin Rhenensis, from Rhenus (see Rhine).


rhenium (n.)

1925, Modern Latin, from Latin Rhenus the river Rhine (see Rhine) + element ending -ium. Coined by
German chemists Walter Noddack and Ida Tacke.


rheo-

word-forming element meaning current of a stream, from Greek rheos a flowing, stream, current, from
PIE root *sreu-; see rheum.


rheology (n.)

1929, from French rh&#233;ologie; see from rheo- + -logy. Related: Rheologist; rheological.


rheostat (n.)

1843, coined by English physicist Sir Charles Wheatstone (1802-1875) from Greek rheos a flowing,
stream (from PIE root *sreu-, see rheum) + -stat regulating device. Related: Rheostatic.


rhesus

1827, from Modern Latin genus name of a type of East Indian monkey (1799), given by French
naturalist Jean-Baptiste Audebert (1759-1800), said to be an arbitrary use of Latin Rhesus, name of
a legendary prince of Thrace, from Greek Rhesos.


rhetoric (n.)

early 14c., from Old French rethorique, from Latin rhetorice, from Greek rhetorike techne art of an
orator, from rhetor (genitive rhetoros) speaker, orator, teacher of rhetoric, related to rhesis
speech, rhema word, phrase, verb, literally that which is spoken, from PIE *wre-tor-, from root
*were- (3) to speak (cognates: Old English word, Latin verbum, Greek eirein to say; see verb).


rhetorical (adj.)

mid-15c., eloquent, from Latin rhetoricus, from Greek rhetorikos oratorical, rhetorical; skilled in
speaking, from rhetor orator (see rhetoric). Meaning pertaining to rhetoric is from 1520s.
Rhetorical question is from 1670s. Related: Rhetorically.


rhetorician (n.)

early 15c., Old French rethoricien, from rethorique (see rhetoric). An Old English word for one was
wordsawere word-sower.


rheum (n.)

mucous discharge, late 14c., from Old French reume a cold (13c., Modern French rhume), from Latin
rheuma, from Greek rheuma discharge from the body, flux; a stream, current, flood, a flowing,
literally that which flows, from rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (cognates: Sanskrit
sravati flows, srotah stream; Avestan thraotah- stream, river, Old Persian rauta river; Greek rheos
a flowing, stream, rhythmos rhythm, rhytos fluid, liquid; Old Irish sruaim, Irish sruth stream,
river; Welsh ffrwd stream; Old Norse straumr, Old English stream, Old High German strom (second
element in maelstrom); Lettish strauma stream, river; Lithuanian sraveti to trickle, ooze; Old
Church Slavonic struja river, o-strovu island, literally that which is surrounded by a river; Polish
strumie&#324; brook).


rheumatic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reumatique (Modern French rhumatique), from Latin rheumaticus troubled
with rheum, from Greek rheumatikos, from rheuma discharge from the body (see rheum).


rheumatism (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin rheumatismus, from Greek rheumatismos, from rheumatizein suffer from the
flux, from rheuma a discharge from the body (see rheum). The meaning of a disease of the joints is
first recorded in 1688, because rheumatism was thought to be caused by an excessive flow of rheum
into a joint thereby stretching ligaments [Barnhart].


rheumatoid (adj.)

1847, from Greek rheumat-, stem of rheuma a discharge from the body (see rheum) + -oid.


rheumatology (n.)

1949, from Greek rheumat-, stem of rheuma discharge (see rheum) + -ology. Related: Rheumatologist.


rheumy (adj.)

1590s, from rheum + -y (2).


rhinal (adj.)

pertaining to the nose, 1857, from rhino- + -al (1). Related: Rhinally.


Rhine

principal river in western Germany, from German Rhein, from Middle High German Rin, ultimately from
Gaulish Renos, literally that which flows, from PIE root *reie- to move, flow, run (cognates:
Sanskrit rinati causes to flow, ritih stream, course; Latin rivus stream; Old Church Slavonic reka
river; Middle Irish rian river, way; Gothic rinnan run, flow, rinno brook; Middle Low German ride
brook; Old English ri&thorn; stream; Old English rinnan, Old Norse rinna to run, Dutch ril running
stream). The spelling with -h- (also in Latin Rhenus; French Rhin) is from influence of the Greek
form of the name, Rhenos.


Rhineland

1670s, from German Rheinland; see Rhine + land (n.). Related: Rheinlander.


rhinestone (n.)

colorless imitation stone of paste or leaded glass, 1879, a loan-translation of French caillou du
Rhin Rhine pebble, so called because they were made near Strasburg, on the River Rhine, and invented
there late 17c. Extensively worn later 18c.    Rhinestone jewelry, a reproduction of the ornaments
of the Louis XV. period, is all the rage in Paris. The Rhinestones are as brilliant as diamonds, and
being set in silver, will stand any amount of wear or of cleaning. [The American Stationer, March
20, 1879]


rhinitis (n.)

1829, medical Latin, from rhino- nose + -itis.


rhino (n.)

short for rhinoceros, 1884. As slang for cash (also rino) 1680s, of unknown origin. Hence cant
rhinocerial rich [Grose, 1788].


rhino-

before vowels rhin-, word-forming element meaning nose, of the nose, from Greek  rhino-, comb. form
of rhis nose, which is of uncertain origin.


rhinoceros (n.)

c.1300, from Latin rhinoceros, from Greek rhinokeros, literally nose-horned, from rhinos nose (a
word of unknown origin) + keras horn (see kerato-). Related: Rhinocerotic.What is the plural of
rhinoceros? ... Well, Liddell and Scott seem to authorize 'rhinocerotes,' which is pedantic, but
'rhinoceroses' is not euphonious. [Sir Charles Eliot, The East Africa Protectorate, 1905]


rhinology (n.)

1838, from rhino- + -logy.


rhinoplasty (n.)

1828, from rhino- nose + -plasty. Related: rhinoplastic (1823).


rhinorrhea (n.)

1866, from rhino- nose + rhoia flow (see rheum).


rhinovirus (n.)

1961, from rhino- + virus.


rhizoid (adj.)

root-like, 1858, from Greek rhiza root, literal and figurative (see rhizome) + -oid. As a noun from
1875.


rhizome (n.)

1832, from Modern Latin rhizoma, from Greek rhizoma mass of tree roots, from rhizoun cause to strike
root, root into the ground, plant, from rhiza root, probably from PIE *wrad- branch, root (cognates:
Latin radix root, Old Norse rot root, Old English wyrt plant, herb; see radish).


rhizophagous (adj.)

1831, from comb. form of Greek rhiza root (see rhizome) + -phagous.


Rhode Island

U.S. state, the region is traditionally said to have been named by Italian explorer Giovanni da
Verrazzano when he passed through in 1524, based on an imagined similarity between modern Block
Island and the Greek Isle of Rhodes. More likely from Roodt Eylandt, the name Dutch explorer Adriaen
Block gave to Block Island c.1614, literally red island, so called for the color of its cliffs.
Under this theory, the name was altered by 17c. English settlers by influence of the Greek island
name (see Rhodes), and then extended to the mainland part of the colony. Block Island later (by
1685) was renamed for the Dutch explorer.


Rhodes

Greek island, one of the Dodecanese, from Greek Rhodos, perhaps from rhodon rose, or rhoia
pomegranate, but more likely [Room] from a pre-Greek name, from Phoenician erod snake, for the
serpents which were said to have anciently infested the island.


Rhodes scholar (n.)

holder of any of the scholarships founded at Oxford in 1902 by British financier and imperialist
Cecil Rhodes (1853-1902), for whom the former African colony of Rhodesia (later Zimbabwe) also was
named. The surname is literally dweller by a clearing, from Old English rodu plot of land of one
square rod.


rhodium (n.)

hard white metallic element, 1804, Modern Latin, coined by its discoverer, English physician William
H. Wollaston (1766-1828), and named for the color of solutions containing it, from Greek rhodon rose
(see rose (n.1)) + metallic element ending -ium.


rhododendron (n.)

c.1600, from French rhododendron and directly from Latin rhododendron, from Greek rhododendron,
literally rose-tree, from rhodon rose (see rose (n.1)) + dendron tree (see dendro-).


rhomb (n.)

1570s, from Middle French rhombe, from Latin rhombus (see rhombus).


rhomboid (n.)

1560s, from Middle French rhomboide or directly from Late Latin rhomboides, from Greek rhomboeides
rhomboidal; a rhomboid; see rhombus + -oid. Related: Rhomboidal. As an adjective from 1690s.


rhombus (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin rhombus, from Greek rhombos rhombus, rhomb, lozenge; spinning top, maghic
wheel used by sorcerers; a spinning motion, from rhembesthai to spin, whirl, from PIE *wrembh-, from
*werbh- to turn, twist, bend (source also of Old English weorpan to throw away), from root *wer- (3)
to turn, bend (see versus).


rhonchus (n.)

plural rhonchi, 1829, from Latinized form of Greek rhenkhos, rhankos, properly a snoring, snorting,
from rhenkein to snore, snort, of imitative origin. Related: Rhonchal; rhonchial.


Rhone

river in southeastern France, from a pre-Indo-European element *rod- meaning to flow.


rhotacism (n.)

1830, from Modern Latin rhotacismus, from Greek rhotakizein, from rho the letter -r-, from Hebrew or
Phoenician roth. Excessive or peculiar use of the -r- sound (the burr), especially the conversion of
another sound (usually -s-) to -r-; as in Aeolian Greek, which at the end of words changed -s- into
-r- (hippor for hippos, etc.). Related: Rhotacize.


rhubarb (n.)

late 14c., from Old French rubarbe, from Medieval Latin rheubarbarum, from Greek rha barbaron
foreign rhubarb, from rha rhubarb, perhaps ultimately from a source akin to Persian rewend rhubarb
(associated in Greek with Rha, ancient Scythian name of the River Volga) + barbaron, neuter of
barbaros foreign (see barbarian). Grown in China and Tibet, it was imported into ancient Europe by
way of Russia.    Spelling altered in Medieval Latin by association with rheum. European native
species so called from 1640s. Baseball slang meaning loud squabble on the field is from 1938, of
unknown origin, said to have been first used by broadcaster Garry Schumacher. Perhaps connected with
use of rhubarb as a word repeated by stage actors to give the impression of hubbub or conversation
(attested from 1934).


rhyme (n.)

agreement in terminal sounds, 1560s, partially restored spelling, from Middle English ryme, rime
(c.1200) measure, meter, rhythm, later rhymed verse (mid-13c.), from Old French rime (fem.), related
to Old Proven&ccedil;al rim (masc.), earlier *ritme, from Latin rithmus, from Greek rhythmos
measured motion, time, proportion (see rhythm).    In Medieval Latin, rithmus was used for
accentual, as opposed to quantitative, verse, and accentual verse usually was rhymed, hence the
sense shift. Persistence of older form is due to popular association with Old English rim number,
from PIE root *re(i)- to reason, count (see read (v.)). Phrase rhyme or reason good sense (chiefly
used in the negative) is from late 15c. (see reason (n.)). Rhyme scheme is attested from 1931. Rhyme
royal (1841) is a stanza of seven 10-syllable lines rhymed a-b-a-b-b-c-c.


rhyme (v.)

make verses, make rhymes, c.1300, rimen, from Old French rimer, from rime verse (see rhyme (n.)).
Attested 1670s (of words) in sense to have the same end sound. Modern spelling is from 1650s, by
influence of rhythm. Related: Rhymed; rhyming. The phrase rhyming slang is attested from 1859.


rhythm (n.)

1550s, rhymed verse, metrical movement, from Latin rhythmus movement in time, from Greek rhythmos
measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry; arrangement, order; form, shape, wise,
manner; soul, disposition, related to rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (see rheum).
Rhythm method of birth control attested from 1936. Rhythm and blues, U.S. music style, is from 1949
(first in Billboard).


rhythmic (adj.)

1560s, from French rhythmique or directly from Latin rhythmicus, from Greek rhythmikos, from
rhythmos (see rhythm). Related: Rhythmical; rhythmically.


ria (n.)

from Spanish ria estuary, river mouth (adopted as a geological term first in German, 1886), from
Latin ripa stream bank (see riparian).


rialto (n.)

1879, exchange, mart, from the Rialto of Venice, the name of the quarter where the exchange was
situated, contracted from Rivoalto and named for the canal (Latin rivus altus deep stream) which it
crosses.


riata (n.)

1846, from Spanish reata (see lariat).


rib (n.)

Old English ribb rib, from Proto-Germanic *rebja- (cognates: Old Norse rif, Old Saxon ribbi, Old
Frisian ribb, Middle Dutch, Dutch ribbe, Old High German ribba, German Rippe), literally a covering
(of the cavity of the chest), from PIE *rebh- to roof, cover (cognates: Greek ereptein to roof, Old
Church Slavonic rebro rib, reef). As an item of food from early 15c. Rib joint brothel is slang from
1943, probably in reference to Adam's rib (compare rib woman, wife, attested from 1580s).


rib (v.)

tease, fool, 1930, apparently from rib (n.); perhaps as a figurative suggestion of poking someone in
the ribs. Related: Ribbed; ribbing.


ribald (adj.)

c.1500, from ribald, ribaud (n.), mid-13c., a rogue, ruffian, rascall, scoundrell, varlet, filthie
fellow [Cotgrave], from Old French ribaut, ribalt rogue, scoundrel, lewd lover, also as an
adjective, wanton, depraved, dissolute, licentious, of uncertain origin, perhaps (with suffix -ald)
from riber be wanton, sleep around, dally amorously, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
riban be wanton, literally to rub, possibly from the common euphemistic use of rub words to mean
have sex), from Proto-Germanic *wribanan, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).


ribaldry (n.)

early 14c., from Old French ribauderie debauchery, licentiousness, from ribalt (see ribald).


riband (n.)

archaic for ribbon, late 14c., from ribbon, with excrescent -d.


ribband (n.)

1711, in shipbuilding, from rib (n.) + band (n.1).


ribbon (n.)

early 14c., ribane, from Old French riban a ribbon, variant of ruban (13c.), of unknown origin,
possibly from a Germanic compound whose second element is related to band (n.1); compare Middle
Dutch ringhband necklace. Modern spelling is from mid-16c. Originally a stripe in a material. Custom
of colored ribbon loops worn on lapels to declare support for some group perceived as suffering or
oppressed began in 1991 with AIDS red ribbons.


riboflavin (n.)

growth-promoting substance known as vitamin B2, 1935, from German Riboflavin (1935), from comb. form
of ribose + flavin, from Latin flavus yellow (see blue (1)); so called from its color. Also
sometimes known as lactoflavine, as it is found in milk.


ribonucleic (adj.)

1931, from ribo-, comb. form of ribose, the sugar component, + nucleic acid.


ribose (n.)

1892, from German Ribose (1891), from Ribons&#228;ure, a tetrahydroxy acid, with first element
shortened and arbitrarily rearranged from English arabinose (c.1880), a sugar which is so called
because it is formed from gum arabic.


ribosome (n.)

1958, coined by U.S. microbiologist Richard B. Roberts (1910-1980) from ribo(nucleic acid) + -some
body.


rice (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French ris, from Italian riso, from Latin oriza, from Greek oryza rice, via an
Indo-Iranian language (compare Pashto vri&#382;e, Old Persian brizi), ultimately from Sanskrit
vrihi-s rice. The Greek word is the ultimate source of all European words (Welsh reis, German reis,
Lithuanian rysai, Serbo-Croatian riza, Polish ry&#380;, etc.). Introduced 1647 in the Carolinas.
Rice paper (1822), originally used in China, Japan, etc., is made from straw of rice.


rich (adj.)

Old English rice strong, powerful; great, mighty; of high rank, in later Old English wealthy, from
Proto-Germanic *rikijaz (cognates: Old Norse rikr, Swedish rik, Danish rig, Old Frisian rike
wealthy, mighty, Dutch rijk, Old High German rihhi ruler, powerful, rich, German reich rich, Gothic
reiks ruler, powerful, rich), borrowed from a Celtic source akin to Gaulish *rix, Old Irish ri
(genitive rig) king, from PIE root *reg- move in a straight line, hence, direct, rule (see rex).
The form of the word was influenced in Middle English by Old French riche wealthy, magnificent,
sumptuous, which is, with Spanish rico, Italian ricco, from Frankish *riki powerful, or some other
cognate Germanic source.    Old English also had a noun, rice rule, reign, power, might; authority;
empire. The evolution of the word reflects a connection between wealth and power in the ancient
world. Of food and colors, from early 14c.; of sounds, from 1590s. Sense of entertaining, amusing is
recorded from 1760. The noun meaning the wealthy was in Old English.


Richard

masc. proper name, Middle English Rycharde, from Old French Richard, from Old High German Ricohard
strong in rule, from Proto-Germanic *rik- ruler (see rich) + *harthu hard, from PIE *kar-o- (see
hard). One of the most popular names introduced by the Normans. Usually Latinized as Ricardus, the
common form was Ricard, whence the pet form Rick, etc. [Dictionary of English Surnames]


riches (n.)

valued possessions, money, property, c.1200, modified from richesse (12c.), a singular form
misunderstood as a plural, from Old French richesse, richece wealth, opulence, splendor,
magnificence, from riche (see rich (adj.)). The Old French suffix -esse is from Latin -itia, added
to adjectives to form nouns of quality (compare duress, largesse).


richly (adv.)

Old English ricelice powerfully, sumptuously; see rich (adj.) + -ly (2).


richness (n.)

mid-14c., from rich (adj.) + -ness.


Richter scale

1938, devised by U.S. seismologist Charles Francis Richter (1900-1985).


ricin (n.)

poison obtained from the castor-oil bean, 1888, from ricinus, genus name of the castor-oil plant
(1694), from Latin ricinus (Pliny), of uncertain origin, perhaps the same word as ricinus tick (in
sheep, dogs, etc.).


rick (n.)

Old English hreac stack of hay or straw, from Proto-Germanic *khraukaz (cognates: Old Norse hraukr,
Frisian reak, Dutch rook heap); perhaps related to ridge.


rickets (n.)

disease caused by vitamin D deficiency, 1630s, of uncertain origin. Originally a local name for the
disease in Dorset and Somerset, England. Some derive it from a Dorset word, rucket to breathe with
difficulty, but the sense connection is difficult. The Modern Latin name for the disease, rachitis,
comes from Greek rhakhis spine (see rachitic), but this was chosen by English physician Daniel
Whistler (1619-1684) for resemblance to rickets.


rickettsia (n.)

parasitic organism, 1919, named 1916 in Modern Latin by H. da Rocha-Lima in honor of U.S.
pathologist H.T. Ricketts (1871-1910), who first identified it in 1909 and died of typhus as a
result of his contact with it. The bacteria causes typhus and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, but is
unrelated by pathology or etymology to rickets (q.v.), which is the result of vitamin D deficiency.
The surname is a development from Rickard, variant of Richard, or else from the diminutive form
Ricot.


rickety (adj.)

liable to fall down, 1680s, from rickets (with + -y (2)), via notion of weak, unhealthy. Literal
sense is from c.1720 but never common in English. Of material things, from 1799.


rickey (n.)

alcoholic drink made with carbonated water and lime juice, 1895; reputedly from the name of Colonel
Joseph K. Rickey (1842-1903), Democrat, of Callaway County, Missouri, U.S., lobbyist and wire-
puller, who is said to have concocted it to entertain political friends.    And as long as there is
thirst and limes, or lemons and gin, so long will the Honorable Joe Rickey be remembered in Missouri
and his famous beverage tickle the palates of discriminating citizens. A hundred summers hence Joe
Rickey will be called and Champ Clark and DeArmond forgotten. [The Conservative, Nebraska City,
Neb., July 6, 1899.]


rickshaw (n.)

1887, shortened form of jinrikisha, popularized by Kipling, from Japanese jin a man + riki power +
sha carriage.


ricochet (v.)

1758, originally in a military sense, from French ricochet (n.) the skipping of a shot, or of a flat
stone on water (see ricochet (n.). Related: Ricochetted; ricochetting.


ricochet (n.)

1769, from ricochet (v.) or French ricochet the skipping of a shot or of a flat stone on water, but
in earliest French use (15c.) verbal to-and-fro, and only in the phrase fable du ricochet, an
entertainment in which the teller of a tale skillfully evades questions, and chanson du ricochet, a
kind of repetitious song; of uncertain origin.


ricotta (n.)

kind of Italian cottage cheese, 1877, earlier ricoct (1580s), from Italian ricotta, literally
recooked, from fem. past participle of Latin recoquere, from re- again (see re-) + coquere to cook
(see cook (n.)).


rid (v.)

c.1200, clear (a space); set free, save, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse ry&eth;ja
(past tense ruddi, past participle ruddr) to clear (land) of obstructions, from Proto-Germanic
*reudijan (cognates: Old High German riuten, German reuten to clear land, Old Frisian rothia to
clear, Old English -royd clearing, common in northern place names), from PIE root *reudh- to clear
land. The general sense of to make (something) free (of something else) emerged by 1560s. Senses
merged somewhat with Northern English, Scottish, and U.S. dialectal redd. To get rid of (something
or someone) is from 1660s. Related: Ridden; ridding.


riddance (n.)

1530s, from rid + -ance. Good riddance, a welcome relief from unpleasant company or an embarrassing
connection attested from 1650s (fair riddance in same sense from 1610s).


ridden (adj.)

mid-14c., from past participle of ride (q.v.). Sense evolution, via horses, is from that which has
been ridden upon, broken in (1520s) to, in compounds, oppressed, taken advantage of (1650s).


riddle (n.1)

A word game or joke, comprising a question or statement couched in deliberately puzzling terms,
propounded for solving by the hearer/reader using clues embedded within that wording [Oxford
Dictionary of English Folklore], early 13c., from Old English r&aelig;dels riddle; counsel;
conjecture; imagination; discussion, common Germanic (Old Frisian riedsal riddle, Old Saxon radisli,
Middle Dutch raetsel, Dutch raadsel, Old High German radisle, German R&auml;tsel riddle).    The
first element is from Proto-Germanic *redaz-, from PIE *re-dh-, from PIE *re(1)- to reason, count
(cognates: Old English r&aelig;dan to advise, counsel, read, guess; see read (v.)). The ending is
Old English noun suffix -els, the -s of which later was mistaken for a plural affix and stripped
off. Meaning anything which puzzles or perplexes is from late 14c.


riddle (v.1)

perforate with many holes, 1817 (implied in riddled), earlier sift (early 13c.), from Middle English
ridelle coarse sieve, from late Old English hriddel sieve, altered by dissimilation from Old English
hridder sieve (see riddle (n.2)).


riddle (n.2)

coarse sieve, mid-14c., alteration of late Old English hriddel, dissimilated from hridder, from
Proto-Germanic *hrida- (cognates: German Reiter), from PIE root *krei- to sieve, and thus related to
Latin cribrum sieve, riddle, Greek krinein to separate, distinguish, decide (see crisis).


riddle (v.2)

to pose as a riddle, 1570s, from riddle (n.1). Related: Riddled; riddler; riddling.


ride (v.)

Old English ridan sit or be carried on (as on horseback), move forward; rock; float, sail (class I
strong verb; past tense rad, past participle riden), from Proto-Germanic *ridan (cognates: Old Norse
ri&eth;a, Old Saxon ridan, Old Frisian rida to ride, Middle Dutch riden, Dutch rijden, Old High
Germn ritan, German reiten), from PIE *reidh- to ride (cognates: Old Irish riadaim I travel, Old
Gaulish reda chariot). Common to Celtic and Germanic, perhaps a loan word from one to the other.
Meaning heckle is from 1912; that of have sex with (a woman) is from mid-13c.; that of dominate
cruelly is from 1580s. To ride out endure (a storm, etc.) without great damage is from 1520s. To
ride shotgun is 1963, from custom of having an armed man beside the driver on the stagecoach in Old
West movies to ward off trouble. To ride shank's mare walk is from 1846 (see shank (n.)).


ride (n.)

1759, journey on the back of a horse or in a vehicle, from ride (v.); slang meaning a motor vehicle
is recorded from 1930; sense of amusement park device is from 1934. Meaning act of sexual
intercourse is from 1937. To take (someone) for a ride tease, mislead, cheat, is first attested
1925, American English, possibly from underworld sense of take on a car trip with intent to kill
(1927). Phrase go along for the ride in the figurative sense join in passively is from 1956. A ride
cymbal (1956) is used by jazz drummers for keeping up continuous rhythm, as opposed to a crash
cymbal (ride as rhythm in jazz slang is recorded from 1936).


rider (n.)

one who rides, Old English ridere rider, trooper, knight, mounted warrior, agent noun from ride
(v.). Meaning clause tacked on to a document after first draft is from 1660s. Related: Riderless.


ridership (n.)

mid-15c., position of a rider, from rider + -ship. From 1962 as number of passengers (on public
transportation, etc.).


ridge (n.)

Old English hrycg back of a man or beast, probably reinforced by Old Norse hryggr back, ridge, from
Proto-Germanic *khrugjaz (cognates: Old Frisian hregg, Old Saxon hruggi, Dutch rug, Old High German
hrukki, German R&uuml;cken the back), of uncertain origin. Also in Old English, the top or crest of
anything, especially when long and narrow. The connecting notion is of the ridge of the backbone.
Spelling with -dg- is from late 15c. Ridge-runner Southern Appalachian person first recorded 1917.


ridgepole (n.)

also ridge-pole, 1670s, from ridge (n.) + pole (n.1).


ridicule (v.)

1680s, make ridiculous, from ridicule (n.) or else from French ridiculer, from ridicule. Meaning
make fun of is from c.1700. Related: Ridiculed; ridiculing.


ridicule (n.)

1670s, absurd thing; 1680s, words or actions meant to invoke ridicule, from French ridicule, noun
use of adjective (15c.), or from Latin ridiculum laughing matter, joke, from noun use of neuter of
ridiculus (see ridiculous).    He who brings ridicule to bear against truth, finds in his hand a
blade without a hilt. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


ridiculous (adj.)

1540s, ridyculouse, from Latin ridiculosus laughable, from ridiculus that which excites laughter,
from ridere to laugh. Shakespeare and other 17c. writers sometimes spelled it rediculous. Slang
extensions to outrageous (1839); excellent (1959, jazz slang). Related: Ridiculously;
ridiculousness.


riding (n.2)

one of the three districts into which Yorkshire was divided, late 13c., from late Old English
*&thorn;ri&eth;ing, a relic of Viking rule, from Old Norse &eth;ri&eth;jungr third part, from
&eth;ri&eth;i third (see third). The initial consonant merged with final consonant of preceding
north, west, or east.


riding (n.1)

c.1300, verbal noun from ride (v.). Meaning teasing, annoying is from 1927. Riding-hood, worn by
women when riding or exposed to weather, is from mid-15c.


Riesling (n.)

1833, from German Riesling (15c.), the name of the grape, of uncertain origin.


rife (adj.)

Old English rife abundant, common, prevalent, from Proto-Germanic *rif- (cognates: Old Norse rifr,
Swedish river, Norwegian riv, Middle Dutch riif, Middle Low German rive abundant, generous), said to
be from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut The prevalence of the word in early southern texts is
in favour of its being native in English, rather than an adoption from Scandinavian. [OED]


riff (n.)

melodic phrase in jazz, 1935 (but said to have been used by musicians since c.1917), of uncertain
origin, perhaps a shortened form of riffle, or altered from refrain. The verb is attested from 1942,
from the noun. Also in extended use. Related: Riffed; riffing.


riffle (v.)

1754, to make choppy water, American English, perhaps a variant of ruffle make rough. The word
meaning shuffle (cards) is first recorded 1894, probably echoic; hence that of skim, leaf through
quickly (of papers, etc.) is from 1922. Related: Riffled; riffling.


riffraff (n.)

also riff-raff, late 15c., from earlier rif and raf one and all, everybody, every scrap, also
sweepings, refuse (mid-14c.), from Old French rif et raf, from rifler to spoil, strip (see rifle
(v.)). Second element from raffler carry off, related to rafle plundering, or from raffer to snatch,
to sweep together (see raffle (n.)).


rifle (n.)

1775, portable firearm having a spirally grooved bore, used earlier of the grooves themselves
(1751), noun use of rifled (pistol), 1680s, from verb meaning to cut spiral grooves in (a gun
barrel); see rifle (v.2).


rifle (v.1)

to plunder, early 14c. (implied in rifling), from Old French rifler strip, filch, plunder, peel off
(skin or bark), fleece, literally to graze, scratch (12c.), probably from a Germanic source (compare
Old English geriflian to wrinkle, Old High German riffilon to tear by rubbing, Old Norse rifa to
tear, break). Related: Rifled; rifling.


rifle (v.2)

to cut spiral grooves in (a gun barrel), 1630s, probably from French rifler, from Old French rifler
to scratch or groove (see rifle (v.1)). Related: Rifled; rifling.


rifleman (n.)

1775, from rifle (n.) + man (n.).


rift (n.)

early 14c., a split, act of splitting, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish and Norwegian rift
a cleft, Old Icelandic ript (pronounced rift) breach; related to Old Norse ripa to break a contract
(see riven). Figurative use from 1620s. Geological sense from 1921. As a verb, c.1300.


rig (v.)

late 15c., originally nautical, to fit with sails, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare
Danish, Norwegian rigge to equip, Swedish rigga to rig, harness), though these may be from English;
perhaps ultimately from PIE *reig- to bind. Slang meaning to pre-arrange or tamper with results is
attested from 1938, perhaps a different word, from rig (n.) a trick, swindle, scheme (1775), earlier
sport, banter, ridicule (1725), of unknown origin. Also there is rig (v.) ransack from 1560s,
likewise of unknown origin. Related: Rigged; rigging.


rig (n.)

distinctive arrangement of sails, masts, etc. on a ship, 1822, from rig (v.). Extended to costume,
clothing outfit (1843); horse-drawn vehicle (1831), which led to sense of truck, bus, etc. (1851);
and apparatus for well-sinking (1875).


Rig veda

1776, from Sanskrit rigveda, from rg- praise, hymn, spoken stanza, literally brightness, from PIE
*erkw- to radiate, beam; praise + veda knowledge, from PIE *weid-o-, from root *weid- to know, see
(see vision (n.)). A thousand hymns, orally transmitted, probably dating from before 1000 B.C.E.
Related: Rig-vedic.


rigatoni (n.)

short, hollow, fluted tubes of pasta, 1930, from Italian rigatooni, plural of rigato, past
participle of rigare to draw a line, to make fluting, from riga line; something cut out, from a
Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *rigon- (see row (n.1)), from PIE *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(see riparian).


Rigel

bright star in Orion, 1590s, from Arabic Rijl Jauzah al Yusra the Left Leg of the Central One, from
rijl foot.


rigging (n.)

late 15c., action of fitting (a ship) with ropes, etc.; 1590s as ropes that work the sails of a
ship, verbal noun from rig (v.).


right (adj.1)

morally correct, Old English riht just, good, fair; proper, fitting; straight, not bent, direct,
erect, from Proto-Germanic *rekhtaz (cognates: Old Frisian riucht right, Old Saxon reht, Middle
Dutch and Dutch recht, Old High German reht, German recht, Old Norse rettr, Gothic raihts), from PIE
root *reg- move in a straight line, also to rule, to lead straight, to put right (see regal;
cognates: Greek orektos stretched out, upright; Latin rectus straight, right; Old Persian rasta-
straight, right, ar&#353;ta- rectitude; Old Irish recht law; Welsh rhaith, Breton reiz just,
righteous, wise).    Compare slang straight (adj.1) honest, morally upright, and Latin rectus right,
literally straight, Lithuanian teisus right, true, literally straight. Greek dikaios just (in the
moral and legal sense) is from dike custom. As an emphatic, meaning you are right, it is recorded
from 1580s; use as a question meaning am I not right? is from 1961. The sense in right whale is
justly entitled to the name. Right stuff best human ingredients is from 1848, popularized by Tom
Wolfe's 1979 book about the first astronauts. Right of way is attested from 1767. Right angle is
from late 14c.


right (adj.2)

opposite of left, early 12c., riht, from Old English riht, which did not have this sense but meant
good, proper, fitting, straight (see right (adj.1)). The notion is of the right hand as the correct
hand. The usual Old English word for this was swi&thorn;ra, literally stronger.  The history of
words for 'right' and 'left' shows that they were used primarily with reference to the hands [Buck].
Similar sense evolution in Dutch recht, German recht right (not left), from Old High German reht,
which meant only straight, just.    The usual PIE root (*dek-) is represented by Latin dexter (see
dexterity). Other derivations on a similar pattern to English right are French droit, from Latin
directus straight; Lithuanian labas, literally good; and Slavic words (Bohemian pravy, Polish prawy,
Russian pravyj) from Old Church Slavonic pravu, literally straight, from PIE *pro-, from root *per-
(1) forward, through (see per).    The political sense of conservative is first recorded 1794
(adj.), 1825 (n.), a translation of French Droit the Right, Conservative Party in the French
National Assembly (1789; see left (adj.)).


right (v.)

Old English rihtan to straighten, rule, set up, set right, amend; guide, govern; restore, replace,
from riht (adj.); see right (adj.1). Compare Old Norse retta to straighten, Old Saxon rihtian, Old
Frisian riuchta, German richten, Gothic garaihtjan. Related: Righted; righting.


right (n.)

Old English riht (West Saxon, Kentish), reht (Anglian), that which is morally right, duty,
obligation, also rule of conduct; law of a land; also what someone deserves; a just claim, what is
due; correctness, truth; a legal entitlement, a privilege, from the root of right (adj.1). Meaning
the right (as opposed to the left) is from mid-13c.; political use from 1825. From early 14c. as a
right action, a good deed. Meaning a blow with the right fist is from 1898. The phrase to rights at
once, straightway is 1660s, from sense in a proper manner (Middle English).


right (adv.)

Old English rehte, rihte in a straight or direct manner, from right (adj.1). Right on! as an
exclamation of approval first recorded 1925 in black slang, popularized mid-1960s by Black Panther
movement.


right hand (n.)

Old English rihthand; see right (adj.2) + hand (n.). Figurative for indispensable person, 1520s;
right-hand man first attested 1660s. Right-handed attested from late 14c.


right wing (n.)

1570s of armies; from 1882 in football; 1905 in the political sense (compare left wing). Right-
winger attested by 1919 in U.S. politics, 1895 in sports.


right-minded (adj.)

1580s, from right (adj.) + minded.


righteous (adj.)

early 16c. alteration of rightwise, from Old English rihtwis, from riht (see right) + wis wise, way,
manner (see wise (adj.)). Suffix altered by influence of courteous, etc. Meaning genuine, excellent
is 1942 in jazz slang. Related: Righteously.


righteousness (n.)

Old English rehtwisnisse; see righteous + -ness.


rightful (adj.)

Old English rihtful; see right (adj.1) + -ful. Related: Rightfully; rightfulness.


rightly (adv.)

Old English rihtlice justly, virtuously; properly, regularly, correctly; see right (adj.1) + -ly
(2).


righty (n.)

right-handed person, 1949, from right (adj.2) + -y (3).


rigid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin rigidus hard, stiff, rough, severe, from rigere be stiff, from PIE *reig-
stretch (tight), bind tightly, make fast (cognates: Old Irish riag torture, Middle High German ric
band, string). Related: Rigidly.


rigidity (n.)

1620s, from Latin rigiditas stiffness, from rigidus (see rigid).


rigmarole (n.)

1736, a long, rambling discourse, apparently from an altered, Kentish colloquial survival of ragman
roll long list or catalogue (1520s), in Middle English a long roll of verses descriptive of personal
characters, used in a medieval game of chance called Rageman, perhaps from Anglo-French Ragemon le
bon Ragemon the good, which was the heading on one set of the verses, referring to a character by
that name. Sense transferred to foolish activity or commotion by 1939.


rigor (n.)

late 14c., from Old French rigor strength, hardness (13c., Modern French rigueur), from Latin
rigorem (nominative rigor) numbness, stiffness, hardness, firmness; roughness, rudeness, from rigere
be stiff (see rigid).


rigor mortis

stiffening of the body caused by contraction of muscles after death, 1837, from Latin rigor
stiffness (see rigor) + mortis, genitive of mors death (see mortal).


rigorous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French rigorous (13c., Modern French rigoureux), from Medieval Latin rigorosus,
from Latin rigor (see rigor). Related: Rigorously.


rigour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of rigor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


rile (v.)

1825, American English spelling alteration to reflect a dialectal pronunciation of roil (q.v.);
compare heist from hoist and in the same era spile for spoil (v.). Bartlett writes that in both
England and America roil is now commonly pronounced and written rile [Dictionary of Americanisms,
1848]. Related: Riled; riling.


rill (n.)

small brook, rivulet, 1530s, from or related to Dutch and Frisian ril, Low German rille groove,
furrow, running stream, probably from Proto-Germanic *ril- (cognates: Old English ri&eth;,
ri&thorn;e brook, stream, which survives only in dialects), a diminutive form from PIE root *reie-
to run, flow (see Rhine).


rim (n.)

Old English rima edge, border, verge, coast, as in s&aelig;rima seashore, literally rim of the sea,
and d&aelig;grima dawn, literally rim of the day. Related to Old Norse rime, rimi a raised strip of
land, ridge, Old Frisian rim edge, but with no other known cognates. The snare drummer's rim shot
(striking the rim and the head at once) is recorded from 1934.


rim (v.)

1794, to fit with a rim, from rim (n.). Sexual senses from 1920s, some perhaps influenced by ream
(v.). Related: Rimmed; rimming.


rime (n.)

hoarfrost, Old English hrim, from Proto-Germanic *khrima- (cognates: Old Norse hrim, Dutch rijm,
German Reif). Old French rime is of Germanic origin. Rare in Middle English, surviving mainly in
Scottish and northern English, revived in literary use late 18c.


rind (n.)

Old English rinde bark, crust, later peel of a fruit or vegetable (c.1400), from Proto-Germanic
*rind- (cognates: Old Saxon rinda, Middle Dutch and Dutch rinde bark of a tree, Old High German
rinda, German Rinde), probably related to Old English rendan (see rend (v.)).


ring (n.1)

circular band, Old English hring small circlet, especially one of metal for wearing on the finger or
as part of a mail coat; anything circular, from Proto-Germanic *hringaz something curved, circle
(cognates: Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hring, Danish, Swedish, Dutch ring, Old High German hring,
German Ring), from PIE *(s)kregh- nasalized form of (s)kregh-, from root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend,
with wide-ranging derivative senses (cognates: Latin curvus bent, curved, crispus curly; Old Church
Slavonic kragu circle, and perhaps Greek kirkos ring, koronos curved).    Other Old English senses
were circular group of persons, also horizon. Meaning place for prize fight and wrestling bouts
(early 14c.) is from the space in a circle of bystanders in the midst of which such contests once
were held, ... a circle formed for boxers, wrestlers, and cudgel players, by a man styled Vinegar;
who, with his hat before his eyes, goes round the circle, striking at random with his whip to
prevent the populace from crowding in [Grose, 1785]. Meaning combination of interested persons is
from 1829. Of trees, from 1670s; fairy ring is from 1620s. Ring finger is Old English hringfingr, a
compound found in other Germanic languages. To run rings round (someone) be superior to is from
1891.    Nursery rhyme ring a ring a rosie is attested in an American form (with a different ending)
from c.1790. The belief that the rhyme originated with the Great Plague is now almost universal, but
has no evidence to support it and is almost certainly nonsense [Oxford Dictionary of English
Folklore]. This proposal of connection dates only to the late 1960s.


ring (v.1)

sound a bell, Old English hringan sound, give a certain resonant sound when struck; announce by
bells, from Proto-Germanic *khrengan (cognates: Old Norse hringja, Swedish ringa, Middle Dutch
ringen), probably of imitative origin. Related: Rang; rung. Originally a weak verb, strong
inflection began in early Middle English by influence of sing, etc. To ring down a theatrical
curtain is from 1772, from the custom of signaling for it by ringing a bell. To ring up a purchase
on a cash register is by 1937, from the bell that sounded. Specialized sense give a resonant sound
when struck as an indication of genuineness or purity, with transferred use (as in to ring hollow)
is from 1610s.


ring (v.2)

make a circle around, Old English ymbhringan, from the root of ring (n.1). Intransitive sense gather
in a ring is mid-15c. Sense of provide or attach a ring is late 14c. Meaning move in a circle around
is from 1825. Related: Ringed; ringing. Compare Frisian ringje, Middle Dutch and Dutch ringen, Old
High German ringan, German ringen, Old Norse hringa, hringja.


ring (n.2)

1540s, set of church bells, from ring (v.1). Meaning a call on the telephone is from 1900; to give
(someone) a ring call on the telephone was in use by 1910. Meaning a ringing tone is from 1620s;
specifically the ringing sound made by a telephone by 1951. Meaning resonance of coin or glass as a
test of genuineness is from 1850, with transferred use (ring of truth, etc.).


ring-road (n.)

1928, from ring (n.1) + road.


ringer (n.)

early 15c., one who rings (a bell), agent noun from ring (v.1). In quoits (and by extension,
horseshoes) from 1863, from ring (v.2). Especially in be a dead ringer for resemble closely, 1891,
from ringer, a fast horse entered fraudulently in a race in place of a slow one (the verb to ring in
this sense is attested from 1812), possibly from British ring in substitute, exchange, via ring the
changes, substitute counterfeit money for good, a pun on ring the changes in the sense of play the
regular series of variations in a peal of bells (1610s). Meaning expert is first recorded 1918,
Australian slang, from earlier meaning man who shears the most sheep per day (1871).


ringing (n.)

act of causing a bell to ring; sound made by a bell, 14c., verbal noun from ring (v.1). Meaning
ringing sensation in the ears is from late 14c.


ringleader (n.)

c.1500, from Middle English phrase to lead the ring (mid-14c.), probably from a medieval metaphor
from dancing. See ring (n.1) + lead (v.1).


ringlet (n.)

1550s, from ring (n.1) + diminutive suffix -let. Of hair, since 1660s. Related: Ringleted.


ringmaster (n.)

1842, from ring (n.1) in the circus sense + master (n.).


ringside (n.)

also ring-side, 1855, from ring (n.1) in the space for fighting sense + side (n.).


ringworm (n.)

name given to certain skin diseases, early 15c., from ring (n.1) + worm (n.).


rink (n.)

late 14c., Scottish dialect, probably from Old French renc, reng row, line, from Frankish and
ultimately connected with ring (n.1). Probably confused in meaning with ring (n.1) in sense of area
marked out for a sporting contest. From 1787 in curling; ice hockey sense first attested 1896.


rinky-dink (adj.)

1913 (from 1912 as a noun), said to be carnival slang and imitative of the sound of banjo music at
parades [Barnhart]; compare ricky-tick old-fashioned jazz (1938). But early records suggest
otherwise unless there are two words. The earliest senses seem to be as a noun, maltreatment,
especially robbery:    So I felt and saw that I was robbed and I went to look after an officer. I
found an officer on the corner of Twenty-fifth street and Sixth avenue. I said, Officer, I have got
the rinky-dink. He knew what it meant all right. He said, Where? Down at that wench house? I said, I
guess that is right. [testimony dated New York August 9, 1899, published 1900]    And this chorus
from the Yale Literary Magazine, Feb. 1896:  Rinky dinky, rinky dink,  Stand him up for another
drink.


rinse (v.)

c.1300 subject to light washing; wash with water only (mid-13c. in surname Rinsfet), from Old French
reincier (transitive) to wash, cleanse (12c., Modern French rincer), probably dissimilated from
recincier, from Vulgar Latin *recentiare to make fresh, to wash, cleanse with water, from Late Latin
recentare to make fresh, from Latin recens new, fresh (see recent). OED says similarity in form and
sense with Old Norse hreinsa is prob[ably] accidental. Meaning wash a second time to remove
remaining impurities, soap, etc. is from 1520s. Related: Rinsed; rinsing.


rinse (n.)

1837, from rinse (v.). As a hair treatment, by 1928.


rio (n.)

a river, from Spanish rio, from Latin rivus brook, stream (see rivulet).


Rio de Janeiro

literally January River, named by explorer Amerigo Vespucci because he discovered it on Jan. 1,
1502, and so called because he incorrectly thought the bay was the estuary of a large river. See
January.


riot (n.)

c.1200, debauchery, extravagance, wanton living, from Old French riote (12c.) dispute, quarrel,
(tedious) talk, chattering, argument, domestic strife, also a euphemism for sexual intercourse, of
uncertain origin. Compare Medieval Latin riota quarrel, dispute, uproar, riot. Perhaps from Latin
rugire to roar.  Meaning public disturbance is first recorded late 14c. Meaning something
spectacularly successful first recorded 1909 in theater slang.   Run riot is first recorded 1520s, a
metaphoric extension from Middle English meaning in reference to hounds following the wrong scent.
The Riot Act, part of which must be read to a mob before active measures can be taken, was passed
1714 (1 Geo. I, st.2, c.5). Riot girl and alternative form riot grrl first recorded 1992.


riot (v.)

late 14c., behave in a dissolute manner, engage in loose revelry, from Old French rioter chatter,
dispute, quarrel, from riote (see riot (n.)). Meaning take part in a public disturbance is from
1755. Related: Rioted; rioting.


rioter (n.)

late 14c., debauchee, from Old French riotour, from riote, (see riot (n.)). Meaning one who takes
part in a rising or public disturbance against authority is from mid-15c.


rioting (n.)

1590s, dissoluteness, verbal noun from riot (v.). Earlier was  riotry (early 14c.). Meaning
continuous public disturbance is from 1832.


riotous (adj.)

mid-14c., troublesome, wanton, extravagant, from Old French riotos argumentative, quarrelsome, from
riote (see riot (n.)). Meaning tumultuous, turbulent is mid-15c. Related: Riotously; riotousness.


rip (v.)

tear apart, c.1400, probably of North Sea Germanic origin (compare Flemish rippen strip off roughly,
Frisian rippe to tear, rip) or else from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish reppa, Danish rippe
to tear, rip). In either case, from Proto-Germanic *rupjan-, from PIE root *reup-, *reub- to snatch.
Meaning to slash open is from 1570s. Related: Ripped; ripping.    In garments we rip along the line
at which they were sewed; we tear the texture of the cloth. ... Rend implies great force or
violence. [Century Dictionary]    Meaning to move with slashing force (1798) is the sense in let her
rip, American English colloquial phrase attested from 1853. The noun is attested from 1711. The
parachutist's rip cord (1911) originally was a device in ballooning to open a panel and release air.


rip (n.1)

rough water, 1775, perhaps a special use of rip (v.). Originally of seas; application to rivers is
from 1828.


rip (n.2)

thing of little value, 1815, earlier inferior or worn-out horse (1778), perhaps altered from slang
rep (1747) man of loose character; vicious, reckless and worthless person, which itself is perhaps
short for reprobate (n.).


Rip Van Winkle

person out of touch with current conditions, 1829, from name of character in Washington Irving's
Sketch Book (1819-20).


rip-off (n.)

an act of fraud, a swindle, 1969, from verbal phrase rip off to steal or rob (c.1967) in U.S. black
slang, from rip (v.) + off (adv.). Rip was prison slang for to steal since 1904, and was also used
in this sense in 12c. Meaning an exploitative imitation, a plagiarism is from 1971. Related: Ripped-
off.


rip-rap (n.)

also riprap, loose stone thrown down in water or soft ground as foundation, 1822, American English,
perhaps connected with earlier nautical word rip-rap meaning stretch of rippling water (often caused
by underwater elevations), 1660s, probably of imitative origin (compare riprap a sharp blow, 1570s).


rip-saw (n.)

a hand saw, the teeth of which have more rake and less set than a cross-cut saw, used for cutting
wood in the direction of the grain, 1846, from rip (n.) split timber (see rip (v.) + saw (n.1)).


rip-tide (n.)

also riptide, 1862, from rip (n.1) + tide (n.). It is a current not a tide, and the attempt to
correct it to rip current dates from 1936.


riparian (adj.)

of or pertaining to river banks, 1849, with -an + Latin riparius of a river bank, from riparia
shore, later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa (steep) bank of a
river, shore, probably literally break (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream
bed), or else that which is cut out by the river, from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(cognates: Greek ereipia ruins, eripne slope, precipice; Old Norse rifa break, to tear apart; Danish
rift breach, Middle High German rif riverbank, seashore; English riven, rift).


ripe (adj.)

Old English ripe ready for reaping, fit for eating, mature, from West Germanic *ripijaz (cognates:
Old Saxon ripi, Middle Dutch ripe, Dutch rijp, Old High German rifi, German reif); related to Old
English repan to reap (see reap). Meaning ready for some action or effect is from 1590s. Related:
Ripely; ripeness.


ripen (v.)

to grow ripe, 1560s, from ripe + -en (1). Related: Ripened; ripening. Earlier, the verb was simply
ripe, from late Old English ripian, from the adjective.


riposte (n.)

1707, a quick thrust after parrying a lunge, a fencing term, from French riposte, by dissimilation
from risposte (17c.), from Italian risposta a reply, noun use of fem. past participle of rispondere
to respond, from Latin respondere (see respond). Sense of sharp retort; quick, sharp reply, is first
attested 1865. As a verb, 1851.


ripper (n.)

1610s, agent noun from rip (v.). Meaning killer who mutilates his victims (1890) is from Jack the
Ripper, notorious London murderer, whose nickname contains a pun on ripper in sense of tool for
ripping old slates, etc. (1823) and the slang meaning excellent person or thing, a 'ripping' fellow
(1838), from ripping excellent, splendid.


ripping (adj.)

cutting, 1714, present participle adjective from rip (v.). Slange meaning Very fast, rapid os from
1826, hence further slang development excellent, splendid (1846.). Related: Rippingly.


ripple (v.)

early 15c., to crease; 1660s, to present a ruffled surface, of unknown origin, perhaps a
frequentative of rip (v.). Transitive sense cause to ripple is from 1786. Related: Rippled;
rippling.


ripple (n.)

very small wave, 1798, from earlier meaning stretch of shallow, rippling water (1755), from ripple
(v.). Meaning mark or movement suggestive of a ripple is from 1843. Meaning ice cream streaked with
colored syrup first attested 1939, so called from its appearance. As the name of a brand of
inexpensive wine sold by E&J; Gallo Winery, from 1960 to 1984. Ripple effect is from 1950.


riproaring (adj.)

1834, altered from riproarious (1821), from rip (v.) tear apart + uproarious; see uproar.


ripsnorter (n.)

something of exceptional strength, 1840, probably from rip (v.) + snort (v.).


rise (v.)

Old English risan to rise, rise from sleep, get out of bed; stand up, rise to one's feet; get up
from table; rise together; be fit, be proper (usually arisan; class I strong verb; past tense ras,
past participle risen), from Proto-Germanic *us-risanan to go up (cognates: Old Norse risa, Old
Saxon risan, Gothic urreisan to rise, Old High German risan to rise, flow, German reisen to travel,
originally to rise for a journey).    From c.1200 as move from a lower to a higher position, move
upward; increase in number or amount; rise in fortune, prosper; become prominent; also rise from the
dead. Meaning come into existence, originate; result (from) is mid-13c. From early 14c. as rebel,
revolt; also occur, happen, come to pass; take place. Related to raise (v.). Related: Rose; risen.


rise (n.)

upward movement, 1570s, from rise (v.). Meaning a piece of rising ground is from 1630s. Meaning
spring, source, origin, beginning is from 1620s. Phrase to get a rise out of (someone) (1829) is a
metaphor from angling (1650s).


risen

past participle of rise (v.); Old English gerisen, past participle of risan.


riser (n.)

late 14c., rebel, agent noun from rise (v.). Meaning one who rises (from bed, in a certain manner)
is mid-15c. Meaning upright part of a step is from 1771.


risible (adj.)

1550s, given to laughter, from Middle French risible (14c.) and directly from Late Latin risibilis
laughable, able to laugh, from Latin risus, past participle of ridere to laugh. Meaning capable of
exciting laughter, comical is from 1727.


rising (n.)

c.1300, resurrection, act of one who rises, verbal noun from rise (v.). Of heavenly bodies from mid-
14c. Meaning a getting up from bed is c.1400. Sense of insurrection is late 14c.


rising (adj.)

1540s, present participle adjective from rise (v.).


risk (n.)

1660s, risque, from French risque (16c.), from Italian risco, riscio (modern rischio), from riscare
run into danger, of uncertain origin. The anglicized spelling first recorded 1728. Spanish riesgo
and German Risiko are Italian loan-words. With run (v.) from 1660s. Risk aversion is recorded from
1942; risk factor from 1906; risk management from 1963; risk taker from 1892.


risk (v.)

1680s, from risk (n.), or from French risquer, from Italian riscare, rischaire, from the noun.
Related: Risked; risks; risking.


risky (adj.)

1825, from risk (n.) + -y (2). Riskful in same sense is from 1793. Related: Riskiness.


Risorgimento (n.)

1889, movement which led to the unification and independence of Italy, Italian, literally uprising
(of Italy against Austria, c.1850-60), from risorgere, from Latin resurgere (see resurgent).


risotto (n.)

rice cooked in broth with meat and cheese, 1848, from Italian risotto, from riso rice (see rice). At
first in Italian contexts; it begins to appear in English cookery books c.1880.


risque (adj.)

tending toward impropriety, 1867, from French risqu&eacute;, past participle of risquer to risk (see
risk (v.)).


Ritalin (n.)

proprietary name (Ciba Ltd., originally in Switzerland) for drug methylphenidate hydrochloride,
copyrighted 1948, years before the drug itself was marketed.


ritardando (adj.)

1811, from Italian, present participle of ritardare, from Latin retardare (see retardation).


rite (n.)

early 14c., from Latin ritus religious observance or ceremony, custom, usage, perhaps from PIE root
*re(i)- to count, number (cognates: Greek arithmos number, Old English rim number; see read (v.)).
Rite of passage (1909) is translated from French rite de passage, coined by French anthropologist
Arnold van Gennep (1873-1957).


ritual (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French ritual or directly from Latin ritualis relating to (religious) rites, from
ritus rite (see rite). Related: Ritually.


ritual (nj.)

1640s, from ritual (adj.).


ritualistic (adj.)

1844, from ritualist one versed in or devoted to rituals (1650s; see ritual) + -ic. Related:
Ritualism (1838).


Ritz (n.)

high quality, superiority, 1910 (Ritzian, adj., is attested by 1908), in reference to the luxurious
Ritz hotels in New York, London, Paris, etc., commemorating Swiss hotelier C&eacute;sar Ritz
(1850-1918). To put on the ritz assume an air of superiority is recorded from 1926. A verb ritz to
behave haughtily is recorded from 1911.


ritzy

1920, from ritz + -y (2). Related: Ritziness.


rival (n.)

1570s, from Latin rivalis a rival, adversary in love; neighbor, originally, of the same brook, from
rivus brook (see rivulet). One who is in pursuit of the same object as another. The sense evolution
seems to be based on the competitiveness of neighbors: one who uses the same stream, or one on the
opposite side of the stream A secondary sense in Latin and sometimes in English was associate,
companion in duty, from the notion of one having a common right or privilege with another. As an
adjective 1580s from the noun.


rival (v.)

c.1600, from rival (n.). Related: Rivaled; rivaling.


rivalrous (adj.)

1812; see rivalry + -ous.


rivalry (n.)

1590s; from rival + -ry. Shakespeare has rivality (Antony and Cleopatra), but from the secondary
sense of the root word and meaning partnership, equality in rank.


rive (v.)

tear in pieces, strike asunder, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rifa to tear
apart (compare Swedish rifva, Danish rive scratch, tear), from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(see riparian).


riven (adj.)

split, cloven, rent, c.1300, past participle adjective from rive to tear, rend.


river (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere river, riverside, river bank (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *riparia riverbank, seashore, river (source also of Spanish ribera, Italian riviera),
noun use of fem. of Latin riparius of a riverbank (see riparian). Generalized sense of a copious
flow of anything is from late 14c. The Old English word was ea river, cognate with Gothic ahwa,
Latin aqua (see aqua-). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense river bank as the main one,
or else the secondary Latin sense coast of the sea (compare Riviera).    U.S. slang phrase up the
river in prison (1891) is originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, which was literally up the
(Hudson) river from New York City. Phrase down the river done for, finished perhaps echoes sense in
sell down the river (1851), originally of troublesome slaves, to sell from the Upper South to the
harsher cotton plantations of the Deep South.


riverine (adj.)

1849, from river + -ine (1). French form riverain is attested from 1858.


riverside (n.)

c.1400, from river + side (n.).


rivet (n.)

c.1400, from Old French rivet nail, rivet, from Old French river to clench, fix, fasten, possibly
from Middle Dutch wriven turn, grind, related to rive (v.). The English word may be directly from
Middle Dutch.


rivet (v.)

early 15c., from rivet (n.). Meaning to command the attention is from c.1600. Related: Riveted;
riveting.


riveter (n.)

1800, agent noun from rivet (v.).


riveting (adj.)

commanding attention, 1854, present participle adjective from rivet (v.). Related: Rivetingly.


Riviera (n.)

Mediterranean seacoast around Genoa, 1630s, from Italian riviera, literally bank, shore (see river).
In extended use, the coast from Marseilles to La Spezia, which became popular 19c. as a winter
resort. Thence adopted (sometimes ironically) in reference to areas of other countries, as in
American Riviera (Florida, 1887); English Riviera (Devonshire coast, 1882).


rivulet (n.)

1580s, from Italian rivoletto, diminutive of rivolo, itself a diminutive of rivo brook, from Latin
rivus stream, brook, from PIE *reiwos, literally that which flows, from root *reie- to flow, run
(see Rhine).


RNA (n.)

1948, abbreviation of ribonucleic acid (see ribonucleic).


roach (n.1)

shortened form of cockroach, 1837, on mistaken notion that it was a compound. In contemporary
writing said to be from a polite desire to avoid the sexual connotation in the first syllable.
Meaning butt of a marijuana cigarette is first recorded 1938, perhaps from resemblance to the
insect, but perhaps a different word entirely.


roach (n.2)

small freshwater fish, c.1200, from Old French roche (13c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from a
Germanic source. Applied to similar-looking fish in North America.


road (n.)

Old English rad riding expedition, journey, hostile incursion, from Proto-Germanic *raido (cognates:
Old Frisian red ride, Old Saxon reda, Middle Dutch rede, Old High German reita foray, raid), from
PIE *reidh- to ride (see ride (v.)). Also related to raid (n.). In Middle English, a riding, a
journey; sense of open way for traveling between two places is first recorded 1590s. Meaning narrow
stretch of sheltered water is from early 14c. (as in Hampton Roads in Virginia).    Modern spelling
established 18c. In 19c. U.S. use, often meaning railroad. On the road travelling is from 1640s.
Road test (n.) is from 1906; as a verb from 1937. Road hog is attested from 1886; road rage is from
1988. Road map is from 1786; road trip is by 1950, originally of baseball teams. Old English had
radwerig weary of travelling.


road kill (n.)

animal killed by vehicular traffic, 1972; the figurative sense is from 1992.


road-runner (n.)

long-tailed crested desert cuckoo, 1847, American English, from road (n.) + runner. Earliest
references give the Mexican Spanish name for it as correcamino and the English name might be a
translation of that. The Warner Bros. cartoon character dates to 1948.


roadblock (n.)

1940, from road + block (n.).


roadhouse (n.)

inn by a roadside, 1857, later place for refreshment and entertainment along a road (1922), from
road (n.) + house (n.).


roadie (n.)

laborer employed by pop groups while on tour, 1969, from road + -ie.


roadside (n.)

1744, from road (n.) + side (n.).


roadster (n.)

open two-seat automobile, 1908; earlier a light, horse-drawn carriage (1892); a horse for riding
(1818); a ship lying near the shore (1744), from road (n.) + -ster.


roadwork (n.)

also road-work, 1765, work done in making and repairing roads; 1903 as exercise done on roads; from
road (n.) + work (n.).


roam (v.)

c.1300, romen, possibly from Old English *ramian act of wandering about, which is probably related
to ar&aelig;man arise, lift up. There are no certain cognate forms in other Germanic languages, but
Barnhart points to Old Norse reimu&eth;r act of wandering about, reimast to haunt. Except in late
puns, there is no evidence of connexion with the Romance words denoting pilgrims or pilgrimages to
Rome .... [OED], such as Spanish romero a pilot-fish; a pilgrim; Old French romier travelling as a
pilgrim; a pilgrim, from Medieval Latin romerius a pilgrim (originally to Rome). Related: Roamed;
roamer; roaming.


roan (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French roan reddish brown, perhaps from Spanish roano, from Old Spanish raudano,
probably from a Germanic source (compare Gothic raudan, accusative of rau&eth;s red). Chiefly of
horses.


roar (v.)

Old English rarian roar, wail, lament, bellow, cry, probably of imitative origin (compare Middle
Dutch reeren, German r&ouml;hren to roar; Sanskrit ragati barks; Lithuanian reju to scold; Old
Church Slavonic revo I roar; Latin raucus hoarse). Related: Roared; roaring.


roar (n.)

late 14c., from roar (v.) and Old English gerar.


roaring (adj.)

late 14c., present participle adjective from roar (v.). Used of periods of years characterized by
noisy revelry, especially roaring twenties (1930); but also, in Britain, roaring fifties (1892).
Roaring forties in reference to exceptional rough seas between latitudes 40 and 50 south, is
attested from 1841.


roast (v.)

late 13c., to cook by dry heat, from Old French rostir to roast, burn (Modern French r&ocirc;tir),
from Frankish *hraustjan (cognate with Old High German rosten, German r&#246;sten, Middle Dutch
roosten to roast), originally cook on a grate or gridiron, related to Germanic words meaning
gridiron, grate; such as German Rost, Middle Dutch roost.    Intransitive sense be very hot, be
exposed to great heat is from c.1300. The meaning make fun of in an affectionate way is from 1710.
From the same source as roster. Related: Roasted; roasting. Roast beef first recorded 1630s (French
rosbif is from English).


roast (n.)

early 14c., meat roasted or for roasting; see roast (v.). Meaning a roasting is from 1580s. Sense of
an unmerciful bantering is from 1740.


roaster (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from roast (v.). As a kind of oven, from 1799; as article of food prepared for
roasting, 1680s.


rob (v.)

late 12c., from Old French rober rob, steal, pillage, ransack, rape, from West Germanic *rauba booty
(cognates: Old High German roubon to rob, roub spoil, plunder; Old English reafian, source of the
reave in bereave), from Proto-Germanic *raubon to rob, from PIE *reup-, *reub- to snatch (see rip
(v.)).Lord, hou schulde God approve &thorn;at &thorn;ou robbe Petur, and gif &thorn;is robbere to
Poule in &thorn;e name of Crist? [Wyclif, c.1380]To rob the cradle is attested from 1864 in
reference to drafting young men in the American Civil War; by 1949 in reference to seductions or
romantic relationships with younger persons. Related: Robbed; robbing.


Rob Roy (n.)

Highland freebooter (1671-1734). His name means Red Robert. As a type of cocktail made with Scotch
whiskey, it is attested from 1960.


robber (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French robbere, Old French robeor, agent noun from rober (see rob). Robber
baron  in the corrupt, greedy financier sense is attested from 1870s, from a comparison of Gilded
Age capitalists to medieval European warlords.    It is the attempt of the more shrewd to take
advantage of the less shrewd. It is the attempt of the strong to oppress the weak. It is the old
robber baron in his castle descending, after men have planted their crops, and stealing them. [Henry
Ward Beecher, sermon, Truthfulness, 1871] <hr />   Regulation by combination means that the railroad
managers are feudal lords and that you are their serfs. It means that every car load of grain or
other produce of your fields and shops that passes over the New York Central shall pay heavy toll
for right of transit to Vanderbilt, the robber baron of our modern feudalism, who dominates that
way. [W.C. Flagg, testimony to Congress, 1874]


robbery (n.)

c.1200, from Old French roberie robbery, theft, from rober to rob (see rob).


robe (n.)

long, loose outer garment, late 13c., from Old French robe long, loose outer garment (12c.), from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German rouba vestments), from West Germanic *raubo booty (cognate
with Old High German roub robbery, breakage), which also yielded rob (v.).    Presumably the notion
is of garments taken from the enemy as spoils, and the Old French word had a secondary sense of
plunder, booty, while Germanic cognates  had both senses; as in Old English reaf plunder, booty,
spoil; garment, armor, vestment. Meaning dressing gown is from 1854. Metonymic sense of the legal
profession is attested from 1640s.


robe (v.)

late 14c., from robe (n.). Related: Robed; robing.


Robert

masc. proper name, from Old North French form of Old High German Hrodberht bright-fame, bright with
glory, from hrod- fame, glory, from Proto-Germanic *hrothi-, + -berht bright (see Albert). The name
of William the Conqueror's rebellious oldest son. It was introduced by Normans during the reign of
Edward the Confessor and became very popular [Dictionary of English Surnames].


robin (n.)

common European songbird, 1540s, shortening of Robin Redbreast (mid-15c.), from masc. personal name
Robin, also (in reference to the bird) in the diminutive form robinet. Redbreast alone for the bird
is from early 15c., and the Robin might have been added for the alliteration. It ousted the native
ruddock. In North America, the name was applied to the red-breasted thrush by 1703. Robin's egg as a
shade of blue is attested from 1881.


Robin

masc. proper name, from Old French Robin, diminutive of Robert (q.v.). Robin Goodfellow sportive elf
of the English countryside, is first attested 1530s, popular 16-17c.; Robin Hood is at least from
late 14c.


Robinson Crusoe

man without companionship, 1768, from the eponymous hero of Daniel Defoe's fictional shipwreck
narrative (1719).


robot (n.)

1923, from English translation of 1920 play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots), by Karel Capek
(1890-1938), from Czech robotnik slave, from robota forced labor, compulsory service, drudgery, from
robotiti to work, drudge, from an Old Czech source akin to Old Church Slavonic rabota servitude,
from rabu slave, from Old Slavic *orbu-, from PIE *orbh- pass from one status to another (see
orphan). The Slavic word thus is a cousin to German Arbeit work (Old High German arabeit). According
to Rawson the word was popularized by Karel Capek's play, but was coined by his brother Josef (the
two often collaborated), who used it initially in a short story.


robotic (adj.)

1941 (Asimov), from robot + -ic.


robotics (n.)

1941, from robot + -ics. Coined in a science fiction context by Russian-born U.S. author Isaac
Asimov (1920-1992), who proposed the Three Laws of Robotics in 1968.


robust (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French robuste (14c.) and directly from Latin robustus strong and hardy,
literally as strong as oak, originally oaken, from robur, robus hard timber, strength, also a
special kind of oak, named for its reddish heartwood, from Latin ruber red (related to robigo rust),
from PIE *reudh- (see red (adj.1)). Related: Robustly; robustness. Robustious (1540s) was a common
form in 17c. (see Hamlet iii.2); it fell from use by mid-18c., but was somewhat revived by mid-19c.
antiquarian writers.


roc (n.)

large, ferocious bird of fable, 1570s, from Arabic rukhkh, from Persian rukh. Mentioned in Marco
Polo's account of Madagascar, modern use is mostly from Arabian Nights. Hence roc's egg something
marvelous or prodigious.


rock (n.1)

stone, mass of mineral matter, c.1300, from Old English rocc (as in stanrocc stone rock or obelisk)
and directly from Old North French roque, which is cognate with Medieval Latin rocca (8c.), from
Vulgar Latin *rocca, of uncertain origin, according to Klein sometimes said to be from Celtic
(compare Breton roch).    In Middle English it seems to have been used principally for rock
formations as opposed to individual stones. Meaning precious stone, especially a diamond, is 1908,
U.S. slang. Meaning crystallized cocaine is attested from 1973, in West Coast U.S. slang. Figurative
use for sure foundation (especially with reference to Christ) is from 1520s; but also from 1520s as
source of danger or destruction, in reference to shipwrecks (as in on the rocks). Also used
attributively in names of animals that frequent rocky habitats, as in rock lobster (1843). Between a
rock and a hard place first attested 1921:   to be between a rock and a hard place, vb. ph. To be
bankrupt. Common in Arizona in recent panics; sporadic in California. [Dialect Notes, vol. V, part
iv, 1921]    Rock-ribbed is from 1776, originally of land; figurative sense of resolute first
recorded 1887. Rock-happy (1945) was U.S. Pacific Theater armed forces slang for mentally unhinged
after too much time on one island. The rock-scissors-paper game is attested by that name from 1976;
from 1968 as paper-stone-scissors. A 1967 source says it is based on Japanese Jan Ken Pon (or Janken
for short), which is said to mean the same thing more or less.


rock (v.1)

to sway, late Old English roccian move a child gently to and fro, related to Old Norse rykkja to
pull, tear, move, Swedish rycka to pull, pluck, Middle Dutch rucken, Old High German rucchan, German
r&uuml;cken to move jerkily.    Meaning cause to sway back and forth is from late 13c. Intransitive
sense from late 14c. For popular music senses, see rock (v.2). Related: Rocked; rocking. To rock the
boat in the figurative sense stir up trouble is from 1914. Rock-a-bye first recorded 1805 in nursery
rhyme.


rock (v.2)

to dance to popular music with a strong beat, 1948 (first attested in song title We're gonna rock),
from rock (v.1), in earlier blues slang sense of to cause to move with musical rhythm (1922); often
used at first with sexual overtones (as in 1922 song title My Man Rocks Me (with One Steady Roll)).
Sense developed early 1950s to play or dance to rock and roll music. Related: Rocked; rocking.
Rocksteady, Jamaican pop music style (precursor of reggae), is attested from 1969.


rock (n.2)

action of rocking; a movement to and fro, 1823, from rock (v.1). As short for rock and roll, by
1957; but sense of musical rhythm characterized by a strong beat is from 1946, in blues slang. Rock
star attested by 1966.


rock and roll (n.)

also rock 'n' roll, 1954 in reference to a specific style of popular music, from rock (v.2) + roll
(v.). The verbal phrase had been a Black English euphemism for sexual intercourse, used in popular
dance music lyrics and song titles since at least the 1930s.


rock-bottom (adj.)

lowest possible, 1884, from noun (1815), from rock (n.1) + bottom (n.).


rock-candy (n.)

1723, from rock (n.1) + candy (n.).


rock-face (n.)

1847, from rock (n.1) + face (n.).


rock-garden (n.)

1819, from rock (n.1) + garden (n.).


rock-hound (n.)

1921, from rock (n.1) + hound (n.). Used variously of geologists, mineralogists, and amateur
collectors.


rock-salt (n.)

1707, from rock (n.1) + salt (n.).


rockabilly (n.)

1956, from noun sense of rock (n.2) in the music sense + second element abstracted from hillbilly
music. One of the first uses is in a Billboard item about Johnny Burnette's Lonesome Train.


Rockefeller (n.)

immensely rich man, 1938, in reference to U.S. financier and philanthropist John D. Rockefeller
(1839-1937).


rocker (n.)

a rocking chair, 1852, American English, from rock (v.1); earlier nurse charged with rocking a
cradle (early 14c.). In sense of one of the curved pieces of wood that makes a chair or cradle rock
it dates from 1787. Slang off (one's) rocker crazy first recorded 1897. Meaning one who enjoys rock
music (as opposed to mod (n.1)) is recorded from 1963, from rock (v.2).


rocket (n.1)

garden plant of the cabbage family, c.1500, from Middle French roquette (16c.), from Italian
rochetta, diminutive of ruca a kind of cabbage, from Latin eruca colewort, perhaps so called for its
downy stems and related to ericus hedgehog, also a beam set with spikes, from PIE *ghers- to bristle
(see horror).


rocket (n.2)

type of self-propelling projectile, 1610s, from Italian rocchetto a rocket, literally a bobbin,
diminutive of rocca a distaff, so called because of cylindrical shape. The Italian word probably is
from a Germanic source (compare Old High German rocko distaff, Old Norse rokkr), from Proto-Germanic
*rukkon-, from PIE root *rug- fabric, spun yarn.    Originally fireworks rocket, meaning device
propelled by a rocket engine first recorded 1919; rocket-ship in the modern sense first attested
February 1927 (Popular Science); earlier as a type of naval warship firing projectiles. Rocket
science in the figurative sense of difficult, complex process or topic is attested by 1985. Rocket
scientist is from 1952.    That such a feat is considered within the range of possibility is
evidenced by the activities of scientists in Europe as well as in America. Two of them, Prof. Herman
Oberth and Dr. Franz Hoeff, of Vienna, are constructing a five-ton rocket ship in which they hope to
reach the moon in two days. [Popular Science, Feb. 1927]


rocket (v.)

to spring like a rocket, 1860, from rocket (n.2). Earlier to attack with rockets (1799). Related:
Rocketed; rocketing.


rocketry (n.)

1930, from rocket (n.2) + -ry.


Rockies (n.)

the Rocky Mountains, 1827; see rocky.


rocking (adj.)

moving back and forth or to and fro, late 14c., present participle adjective from rock (v.1). Of
music, from 1949  (see rock (v.2)). Rocking-horse is first recorded 1724; rocking-chair is from
1766.


rocks (n.)

plural of rock (n.1). Meaning ice cubes is from 1946; slang meaning testicles is first recorded in
phrase get (one's) rocks off achieve intense satisfaction. On the rocks ruined is from 1889,
figurative use of the expression with reference to ships (by 1735).


rocky (adj.)

full of rocks, c.1400, from rock (n.1) + -y (2); unsteady, 1737, from rock (v.1). Meaning difficult,
hard is recorded from 1873, and may represent a bit of both.    The Rocky Mountains so called by
1802, translating French Montagnes Rocheuses, first applied to the Canadian Rockies. The name is not
directly self-descriptive but is an approximate translation of the name of the former Native
American people here known as the Assiniboin .... The mountains are in fact not noticeably rocky
[Room]. Bright notes that These Indians were called /assiniipwaan/, lit. 'stone Sioux', by their
Cree (Algonkian) neighbors.


rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


rod (n.)

Old English rodd a rod, pole, which is probably cognate with Old Norse rudda club, from Proto-
Germanic *rudd- stick, club, from PIE *reudh- to clear land.    As a long, tapering elastic pole for
fishing, from mid-15c. Figurative sense of offshoot (mid-15c.) led to Biblical meaning scion, tribe.
As an instrument of punishment, attested from mid-12c.; also used figuratively for any sort of
correction or punishment, but the basic notion is of beating someone with a stick.    As a unit of
measure (5&#189; yards or 16&#189; feet, also called perch or pole) first attested mid-15c., from
the stick used to measure it off. As a measure of area, a square perch, from late 15c., the usual
measure in brickwork. Meaning light-sensitive cell in a retina is from 1866, so-called for its
shape. Slang meaning penis is recorded from 1902; that of gun, revolver is from 1903.


rode

past tense of ride (q.v.).


rodent (n.)

1835 (as an adjective 1833), from Modern Latin Rodentia, the order name, from Latin rodentem
(nominative rodens), present participle of rodere to gnaw, eat away, from PIE root *red- to scrape,
scratch, gnaw (cognates: Sanskrit radati scrapes, gnaws, radanah tooth; Latin radere to scrape;
Welsh rhathu scrape, polish). Uncertain connection to Old English r&aelig;tt (see rat (n.)).


rodeo (n.)

1914 as public entertainment show of horse-riding skill, from earlier meaning cattle round-up
(1834), from Spanish rodeo, pen for cattle at a fair or market, literally a going round, from rodear
go round, surround, related to rodare revolve, roll, from Latin rotare go around (see rotary).


Roderick

also Roderic, masc. proper name, from Old High German Hroderich, literally ruling in fame, from
hruod- fame, glory + Proto-Germanic *rikja rule (see rich). Italian and Spanish Rodrigo, Russian
Rurik are from German.


rodomontade (n.)

1610s (earlier rodomontado, 1590s), vain boasting like that of Rodomonte, character in Ariosto's
Orlando Furioso. In dialectal Italian the name means literally one who rolls (away) the mountain.


roe (n.1)

fish eggs, mid-15c., probably from an unrecorded Old English *hrogn, from Proto-Germanic *khrugna
(cognates: Old Norse hrogn, Danish rogn, Swedish rom, Flemish rog, Middle Low German and Middle
Dutch roge, Old High German rogo, German Rogen roe), from PIE *krek- frog spawn, fish eggs
(cognates: Lithuanian kurkle, Russian krjak spawn of frogs). Exact relations of the Germanic words
are uncertain.


roe (n.2)

small deer, Old English ra, from raha, from Proto-Germanic *raikhaz (cognates: Old Norse ra, Old
Saxon reho, Middle Dutch and Dutch ree, Old High German reh, German Reh roe), of uncertain origin;
perhaps from PIE root *rei- streaked, spotted, striped in various colors.


roebuck (n.)

c.1200, from roe (n.2) + buck (n.1). Similar formation in Dutch reebok, German Rehbock, Danish
raabuck.


roentgen

1896, in Roentgen rays X-rays, in recognition of German physicist Wilhem Conrad R&ouml;ntgen
(1845-1923), who discovered X-rays in 1895. As a unit of exposure to radiation, it is attested from
1922, proposed in French in 1921.


rofl

by 1993, online chat abbreviation for rolling on the floor laughing.


rogation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin rogationem (nominative rogatio) an asking, prayer, entreaty, noun of action
from past participle stem of rogare to ask, apparently a figurative use and meaning literally to
stretch out (the hand), from PIE *rog-, 0-grade form of root *reg- move in a straight line (see
regal). Related: Rogations.   Rogation days were the Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday before Ascension
Day, a time for processions round fields blessing crops and praying for good harvest, also blessing
the boundary markers of each parish. Discouraged by Protestants as superstitious, but continued or
revived in modified form as beating the bounds.


Roger

masc. proper name, from Old French Rogier, from Old High German Hrotger, literally famous with the
spear, from hruod- fame, glory + ger spear (see gar (n.)). As a generic name for a person, attested
from 1630s. Slang meaning penis was popular c.1650-c.1870; hence the slang verb sense of to copulate
with (a woman), attested from 1711.    The use of the word in radio communication to mean yes, I
understand is attested from 1941, from the U.S. military phonetic alphabet word for the letter -R-,
in this case an abbreviation for received. Said to have been used by the R.A.F. since 1938. The
Jolly Roger pirate flag is first attested 1723, of unknown origin; jolly here has its otherwise
obsolete Middle English sense high-hearted, gallant. Roger de Coverley, once a favorite English
country dance, is so called from 1685, in reference to Addison's character in the Spectator. French
roger-bontemps jovial, carefree man, is attested there from 15c.


Roget

in reference to the Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases published 1852 by English physician and
philologist Peter Mark Roget (1779-1869). Related: Roget's.


rogue (n.)

1560s, idle vagrant, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a
begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an
agent noun in English from Latin rogare to ask. Another theory [Klein] traces it to Celtic (compare
Breton rog haughty); OED says, There is no evidence of connexion with F. rogue 'arrogant.'     In
playful or affectionate use, one who is mischievous, 1590s. Meaning large wild beast living apart
from the herd is from 1859, originally of elephants. Meaning something uncontrolled or undisciplined
is from 1964. Also common in 17c. as a verb. Rogue's gallery police collection of mug shots is
attested from 1859.


roguery (n.)

1590s, from rogue (n.) + -ery.


roguish (adj.)

1570s, from rogue + -ish. Related: Roguishly; roguishness.


Rohypnol (n.)

1995, trade name for a powerful insomnia drug.


roil (v.)

1580s, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French rouiller to rust, make muddy, from Old
French roil mud, muck, rust (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *robicula, from Latin robigo rust (see
robust). An earlier borrowing of the French verb is Middle English roil to roam or rove about (early
14c.). Related: Roiled; roiling.


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


Roland

masc. proper name, from French, from Old High German Hrodland, literally (having a) famous land. As
legendary nephew of Charlemagne, celebrated in Chanson de Roland, c.1300. His comrade was Oliver,
hence a Roland for an Oliver (1610s) in expressions meaning to give as good as one gets, tit for
tat.


role (n.)

part or character one takes, c.1600, from French r&ocirc;le part played by a person in life,
literally roll (of paper) on which an actor's part is written, from Old French rolle (see roll
(n.)). Meaning function performed characteristically by someone is from 1875. In the social
psychology sense from 1913. Role model first attested 1957.


roleplay (n.)

also role-play, 1958; from role (n.) + play (v.). As a verb by 1961. Related: Role-playing


Rolex (n.)

proprietary name of a make of watches, trademark reg. 1908 by German businessman Hans Wilsdorf, with
Wilsdorf &amp; Davis, London. Invented name. Company moved out of Britain 1912 for tax purposes and
now is headquartered in Geneva.


Rolf

masc. proper name, introduced in England by the Normans, from Old Norse Hrolfr, related to Old High
German Hrodulf, literally wolf of fame (see Rudolph). Rolfing (1972) as a deep massage technique is
named for U.S. physiotherapist Ida P. Rolf (1897-1979), and first attested 1958, as Rolf Technique.


roll (n.)

early 13c., rolled-up piece of parchment or paper (especially one inscribed with an official
record), from Old French rolle document, parchment scroll, decree (12c.), from Medieval Latin
rotulus a roll of paper (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian ruollo), from Latin rotula small
wheel, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary).    Meaning a register, list, catalogue is from late
14c., common from c.1800. Meaning dough which is rolled before baking is first recorded mid-15c.
Sense of act of rolling is from 1743. Meaning quantity of material rolled up is from late 14c.;
meaning quantity of paper money is from 1846; sense of quantity of (rolled) film is from 1890.
Meaning act of sexual intercourse is attested from 1942 (roll in the hay), from roll (v.). Dutch
rol, German Rolle, Danish rulle, etc. are from French.


roll (v.)

c.1300 turn over and over, move by rotating (intransitive); late 14c. as to move (something) by
turning it over and over; from Old French roeller roll, wheel round (Modern French rouler), from
Medieval Latin rotulare, from Latin rotula, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary). Related: Rolled;
rolling.    Of sounds (such as thunder) somehow suggestive of a rolling ball, 1590s; of a drum from
1680s. Of eyes, from late 14c. Of a movie camera, to start filming, from 1938. Sense of rob a
stuporous drunk is from 1873, from the action required to get to his pockets. To roll up gather,
congregate is from 1861, originally Australian. To be on a roll is from 1976. To roll with the
punches is a metaphor from boxing (1940). Heads will roll is a Hitlerism:If our movement is
victorious there will be a revolutionary tribunal which will punish the crimes of November 1918.
Then decapitated heads will roll in the sand. [1930]


roll call (n.)

1775, from roll (n.) list of names used to determine who is present (a sense attested from 1590s) +
call (v.).


rollback (n.)

also roll-back, action of rolling backward, 1937; reduction, 1942, American English, from verbal
phrase, from roll (v.) + back (adv.).


roller (n.)

late 13c., thing that rolls; early 15c., rolling pin, agent noun from roll (v.). Meaning hair-curler
is attested from 1795. Roller derby is from 1936  (see derby); roller hockey from 1926. Disparaging
religious term holy roller is attested from 1842, American English, from the alleged rolling in the
church aisles done by those in the Spirit.


Rollerblade (n.)

1985, a registered proprietary name in U.S., from roller + blade (n.). As a verb by 1988. Related:
Rollerblading.


rollercoaster (n.)

also roller-coaster, and originally roller coaster, by 1884, perhaps mid-1870s, from roller +
coaster. As a verb by 1959.


rollerskate (n.)

also roller-skate, 1861, American English, from roller + skate (n.). The verb is from 1885. Related:
Rollerskated; rollerskating.


rollicking (adj.)

1811, present participle adjective from rollick be jovial in behavior (though this does not appear
in print until 1826), which perhaps is a blend of roll (v.) and frolic (v.).


rolling (adj.)

14c., past participle adjective from roll (v.). Of prairie land from 1819. From mid-15c. as a verbal
noun. Rolling pin is recorded from late 15c. Rolling paper for cigarettes, etc., is from 1969.
Rolling stock wheeled vehicles on a railroad (locomotives, carriages, etc.) is from 1853.  The
rollyng stone neuer gatherth mosse. [John Heywood, A dialogue conteinying the nomber in effect of
all the proverbes in the Englishe tongue, 1546]


rollout (n.)

also roll-out, 1957, originally of airplanes, from verbal phrase, from roll (v.) + out (adv.). As a
type of U.S. football play from 1959.


rollover (n.)

also roll-over an overturning, 1945, from verbal phrase; see roll (v.) + over (adv.). Economic
verbal sense of reinvest is from 1957.


Rolls-Royce (n.)

registered 1908 as trademark, named for designers C.S. Rolls (1877-1910) and Sir Henry Royce
(1863-1933). Figurative use from 1916 for any product deemed to be of high quality. Shortened form
Rolls first attested 1928.


Rolodex (n.)

1958, said to be from rolling + index.


roly-poly (adj.)

short and stout, 1820, probably a varied reduplication of roll (v.). As a noun, it was used as the
name of various ball games from 1713, and it was used as early as 1610s in the sense of rascal. As
an appellation of a short, stout person, from 1836.


Rom

male gypsy, 1841, see Romany.


romaine (adj.)

type of lettuce, 1876, from French romaine (in laitue romaine, literally Roman lettuce), from fem.
of Old French romain Roman, from Latin Romanus (see Roman). Perhaps so called because of the
lettuce's introduction into France (by Bureau de la Rivi&egrave;re, chamberlain of Charles V and VI)
at the time of the Avignon papacy (1309-77).


Roman (n.)

Old English, from Latin Romanus of Rome, Roman, from Roma Rome (see Rome). The adjective is c.1300,
from Old French Romain. The Old English adjective was romanisc, which yielded Middle English
Romanisshe.    As a type of numeral (usually contrasted to Arabic) it is attested from 1728; as a
type of lettering (based on the upright style typical of Roman inscriptions, contrasted to Gothic,
or black letter, and italic) it is recorded from 1510s. Roman nose is from 1620s. Roman candle as a
type of fireworks is recorded from 1834. Roman Catholic is attested from c.1600, a conciliatory
formation from the time of the Spanish Match, replacing Romanist, Romish which by that time had the
taint of insult in Protestant England.


roman (n.)

a novel, 1765, from French roman, from Old French romanz (see romance (n.)); roman &agrave; clef,
novel in which characters represent real persons, literally novel with a key (French), first
attested in English 1893. And, for those who can't get enough of it, roman policier a story of
police detection (1928).


Roman holiday (n.)

occasion on which entertainment or profit is derived from injury or death, 1860, originally in
reference to holidays for gladiatorial combat; the expression seems to be entirely traceable to an
oft-quoted passage on a dying barbarian gladiator from the fourth canto (1818) of Byron's Childe
Harold's Pilgrimage:    But where his rude hut by the Danube lay  There were his young barbarians
all at play,  There was their Dacian mother. He, their sire,  Butcher'd to make a Roman holiday!


romance (n.)

c.1300, a story, written or recited, of the adventures of a knight, hero, etc., often one designed
principally for entertainment, from Old French romanz verse narrative (Modern French roman),
originally an adverb, in the vernacular language, from Vulgar Latin *romanice scribere to write in a
Romance language (one developed from Latin instead of Frankish), from Latin Romanicus of or in the
Roman style, from Romanus Roman (see Roman).    The sense evolution is because medieval vernacular
tales usually told chivalric adventures full of marvelous incidents and heroic deeds. In reference
to literary works, often in Middle English meaning ones written in French but also applied to native
compositions. Literary sense extended by 1660s to a love story. Meaning adventurous quality first
recorded 1801; that of love affair is from 1916. Romance novel attested from 1964. Compare Romance
(adj.).


romance (v.)

late 14c., recite a narrative, from Old French romancier narrate in French; translate into French,
from romanz (see romance (n.)). Later invent fictitious stories (1670s), then be romantically
enthusiastic (1849); meaning court as a lover is from 1938, probably from romance (n.). Related:
Romanced; romancing.


Romance (adj.)

mid-14c., French; in the vernacular language of France (contrasted to Latin), from Old French romanz
French; vernacular, from Late Latin Romanice, from Latin Romanicus (see Roman). Extended 1610s to
other modern tongues derived from Latin (Spanish, Italian, etc.); thus pertaining to the languages
which arose out of the Latin language of the provinces of Rome. Compare romance (n.).


romancer (n.)

mid-14c., chronicler writing in French, from Old French romanceour, from romanz (see romance (n.)).
Later, one inclined to romantic imagination (the main sense 19c.); modern use for seducer, wooer of
a romantic quality appears to be a new formation c.1967 from romance (v.).


Romanesque (adj.)

1715, originally descended from Latin (compare romance), later architectural style in Europe between
Roman and Gothic periods (1819), from Roman, influenced by French romanesque, from Late Latin
Romanice in Vulgar Latin (see romance (n.)).


Romania

Eastern European nation, name taken officially in 1861 at the union of Wallachia and Moldavia, from
Latin Romani people from Rome, which was used to describe the descendants of colonists there from
Roman times; see Roman + -ia. In early use often Rumania, or, from French, Roumania. Related:
Romanian; Rumanian; Roumanian.


Romanic (adj.)

pertaining to Rome or the Roman people, 1708, originally in reference to languages descended from
Latin, from Latin Romanicus, from Romanus Roman (see Roman).


Romanism (n.)

Roman Catholicism (usually, if not always, with a disparaging savor; in some contexts suggesting
political allegiance to the Vatican), 1670s, from Roman + -ism.


Romano

strong-tasting hard cheese, 1908, from Italian, literally Roman (see Roman).


Romano-

word-forming element meaning pertaining to Rome or Romans or their language, from comb. form of
Latin Romanus (see Roman).


Romansh

Rhaeto-Romanic, Latin-derived language spoken in the Grisons region of eastern Switzerland, 1660s,
from Grisons Rumansch, from Late Latin Romanice in Vulgar Latin (see romance (n.)).


romantic (n.)

an adherent of romantic virtues in literature, 1827, from romantic (adj.).


romantic (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a literary romance, from French romantique, from Middle French romant a
romance, oblique case of Old French romanz verse narrative (see romance (n.)).    As a literary
style, opposed to classical since before 1812; in music, from 1885. Meaning characteristic of an
ideal love affair (such as usually formed the subject of literary romances) is from 1660s. Meaning
having a love affair as a theme is from 1960. Related: Romantical (1670s); romantically. Compare
romanticism.


romanticism (n.)

1803, a romantic idea, from romantic + -ism. In literature, 1823 in reference to a movement toward
medieval forms (especially in reaction to classical ones) it has an association now more confined to
Romanesque. The movement began in German and spread to England and France. Generalized sense of a
tendency toward romantic ideas is first recorded 1840.


romanticist (n.)

1821; see romantic + -ist.


romanticize (v.)

1818, from romantic + -ize. Related: Romanticized; romanticizing.


Romany (n.)

a gypsy; the Gypsy language, 1812, romani, fem. of romano (adj.) Gypsy, from rom, the Romany word
for man, husband, male, Gypsy (plural roma), from Sanskrit domba-s (with initial cerebral d, which
confuses with r [Klein]) male member of a low caste of musicians.


Rome

capital of Italy; seat of an ancient republic and empire; city of the Papacy, Old English, from Old
French Rome, from Latin Roma, a word of uncertain origin. The original Roma quadrata was the
fortified enclosure on the Palatine hill, according to Tucker, who finds no probability in
derivation from *sreu- flow, and suggests the name is most probably from *urobsma (urbs, robur) and
otherwise, but less likely from *urosma hill (compare Sanskrit varsman- height, point, Lithuanian
virsus upper). Another suggestion [Klein] is that it is from Etruscan (compare Rumon, former name of
Tiber River).    Common in proverbs, such as Rome was not buylt in one daye (1540s); for when a man
doth to Rome come, he must do as there is done (1590s); All roads alike conduct to Rome (1806).


Romeo (n.)

a lover, passionate admirer, seducer of women, 1766, from the name of the hero in Shakespeare's
tragedy Romeo and Juliet (1590s).


Romish (adj.)

Roman-Catholic, 1530s, from Rome + -ish.


romp (v.)

1709, to play, sport, frolic; 1734, piece of lively play; perhaps a variant of ramp (v.); but also
see romp (n.). Meaning to win (a contest) with great ease first attested 1888. Related: Romped;
romping.


romp (n.)

1734, piece of lively play, from romp (v.). From 1706 as a wanton girl (probably a variant of ramp
(n.2)).


romper (n.)

1842, agent noun from romp (v.). Rompers small children's overalls first recorded 1909, on model of
trousers.


Ronald

masc. proper name, from Old Norse R&ouml;gnvaldr Having the Gods' Power, from r&ouml;gn gods,
literally decreeing powers (plural of regin decree) + valdr ruler (see wield).


rondeau (n.)

1520s, from Middle French rondeau, from Old French rondel short poem (see rondel). Metrical form of
10 or 13 lines with only two rhymes.


rondel (n.)

late 14c. as a type of verse, from Old French rondel short poem, literally small circle (13c.),
diminutive of roont (fem. roonde) circular (see round (adj.)). Metrical form of 14 lines with only
two rhymes. So called because the initial couplet is repeated at the end.


rondo (n.)

1797, musical composition of one principal theme, which is repeated at least once, from Italian
rondo, from French rondeau, rondel, from Old French rondel little round (see rondel).


ronin (n.)

masterless man, outcast, outlaw, 1871, from Japanese, from ro wave + nin man.


roo (n.)

Australian colloquial shortening of kangaroo, attested from 1904.


rood (n.)

Old English rod pole, varying from 6 to 8 yards; also cross, especially that upon which Christ
suffered; crucifix, especially a large one; also a measure of land, properly 40 square poles or
perches, from Proto-Germanic *rod- (cognates: Old Saxon ruoda stake, pile, cross, Old Frisian rode,
Middle Dutch roede, Old High German ruota, German Rute rod), from PIE *ret- post (cognates: Latin
ratis raft, retae trees standing on the bank of a stream; Old Church Slavonic ratiste spear, staff;
Lithuanian rekles scaffolding). Probably not connected with rod.


roof (n.)

Old English hrof roof, ceiling, top, summit; heaven, sky, also figuratively, highest point of
something, from Proto-Germanic *khrofam (cognates: Old Frisian rhoof roof, Middle Dutch roof, rouf
cover, roof, Dutch roef deckhouse, cabin, coffin-lid, Middle High German rof penthouse, Old Norse
hrof boat shed).    No apparent connections outside Germanic. English alone has retained the word in
a general sense, for which the other languages use forms corresponding to OE. &thorn;&aelig;c thatch
[OED]. Roof of the mouth is from late Old English. Raise the roof create an uproar is attested from
1860, originally in U.S. Southern dialect.


roof (v.)

early 15c., from roof (n.). Related: Roofed; roofing.


roof-top (n.)

also rooftop, 1610s, from roof (n.) + top (n.1).


roofer (n.)

one who makes or repairs roofs, 1835, agent noun from roof (v.).


rooibos (n.)

1911, from Afrikaans rooibos, literally red bush, from rooi red, from Dutch roi (see red (adj.1)) +
bos bush (see bush (n.1)).


rook (n.1)

European crow, Old English hroc, from Proto-Germanic *khrokaz (cognates: Old Norse hrokr, Middle
Dutch roec, Dutch roek, Middle Swedish roka, Old High German hruoh crow), possibly imitative of its
raucous voice (compare Gaelic roc croak, Sanskrit kruc to cry out). Used as a disparaging term for
persons since at least c.1500, and extended by 1570s to mean a cheat, especially at cards or dice.


rook (n.2)

chess piece, c.1300, from Old French roc, from Arabic rukhkh, from Persian rukh, of unknown meaning,
perhaps somehow related to the Indian name for the piece, rut, from Hindi rath chariot. Confused in
Middle English with roc.


rook (v.)

to defraud by cheating (originally especially in a game), 1590s, from rook (n.1) in some sense (such
as a gull, simpleton, but this is not attested until 17c.). Related: Rooked; rooking.


rookery (n.)

colony of rooks, 1725, from rook (n.1) + -ery.


rookie (n.)

raw recruit, 1892 in that spelling, popularized by Kipling's Barrack-Room Ballads, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from recruit, influenced by rook (n.1) in its secondary sense, suggesting easy to
cheat. Barr&#232;re [A Dictionary of Slang, Jargon &amp; Cant, 1890] has Rookey (army), a recruit;
from the black coat some of them wear, so perhaps directly from rook (n.1). Came into general use in
American English during the Spanish-American War.    The rapid growth of a word from a single seed
transplanted in a congenial soil is one of the curiosities of literature. Take a single instance. A
few weeks ago there was not one American soldier in a thousand who knew there was such a word as
rookey. To-day there are few soldiers and ex-soldiers who have not substituted it for raw recruit.
[The Midland Monthly, December 1898]


room (n.)

Old English rum space (extent or time); scope, opportunity, from Proto-Germanic *ruman (cognates:
Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic rum, German Raum space, Dutch ruim hold of a ship,
nave), nouns formed from Germanic adjective *ruma- roomy, spacious, from PIE root *reue- (1) to
open; space (cognates: Avestan ravah- space, Latin rus open country, Old Irish roi, roe plain field,
Old Church Slavonic ravinu level, Russian ravnina a plain). Old English also had a frequent
adjective rum roomy, wide, long, spacious.    Original sense preserved in make room clear space for
oneself (late 14c.); meaning chamber, cabin first recorded early 14c. as a nautical term, and first
applied mid-15c. to chambers within houses. The Old English word for this was cofa, ancestor of
cove. Room-service is attested from 1913; room-temperature from 1879. Roomth sufficient space
(1530s) now is obsolete.


room (v.)

to occupy rooms (especially with another) as a lodger, 1828, from room (n.). Related: Roomed;
rooming. Rooming-house is from 1889. In Old English (rumian) and Middle English the verb meant
become clear of obstacles; make clear of, evict.


roomer (n.)

one who hires a room, 1871, agent noun from room (v.).


roommate (n.)

also room-mate, 1789, American English, from room (n.) + mate (n.). Short form roomie is from 1918.


roomy (adj.)

roomsome, 1620s, from room (n.) + -y (2). Related: Roominess.


roose (v.)

c.1200, to boast; c.1300, to praise, Scottish dialect, from Old Norse hrosa to boast of, to praise.
Related: Roosed; roosing. Also as a noun from c.1200.


Roosevelt

the family in America originally bore the name Van Roosevelt, of the field of roses, descriptive of
their estates in Holland. Claes Martenszen Van Rosenvelt, born August 1649, emigrated to New
Amsterdam. His son (1653) and all his descendants dropped the Van. Related: Rooseveltian.


roost (n.)

late Old English hrost wooden framework of a roof, perch for domestic fowl, from Proto-Germanic
*hro(d)-st- (cognates: Old Saxon hrost framework of a roof, attic, Middle Dutch, Flemish, Dutch
roest roost, Old Norse hrot, Gothic hrot roof, of unknown origin. Exact relationship and ulterior
connections unknown. Extended sense hen-house is from 1580s. To rule the roost is recorded from
1769.


roost (v.)

1520s, from roost (n.). Related: Roosted; roosting. Chickens come home to roost in reference to
eventual consequences of bad actions attested from 1824; the original proverb seems to have been
curses, like chickens, come home to roost.


rooster (n.)

1772, agent noun from roost (v.); earlier roost cock, c.1600, in sense of the roosting bird. Favored
in the U.S. originally as a puritan alternative to cock (n.) after it had acquired the secondary
sense penis (and compare roach).


root (n.)

underground part of a plant, late Old English rot, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rot
root, figuratively cause, origin, from Proto-Germanic *wrot (cognates: Old English wyrt root, herb,
plant, Old High German wurz, German Wurz a plant, Gothic waurts a root, with characteristic
Scandinavian loss of -w- before -r-), from PIE *wrad- (see radish (n.), and compare wort). The usual
Old English words for root were wyrttruma and wyrtwala.    Figurative use is from c.1200. Of teeth,
hair, etc., from early 13c. Mathematical sense is from 1550s. Philological sense from 1520s. Slang
meaning penis is recorded from 1846. In U.S. black use, a spell effected by magical properties of
roots, 1935. To take root is from 1530s. Root beer, made from the extracts of various roots, first
recorded 1841, American English; root doctor is from 1821. Root cap is from 1875.


root (v.1)

dig with the snout, 1530s, from Middle English wroten dig with the snout, from Old English wrotan to
root up, from Proto-Germanic *wrot- (cognates: Old Norse rota, Swedish rota to dig out, root, Middle
Low German wroten, Middle Dutch wroeten, Old High German ruozian to plow up), from PIE root *wrod-
to root, gnaw.    Associated with the verb sense of root (n.). Extended sense of poke about, pry
first recorded 1831. Phrase root hog or die work or fail first attested 1834, American English (in
works of Davey Crockett, who noted it as an old saying). Reduplicated form rootin' tootin' noisy,
rambunctious is recorded from 1875.


root (v.2)

cheer, support, 1889, American English, originally in a baseball context, probably from root (v.1)
via intermediate sense of study, work hard (1856). Related: Rooted; rooting.


root (v.3)

fix or firmly attach by roots (often figurative), early 13c., from root (n.); sense of pull up by
the root (now usually uproot) also is from late 14c. Related: Rooted; rooting.


rootless (adj.)

late 14c., from root (n.) + -less. Related: Rootlessly; rootlessness.


rope (n.)

Old English rap rope, cord, cable, from Proto-Germanic *raipaz (cognates: Old Norse reip, West
Frisian reap, Middle Dutch, Dutch reep rope, Old Frisian silrap shoe-thong, Gothic skauda-raip shoe-
lace, Old High German, German reif ring, hoop). Technically, only cordage above one inch in
circumference and below 10 (bigger-around than that is a cable). Nautical use varies. Finnish raippa
hoop, rope, twig is a Germanic loan-word.    To know the ropes (1840, Dana) originally is a seaman's
term. Phrase on the ropes defeated is attested from 1924, a figurative extension from the fight
ring, where ropes figure from 1829. To be at the end of (one's) rope out of resources and options is
first attested 1680s. Formerly also in many slang and extended uses related to punishment by
hanging, such as John Roper's window a noose, rope-ripe deserving to be hanged, both 16c. To give
someone (enough) rope (to hang himself) is from 1650s.


rope (v.)

c.1300, bind with a rope, from rope (n.). Meaning mark off with rope is from 1738; to rope (someone
or something) in is from 1848. Related: Roped; roping.


ropy (adj.)

late 15c., from rope (n.) + -y (2). Related: Ropiness.


roque

1899, arbitrary alteration of croquet [OED].


Roquefort

type of cheese, 1837, from the village in the southwest of France, where it originally was made.
Reference to salad dressing made from this kind of cheese is from 1943.


Rorschach

1927, in reference to a personality test using ink blots, developed by Swiss psychiatrist Hermann
Rorschach (1885-1922). The town so named on the Swiss side of Lake Constance is from an early form
of German R&ouml;hr reeds + Schachen lakeside.


Rosa

fem. proper name, from Latin Rosa, literally rose (see rose (n.1)).


rosacea (n.)

1876, short for acne rosacea (1833), from fem. of Latin rosaceus rose-colored (see rose (n.1)).


rosary (n.)

rose garden, mid-15c., from Latin rosarium rose garden, in Medieval Latin also garland; string of
beads; series of prayers, from noun use of neuter of rosarius of roses, from rosa rose (see rose
(n.1)).    The sense of series of prayers is 1540s, from Middle French rosaire, a figurative use of
the word meaning rose garden, on the notion of a garden of prayers. This probably embodies the
medieval conceit of comparing collections to bouquets (compare anthology and Medieval Latin hortulus
animae prayerbook, literally little garden of the soul). Sense transferred 1590s to the strings of
beads used as a memory aid in reciting the rosary.


Roscius (n.)

name of a celebrated Roman actor.


roscoe (n.)

revolver, 1914, criminals' slang, from the proper name, for some reason.


rose (n.1)

Old English rose, from Latin rosa (source of Italian and Spanish rosa, French rose; also source of
Dutch roos, German Rose, Swedish ros, Polish r&oacute;&#380;a, Russian roza, Lithuanian rozhe,
Hungarian r&#243;zsa, Irish ros, Welsh rhosyn, etc.), probably via Italian and Greek dialects from
Greek rhodon rose (Aeolic wrodon), ultimately from Persian *vrda-.    But Tucker writes: The rose
was a special growth of Macedonia &amp; the Thracian region as well as of Persia, &amp; the Lat.
&amp; Gk. names prob. came from a Thraco-Phrygian source. Aramaic warda is from Old Persian; the
modern Persian cognate, via the usual sound changes, is gul, source of Turkish g&uuml;l rose. Klein
proposes a PIE *wrdho- thorn, bramble.    The form of the English word was influenced by the French.
Used as a color name since 1520s. In English civil wars of 15c., the white rose was the badge of the
House of York, the red of its rival Lancaster. In the figurative sense, bed of roses is from 1590s.
To come up roses is attested from 1969; the image, though not the wording, from 1855. To come out
smelling like a rose is from 1968. Rose of Sharon (Song of Sol. ii:1) is attested from 1610s and
named for the fertile strip of coastal Palestine. The flower has not been identified; used in U.S.
since 1847 of the Syrian hibiscus.


rose (n.2)

light red wine, 1897, from French vin ros&eacute;, literally pink wine.


rose-colored (adj.)

optimistic, 1854, from rose (n.1) on the notion of something uncommonly beautiful.


rose-red (adj.)

c.1300, from rose (n.1) + red (adj.1).


rose-water (n.)

late 14c., water tinctured with oil of roses, from rose (n.1) + water (n.1). Symbolic of affected
delicacy or sentimentalism. Similar formation in Middle Dutch rosenwater, Dutch rozenwater, German
Rosenwasser.


roseate (adj.)

1580s, from Latin roseus (see rose (n.1)) + -ate.


rosebud (n.)

1610s, from rose (n.1) + bud (n.). Hence, young girl in her first bloom, a debutante.


rosemary (n.)

late 14c., earlier rosmarine (c.1300), from Latin rosmarinus, literally dew of the sea (compare
French romarin), from ros dew + marinus (see marine (adj.)). Perhaps so called because it grew near
coasts. Form altered in English by influence of rose and Mary.    Latin ros is from PIE *ers- to be
wet (cognates: Lithuanian rasa, Old Church Slavonic rosa dew, Sanskrit rasah sap, juice, fluid,
essence, Hittite arszi flows, and perhaps also Rha, Scythian name of the River Volga (see rhubarb)).


Rosetta Stone (n.)

discovered 1798 at Rosetta, Egypt; now in British Museum. Dating to 2c. B.C.E., its trilingual
inscription helped Jean-Fran&ccedil;ois Champollion decipher Egyptian demotic and hieroglyphics in
1822, which opened the way to study of all early Egyptian records. Hence, figurative use of the term
to mean something which provides the key to previously unattainable understanding (1902). The place
name is the European form of Rashid, a name given because it was founded c.800 C.E. by Caliph Harun
ar-Rashid.


rosette (n.)

a rose-shaped ornament, especially a bunch or knot of ribbons worn as a decoration, 1790, from
French rosette, diminutive of rose rose (see rose (n.1)).


rosewood (n.)

1650s, from rose (n.1) + wood (n.). The name is due to the scent of some species when freshly cut.


Rosh Hashanah (n.)

Jewish new year, 1846, from Hebrew rosh hashshanah, literally head of the year, from rosh head of +
hash-shanah the year.


Rosicrucian (n.)

1620s, from Modern Latin rosa crucis (DuCange) or crux, Latinization of German Rosenkreuz, French
rosecroix, from the secret society's reputed founder Christian Rosenkreuz, said to date from 1484,
but not mentioned before 1614. As an adjective from 1660s.


rosin (n.)

late 13c., from Old French raisine, rousine, variants of r&eacute;sine (see resin). The verb is from
mid- 14c. Related: Rosined; rosining.


Rosinante (n.)

Don Quixote's horse, from Spanish Rocinante, from rocin worn-out horse + antes before, so called in
allusion to the circumstance that Don Quixote's charger was formerly a wretched hack [Klein]. Rocin
is cognate with Old French rancin draft horse, hack, but the word is of unknown origin.


roster (n.)

1727, from Dutch rooster table, list, originally gridiron, from Middle Dutch roosten to roast (see
roast (v.)). So called from the grid of lines drawn on a paper to make a list.


rostral (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin rostralis, from Latin rostrum beak (see rostrum).


rostrum (n.)

1540s, from Latin rostrum, name of the platform stand for public speakers in the Forum in ancient
Rome. It was decorated with the beaks of ships taken in the first naval victory of the Roman
republic, over Antium, in 338 B.C.E., and the word's older sense is end of a ship's prow, literally
beak, muzzle, snout, originally means of gnawing, instrument noun form of rodere to gnaw (see
rodent). Compare claustrum lock, bar, from claudere to shut.  Extended sense of any platform for
public speaking is first recorded 1766. Classical plural form is rostra.


rosy (adj.)

late 14c., of a color, from rose (n.1) + -y (2), probably modeled on Old French rose. From 1590s of
healthy complexions; 1775 in the sense cheerful; meaning promising is from 1887. Similar formation
in Middle Dutch rosich, Dutch rozig, German rosig.


rot (v.)

Old English rotian to decay, putrefy, from Proto-Germanic *rutjan (cognates: Old Saxon roton, Old
Norse rotna, Old Frisian rotia, Middle Dutch roten, Dutch rotten, Old High German rozzen to rot,
German r&ouml;&szlig;en to steep flax), from stem *rut-. Related: Rotted; rotting.


rot (n.)

early 14c., from rot (v.) or of Scandinavian origin (compare Icelandic rot, Swedish r&ouml;ta,
Danish r&oslash;de decay, putrefaction), from the root of the verb. Slang noun sense of rubbish,
trash is from 1848.


rotary (adj.)

1731, from Medieval Latin rotarius pertaining to wheels, from Latin rota a wheel, a potter's wheel;
wheel for torture, from PIE root *ret- to run, to turn, to roll (cognates: Sanskrit rathah car,
chariot; Avestan ratho; Lithuanian ratas wheel, ritu I roll; Old High German rad, German Rad, Dutch
rad, Old Frisian reth, Old Saxon rath, Old Irish roth, Welsh rhod carriage wheel). The international
service club (founded by Paul P. Harris in Chicago in 1905) so called from the practice of clubs
entertaining in rotation. Hence Rotarian (1911).


rotate (v.)

1794, intransitive, back-formation from rotation. Transitive sense from 1823. Related: Rotated;
rotating. Rotator muscle which allows a part to be moved circularly is recorded from 1670s.


rotation (n.)

1550s, from Latin rotationem (nominative rotatio) a turning about in a circle, noun of action from
past participle stem of rotare turn round, revolve, whirl about, roll, from PIE *ret- to run, roll
(see rotary).


rotational (adj.)

1852, from rotation + -al (1).


rotavirus (n.)

wheel-shaped virus causing inflammation of the lining of the intestines, 1974, from Latin rota wheel
(see rotary) + virus.


rote (n.)

c.1300, custom, habit, in phrase bi rote by heart, of uncertain origin, sometimes said to be
connected with Old French rote route (see route (n.)), or from Latin rota wheel (see rotary), but
OED calls both suggestions groundless.


rotgut (n.)

also rot-gut, unwholesome liquor, 1630s, from rot (v.) + gut (n.).


Rothschild

rich person, 1833, in reference to the international banking family descended from Mayer Amschel
Rothschild (1744-1812) of Frankfurt. The surname is literally red shield, a house name.


Rotifera (n.)

class of microscopic freshwater organisms, 1830, Modern Latin, from Rotifer (Leeuwenhoek, 1702),
from Latin rota wheel (see rotary) + -fer bearing (see bear (v.)). The animalcules use rotary organs
to swim about.


rotisserie (n.)

1868, restaurant where meat is roasted on a spit, from French r&ocirc;tisserie shop selling cooked
food, restaurant, from present participle stem of r&ocirc;tir to roast, from Old French rostir (see
roast (v.)). As an in-home cooking apparatus, attested from 1953. Manufacturers (or their copy
writers) back-formed a verb, rotiss (1958). Rotisserie league (1980), a form of fantasy baseball, is
based on La Rotisserie, the Manhattan restaurant where it was conceived.


rotogravure (n.)

1913, from German Rotogravur (originally, in full, Deutsche Tiefdr&uuml;ck Gesellschaft), said to
blend two corporate names, Rotophot and Deutsche Photogravur A.G. Etymologically, the roots are
Latin rota wheel, roller (see rotary) and French gravure engraving (see gravure). The process was
used for printing photo sections of newspapers and magazines, so that the word came to be used for
these.


rotor (n.)

1873, irregular shortening of rotator (see rotate (v.)), originally in mathematics. Mechanical sense
is attested from 1903; specifically of helicopters from 1930.


Rototiller (n.)

1923, from roto-, from Latin rota wheel (see rotary) + tiller.


rotten (adj.)

c.1300, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rotinn decayed, past participle of verb related
to rotna to decay, from Proto-Germanic stem *rut- (see rot (v.)). Sense of corrupt is from late
14c.; weakened sense of bad first recorded 1881. Rotten apple is from a saying traced back to at
least 1528: For one rotten apple lytell and lytell putrifieth an whole heape. The Rotten Row in
London and elsewhere probably is from a different word, but of uncertain origin.


rottenness (n.)

late 14c., from rotten + -ness.


rotter (n.)

person deemed objectionable on moral grounds, 1889, slang, from rot + -er (3).


Rottweiler (n.)

1907, from Rottweil, town in W&uuml;rttemberg, southern Germany.


rotund (adj.)

1705, from Latin rotundus rolling, round, circular, spherical, like a wheel, from rota wheel (see
rotary). Earlier was rotound (1610s); rotounde (early 15c.). Meaning full-toned style of oratory
(1830) is after Horace's ore rotundo in Poetics.


rotunda (n.)

round building, 1680s, from Italian rotonda, especially the Pantheon, from noun use of Latin
rotunda, fem. of rotundus round (see rotund). Meaning circular hall or room within a building is
from 1780.


rotundity (n.)

1580s, from Latin rotunditas roundness, from rotundus round (see rotund).


Rotwelsch (n.)

jargon of thieves and vagabonds, 1841, from German Rotwelsch, literally Red Welsh, from rot (see red
(adj.1)) + Welsh because obscure and difficult. But the first element may be connected with Middle
High German rot beggar.


roue (n.)

debauchee, 1800, from French rou&eacute; dissipated man, rake, originally past participle of Old
French rouer to break on the wheel (15c.), from Latin rotare roll (see rotary). Said to have been
first applied in French c.1720 to dissolute friends of the Duke of Orleans (regent of France
1715-23), to suggest the punishment they deserved; but probably rather from a secondary, figurative
sense in French of jaded, worn out, from the notion of broken, run-over, beat down.


Rouen

city in northern France, Roman Rotomagus, in which the second element is Gaulish magos field,
market, and the first is roto wheel, perhaps reflecting the Gaulish love of chariot-racing, or else
it is a personal name.


rouge (n.)

1753, in cosmetic sense, blush, from French rouge red coloring matter, noun use of adjective red
(12c.), from Latin rubeus, related to ruber red (see red). Replaced native paint in this sense. The
verb is attested from 1777. Related: Rouged; rouging. The same word had been borrowed from French in
Middle English with the sense red color; red (early 15c.).


rough (n.)

c.1200, broken ground, from rough (adj.). Meaning a rowdy is first attested 1837. Specific sense in
golf is from 1901. Phrase in the rough in an unfinished or unprocessed condition (of timber, etc.)
is from 1819.


rough (adj.)

Old English ruh rough, coarse (of cloth); hairy, shaggy; untrimmed, uncultivated, from West Germanic
*rukhwaz shaggy, hairy, rough (cognates: Middle Dutch ruuch, Dutch ruig, Old High German ruher,
German rauh), from Proto-Germanic *rukhaz, from PIE *reue- (2) to smash, knock down, tear out, dig
up (cognates: Sanskrit ruksah rough; Latin ruga wrinkle, ruere to rush, fall violently, collapse,
ruina a collapse; Lithuanian raukas wrinkle, rukti to shrink).    The original -gh- sound was
guttural, as in Scottish loch. Sense of approximate is first recorded c.1600. Of places, riotous,
disorderly, characterized by violent action, 1863. Rough draft is from 1690s. Rough-and-ready is
from 1810, originally military; rough-and-tumble (1810) is from a style of free-fighting.


rough (v.)

late 15c., from rough (adj.). Related: Roughed; roughing. Phrase rough it submit to hardships (1768)
is originally nautical:    To lie rough; to lie all night in one's clothes: called also roughing it.
Likewise to sleep on the bare deck of a ship, when the person is commonly advised to chuse the
softest plank. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1788]    To rough out shape or plan
approximately is from 1770. To rough up make rough is from 1763. To rough (someone) up beat up,
jostle violently is from 1868. The U.S. football penalty roughing was originally a term from boxing
(1866).


rough rider (n.)

1733, horse-breaker, from rough (adj. or adv.) + rider. In specific military use, a non-commissioned
officer in cavalry regiments, from 1802; meaning irregular cavalryman is attested from 1884.


rough-hewn (adj.)

1520s, originally of timber, from rough-hew (v.); see rough (adj.) + hew (v.).


rough-house (n.)

1887, uproar, disturbance, from rough (adj.) + house (n.). The verb is first attested 1896. Related:
Rough-housing.


roughage (n.)

1883, rough grass or weeds, from rough (adj.) + -age. Meaning coarse, bulky food first recorded
1927.


roughen (v.)

1580s, from rough (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Roughened; roughening.


roughly (adv.)

c.1300, ungently, violently, from rough (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning approximately, without precision
or exactness is from 1841.


roughneck (n.)

also rough-neck, 1836, rugged individual, from rough (adj.) + neck (n.). Original context is the
Texas frontier, later adpoted to labor organization toughs. Specific sense of oil rig worker is
recorded from 1917. Compare redneck.


roughness (n.)

late 14c., from rough (adj.) + -ness.


roughshod (adj.)

also rough-shod, 1680s, from rough (adj.) + shod. Originally of horses shod with the nails
projecting from the shoe, to prevent slipping.


roulette (n.)

1734, small wheel, from French roulette gambling game played with a revolving wheel, literally small
wheel, from Old French roelete little wheel (12c.), formed on model of Late Latin rotella,
diminutive of Latin rota wheel (see rotary). The game of chance so-called from 1745.


round (adj.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French rounde, Old French roont (12c., Modern French rond), probably
originally *redond, from Vulgar Latin *retundus (source also of Proven&ccedil;al redon, Spanish
redondo, Old Italian ritondo), from Latin rotundus like a wheel, circular, round, related to rota
wheel (see rotary).    As an adverb from c.1300; as a preposition from c.1600. In many uses it is a
shortened form of around. The French word is the source of Middle Dutch ront (Dutch rond), Middle
High German runt (German rund) and similar Germanic words.    Of numbers from mid-14c., from earlier
sense full, complete, brought to completion (mid-14c., notion of symmetry extended to that of
completeness). First record of round trip is from 1844, originally of railways. Round heels attested
from 1926, in reference to incompetent boxers, 1927 in reference to loose women, in either case
implying an inability to avoid ending up flat on one's back.


round (n.)

early 14c., a spherical body, from round (adj.) and Old French roond. Compare Dutch rond, Danish and
Swedish rund, German runde, all nouns from adjectives. Meaning large round piece of beef is recorded
from 1650s. Theatrical sense (in phrase in the round) is recorded from 1944. Sense of circuit
performed by a sentinel is from 1590s; that of recurring course of time is from 1710. Meaning song
sung by two or more, beginning at different times is from 1520s. Golfing sense attested from 1775.
Meaning quantity of liquor served to a company at one time is from 1630s; that of single bout in a
fight or boxing match is from 1812; single discharge of a firearm is from 1725. Sense of recurring
session of meetings or negotiations is from 1964.


round (v.)

late 14c., to make round, from round (adj.). Sense of make a circuit round is from 1590s. Sense of
bring to completeness is from c.1600; meaning to approximate (a number) is from 1934. Meaning turn
round and face, turn on and assault is from 1882. Round out fill up is from 1856. Related: Rounded;
rounding.


round robin (n.)

petition or complaint signed in a circle to disguise the order in which names were affixed and
prevent ringleaders from being identified, 1730, originally in reference to sailors and frequently
identified as a nautical term. As a kind of tournament in which each player plays the others, it is
recorded from 1895.


round-table (n.)

also roundtable, 1826 in reference to a gathering of persons in which all are accorded equal status
(there being no head of a round table.) King Arthur's Round Table is attested from c.1300,
translating Old French table ronde (1155, in Wace's Roman de Brut).


roundabout (adv.)

by a circuitous route, mid-14c., from round (adv.) + about. As an adjective from c.1600. Noun sense
of traffic circle is attested from 1927.


roundel (n.)

late 13c., a circle, from Old French rondel round dance; dance lyric; roundel, from rond round (see
round (n.)).


roundelay (n.)

1570s, from Middle French rondelet, diminutive of rondel short poem with a refrain, literally small
circle, diminutive of Old French rond circle, sphere, originally an adjective from roont (see round
(adj.)). Spelling developed by association with lay (n.) poem to be sung.


rounder (n.)

1620s, a sentinel, agent noun from round (n.) on notion of one who makes the rounds. Sense of
chronic drunkard or criminal is from 1854, on notion of one who is habitually in and out of jails or
bars. Rounders, a baseball-like game, attested from 1828.


Roundhead (n.)

adherent of the Parliamentary party in the English Civil War, 1641, so called for their custom of
wearing the hair close-cropped, in contrast to the flowing curls of the cavaliers.


roundhouse (n.)

also round-house, lock-up, place of detention, 1580s, from Dutch rondhuis guardhouse.  Meaning
circular shed for locomotives with a turntable in the center is from 1856. Meaning blow delivered
with a wide sweep of the arm is perhaps extended from round building for circular machinery.


roundness (n.)

late 14c., from round (adj.) + -ness.


roundup (n.)

also round-up, by 1869 in the cattle drive sense; from verbal phrase round up to collect in a mass
(1610s; specifically of livestock from 1847); see round (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning summary of news
items is recorded from 1886.


rouse (v.)

mid-15c., intransitive probably from Anglo-French or Old French reuser, ruser, originally used in
English of hawks shaking the feathers of the body, but like many hawking terms it is of obscure
origin. Figurative meaning to stir up, provoke to activity is from 1580s; that of awaken is first
recorded 1590s. Related: Roused; rousing.


rouser (n.)

1610s, agent noun from rouse (v.).


roust (v.)

1650s, probably an alteration of rouse. Related: Rousted; rousting.


roustabout (n.)

deck hand, wharf worker, 1868, perhaps from roust + about. But another theory connects it to British
dialect rousing rough, shaggy, a word associated perhaps with rooster. With extended senses in U.S.,
including circus hand (1931); manual laborer on an oil rig (1948).


rout (n.)

1590s, disorderly retreat following a defeat, from Middle French route disorderly flight of troops,
literally a breaking off, rupture, from Vulgar Latin rupta a dispersed group, literally a broken
group, from noun use of Latin rupta, fem. past participle of rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)).
The archaic English noun rout group of persons, assemblage, is the same word, from Anglo-French
rute, Old French route host, troop, crowd, from Vulgar Latin rupta a dispersed group, here with
sense of a division, a detachment. It first came to English meaning group of soldiers (early 13c.),
also gang of outlaws or rioters, mob (c.1300) before the more general sense developed 14c. Also as a
legal term. A rout-cake (1807) was one baked for use at a reception.


rout (v.)

drive into disordered flight by defeat, c.1600, from rout (n.). Related: Routed; routing.


route (n.)

early 13c., from Old French rute road, way, path (12c.), from Latin rupta (via) (a road) opened by
force, from rupta, fem. past participle of rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)). Sense of fixed or
regular course for carrying things (as in mail route) is 1792, an extension of the meaning customary
path of animals (early 15c.).


route (v.)

1890, from route (n.). Related: Routed; routing.


router (n.)

cutter that removes wood from a groove, 1818, from rout poke about, rummage (1540s), originally of
swine digging with the snout; a variant of root (v.1).


routine (n.)

1670s, from French routine usual course of action, beaten path (16c.), from route way, path, course
(see route (n.)) + noun suffix -ine (see -ine (1)). Theatrical or athletic performance sense is from
1926. The adjective is attested from 1817, from the noun. Related: Routinely.


routinization (n.)

1916, noun of action from routinize (1893), from routine + -ize.


roux (n.)

sauce made from browned butter or fat, 1813, from French (beurre) roux browned (butter), from roux
red, reddish-brown, from Latin russus (see russet).


rove (v.)

to wander with no fixed destination, 1530s (earliest sense was to shoot arrows at a mark selected at
pleasure or at random, late 15c.); possibly a Midlands dialectal variant of northern English and
Scottish rave to wander, stray, from Middle English raven, probably from Old Norse rafa to wander,
rove (compare rave (v.)). Influenced by rover, if not a back-formation from it. Related: Roved;
roving.


rover (n.)

late 14c., sea-robber, pirate, from Middle Dutch rover robber, predator, plunderer, especially in
zeerovere pirate, literally sea-robber, from roven to rob, from Middle Dutch roof spoil, plunder,
related to Old English reaf spoil, plunder, reafian to reave (see reave (v.)). Meaning remote-
controlled surface vehicle is from 1970.


row (n.1)

line of people or things, Old English r&aelig;w a row, line; succession, hedge-row, probably from
Proto-Germanic *rai(h)waz (cognates: Middle Dutch rie, Dutch rij row; Old High German rihan to
thread, riga line; German Reihe row, line, series; Old Norse rega string), possibly from PIE root
*rei- to scratch, tear, cut (cognates: Sanskrit rikhati scratches, rekha line). Meaning a number of
houses in a line is attested from mid-15c., originally chiefly Scottish and northern English. Phrase
a hard row to hoe attested from 1823, American English.


row (v.)

propel with oars, Old English rowan go by water, row (class VII strong verb; past tense reow, past
participle rowen), from Proto-Germanic *ro- (cognates: Old Norse roa, Dutch roeien, West Frisian
roeije, Middle High German r&uuml;ejen), from PIE root *ere- (1) to row (cognates: Sanskrit aritrah
oar; Greek eressein to row, eretmon oar, trieres trireme; Latin remus oar; Lithuanian iriu to row,
irklas oar; Old Irish rome oar, Old English ro&eth;or rudder).


row (n.2)

noisy commotion, 1746, Cambridge University slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to rousel
drinking bout (c.1600), a shortened form of carousal. Klein suggests a back-formation from rouse
(n.), mistaken as a plural (compare pea from pease).


row-house (n.)

1913, American English, from row (n.1), which is attested from mid-15c. in sense of a number of
houses in a line, + house (n.).


rowan (n.)

mountain ash, 1804, from rowan-tree, rountree (1540s), northern English and Scottish, from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse reynir, Swedish Ronn the rowan), ultimately from the root of
red, in reference to the berries.    There were those in this neighbourhood, long after the
beginning of the present century, who believed that a slip of rowan tree carried on their person
dispelled glamour, and rendered nugatory all the powers of sorcery and witchcraft. [Alexander Laing,
Lindores Abbey and the Burgh of Newburgh, Edinburgh, 1876]


rowboat (n.)

also row-boat, 1530s, from row (v.) + boat. Similar formation in Dutch roeiboot.


rowdy (n.)

a rough, quarrelsome person, 1808, American English, originally lawless backwoodsman, probably from
row (n.2). The adjective is first recorded 1819. Related: Rowdily; rowdiness.


rowel (n.)

pointed wheel on a spur, mid-14c., from Old French roelle, roel (Modern French rouelle), small wheel
(see roulette).


Roxanne

fem. proper name, from French, from Latin Roxane, from Greek Rhoxane, of Persian origin (compare
Avestan raox&#353;na- shining, bright). Spelling influenced by Anne.


Roxy

cinema chain built by U.S. entertainment mogul Samuel L. Roxy Rothafel (1882-1936).


royal (adj.)

mid-13c., fit for a king; late 14c., pertaining to a king, from Old French roial royal, regal;
splendid, magnificent (12c., Modern French royal), from Latin regalis of a king, kingly, royal,
regal, from rex (genitive regis) king (see rex). Meaning thorough, total attested from 1940s; that
of splendid, first-rate from 1853.    Battle royal (1670s) preserves the French custom of putting
the adjective after the noun (as in attorney general); the sense of the adjective here is on a grand
scale (compare pair-royal three of a kind in cards or dice, c.1600). The Royal Oak was a tree in
Boscobel in Shropshire in which Charles II hid himself during flight after the Battle of Worcester
in 1651. Sprigs of oak were worn to commemorate his restoration in 1660.


royal (n.)

royal person, c.1400, from royal (adj.). Specifically member of the royal family from 1774.


royale (adj.)

French, literally royal (see royal).


royalist (n.)

1640s, from royal + -ist. In England, a partisan of Charles I and II during the Civil War; in the
U.S., an adherent of British government during the Revolution; in France, a supporter of the
Bourbons.


royally (adv.)

late 14c., regally; 1836, gloriously, from royal (adj.) + -ly (2).


royalty (n.)

c.1400, office or position of a sovereign, also magnificence, from or modeled on Old French roialte
(12c., Modern French royaut&#233;), from Vulgar Latin *regalitatem (nominative *regalitas), from
Latin regalis (see royal). Sense of prerogatives or rights granted by a sovereign to an individual
or corporation is from late 15c. From that evolved more general senses, such as payment to a
landowner for use of a mine (1839), and ultimately payment to an author, composer, etc. for sale or
use of his or her work (1857). Compare realty.


rpg (n.)

by 1979, initialism (acronym) from role-playing game. As an initialism for rocket-propelled grenade,
by 1970.


rpm

1906, initialism (acronym) from revolutions per minute.


rRNA (n.)

stands for ribosomal RNA.


rub (v.)

early 14c., transitive and intransitive, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to East Frisian rubben
to scratch, rub, and Low German rubbeling rough, uneven, or similar words in Scandinavian (compare
Danish rubbe to rub, scrub, Norwegian rubba), of uncertain origin. Related: Rubbed; rubbing.    To
rub (someone) the wrong way is from 1853; probably the notion is of cats' fur. To rub noses in
greeting as a sign of friendship (attested from 1822) formerly was common among Eskimos, Maoris, and
some other Pacific Islanders. Rub out obliterate is from 1560s; underworld slang sense of kill is
recorded from 1848, American English. Rub off remove by rubbing is from 1590s; meaning have an
influence is recorded from 1959.


rub (n.)

act of rubbing, 1610s, from rub (v.); earlier obstacle, inequality on ground (1580s, common in 17c.)
which is the figure in Hamlet's there's the rub (1602).


rub-a-dub (n.)

1787, echoic of the sound of a drum.


rub-down (n.)

1885, from verbal phrase, from rub (v.) + down (adv.).


rubaiyat (n.)

quatrains (in Persian poetry), 1859, plural of rubai, from Arabic rubaiyah, from rubaiy composed of
four elements.


rubato

musical instruction, 1883, Italian, short for tempo rubato, literally robbed time, from past
participle of rubare to steal, rob (see rob (v.)).


rubber (n.)

thing that rubs (a brush, cloth, etc.), 1530s, agent noun from rub (v.). The meaning elastic
substance from tropical plants (short for India rubber) first recorded 1788, introduced to Europe
1744 by Charles Marie de la Condamine, so called because it originally was used as an eraser.Very
useful for erasing the strokes of black lead pencils, and is popularly called rubber, and lead-
eater. [entry for Caoutchouc in Howard, New Royal Encyclopedia, 1788]Meaning overshoe made of rubber
is 1842, American English; slang sense of condom is by 1930s. Sense of deciding match in a game or
contest is 1590s, of unknown signification, and perhaps an entirely separate word. Rubber stamp (n.)
is from 1881; figurative sense of institution whose power is formal but not real is from 1919; the
verb in this sense is from 1934. Rubber cement is attested from 1856 (from 1823 as India-rubber
cement). Rubber check (one that bounces) is from 1927.


rubberneck (n.)

1897, person who is always listening to other people's conversation; person who gazes around him
with undue curiosity, from rubber + neck (n.). Popularized with reference to sightseers in
automobiles. As a verb from 1896. Related: Rubbernecking (1896); rubbernecker (1934).


rubbers (n.)

see rubber (n.).


rubbery (adj.)

1890, from rubber (n.) + -y (2). Related: Rubberiness.


rubbish (n.)

c.1400, robous, from Anglo-French rubouses (late 14c.), of unknown origin. No apparent cognates in
Old French; apparently somehow related to rubble (see OED). Spelling with -ish is from late 15c. The
verb sense of disparage, criticize harshly is first attested 1953 in Australian and New Zealand
slang. Related: Rubbished; rubbishing.


rubble (n.)

rough, irregular stones broken from larger masses, late 14c., robeyl, from Anglo-French *robel bits
of broken stone, probably related to rubbish [OED], but also possibly from Old French robe (see
rob).


rube (n.)

1896, reub, from shortened form of masc. proper name Reuben (q.v.), which is attested from 1804 as a
conventional type of name for a country man.


Rube Goldberg (adj.)

1940, from the U.S. cartoonist Reuben Lucius Goldberg (1883-1970) who devised fantastically complex
gadgetry to accomplish simple tasks. His British counterpart was Heath Robinson (1872-1944).


rubella (n.)

German measles, 1883, Modern Latin, literally rash, from neuter plural of Latin rubellus reddish,
diminutive of ruber red (see red (adj.1)).


Rubenesque (adj.)

of a woman's body, rounded and alluringly plump, 1904, of the type characteristic of the paintings
of Flemish painter Sir Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640).


Rubicon (n.)

in phrase to cross (or pass) the Rubicon take a decisive step, 1620s, a reference to a small stream
to the Adriatic on the coast of northern Italy which in ancient times formed part of the southern
boundary of Cisalpine Gaul; crossed by Caesar Jan. 10, 49 B.C.E., when he left his province to
attack Pompey. The name is from Latin rubicundus ruddy, in reference to the color of the soil on its
banks.


rubicund (adj.)

inclining to redness, c.1500, from Middle French rubicond (14c.), or directly from Latin rubicundus,
from rubere to be red, from ruber red (see red (adj.1)). Related: Rubicundity.


Rubik&#039;s Cube (n.)

1980, named for teacher Ern&ouml; Rubik (b.1944) who patented it in Hungary in 1975.


ruble (n.)

unit of the Russian monetary system, 1550s, via French rouble, from Russian rubl', perhaps from Old
Russian rubiti to chop, cut, hew, so called because the original metallic currency of Russia (14c.)
consisted of silver bars, from which the necessary amount was cut off; from Proto-Slavic *rub-, from
PIE root *reub-, *reup- to snatch (see rip (v.)).


rubric (n.)

c.1300, directions in religious services (often in red writing), from Old French rubrique, rubriche
rubric, title (13c.), from Latin rubrica red ochre, red coloring matter, from ruber, from PIE root
*rudhro- (see red). Meaning title or heading of a book is from early 15c. Related: Rubrical.


ruby (n.)

clear rich-red variety of corundum, c.1300, from Old French rubi (12c.), from Medieval Latin rubinus
lapis red stone (source also of Italian rubino), from Latin rubeus red, related to ruber (see red).
As a color name from 1570s. As an adjective from late 15c. Modern French rubis is not explained;
Klein suggests a plural mistaken for singular.


ruche (n.)

frill, 1827, from French ruche, literally beehive (13c.), of Celtic origin (compare Breton rusken),
from Proto-Celtic *rusca bark. Related: Ruched; ruching.


rucksack (n.)

1866, from German Rucksack, from Alpine dialect R&uuml;ck the back (from German R&uuml;cken; see
ridge) + Sack sack (see sack (n.1)).


ruckus (n.)

1890, possibly a blend of ruction and rumpus.


ruction (n.)

disturbance, 1825, dialectal or colloquial, of unknown origin. Perhaps from eruption or an altered
shortening of insurrection.


rudder (n.)

Old English ro&eth;or paddle, oar, from Proto-Germanic *rothru- (cognates: Old Frisian ro&eth;er,
Middle Low German roder, Middle Dutch roeder, Dutch roer, Old High German ruodar, German Ruder oar),
from *ro- steer (see row (v.)) + suffix -&thorn;ra, used to form neutral names of tools. Meaning
broad, flat piece of wood attached to the stern of a boat and used for steering is from c.1300.
Spelling with -d- for -th- first recorded mid-15c. (compare feather (n.), mother (n.), gather).


ruddock (n.)

robin, late Old English rudduc, from rudu red color, related to read (see red (adj.1)) + diminutive
suffix.


ruddy (adj.)

late Old English rudig rubicund, probably from rudu redness, related to read red (see red (adj.1)).
As a British slang euphemism for bloody (q.v.), first recorded 1914. Related: Ruddiness.


rude (adj.)

late 13c., coarse, rough (of surfaces), from Old French ruide (13c.) or directly from Latin rudis
rough, crude, unlearned, perhaps related to rudus rubble. Sense of ill-mannered, uncultured;
uneducated, uncultured is from mid-14c. Rude boy (also rudie, for short) in Jamaican slang is
attested from 1967. Figurative phrase rude awakening is attested from 1895.


rudely (adv.)

mid-14c., from rude (adj.) + -ly (2).


rudesby (n.)

insolent person, 1560s, mock surname from rude + -by, common place-name (and thus surname) ending
element, as in Grimsby, Rigby. Similar formations in idlesby, sneaksby paltry, sneaking fellow
(1570s), suresby.


rudiment (n.)

1540s, from Middle French rudiment (16c.) or directly from Latin rudimentum early training, first
experience, beginning, first principle, from rudis unlearned, untrained (see rude). Related:
Rudiments.


rudimentary (adj.)

1827; see rudiment + -ary. Earlier was rudimental (1590s).


Rudolph

masc. proper name, from German Rudolf, from Old High German Hrodulf, literally fame-wolf, from
hruod- fame, glory + wolf.


Rudra

storm god in Vedic mythology, from Sanskrit Rudrah, according to Klein literally the howler, roarer,
from stem of rudati weeps, laments, bewails, cognate with Latin rudere to roar, bellow, Lithuanian
rauda wail, lamentation, Old English reotan to wail, lament.


rue (v.)

feel regret, Old English hreowan make sorry, distress, grieve (class II strong verb; past tense
hreaw, past participle hrowen), from Proto-Germanic *khrewan (cognates: Old Frisian riowa, Middle
Dutch rouwen, Old Dutch hrewan, German reuen to sadden, cause repentance); in part, blended with Old
English weak verb hreowian feel pain or sorrow, and perhaps influenced by Old Norse hryggja make
sad, both from Proto-Germanic *khruwjan, all from PIE root *kreue- (2) to push, strike (see
anacrusis). Related: Rued; ruing.


rue (n.1)

perennial evergreen shrub, late 14c., from Old French rue (13c.), earlier rude, from Latin ruta rue,
probably from Greek rhyte, of uncertain etymology, originally a Peloponnesian word. The bitter taste
of its leaves led to many punning allusions to rue (n.2.).


rue (n.2)

sorrow, repentance, Old English hreow grief, repentance, sorrow, regret, penitence, common Germanic
(Frisian rou, Middle Dutch rou, Dutch rouw, Old High German (h)riuwa, German reue), related to the
root of rue (v.).


rue (n.3)

French for street, from Vulgar Latin *ruga (source also of Old Italian ruga), properly a furrow,
then in Medieval Latin a path, street (see rough (adj.)).


rueful (adj.)

early 13c., rewfulle, reowfule, from rue (n.2) + -ful. Related: Ruefulness.


ruefully (adv.)

early 13c., reufulike; see rueful + -ly (2).


ruff (n.)

kind of large collar, stiffly starched, especially common in the seventeenth century, 1520s,
originally in reference to sleeves (of collars, from 1550s), probably a shortened form of ruffle.
Card-playing sense is a separate word, from a former game of that name (1580s), from Middle French
roffle, earlier romfle (early 15c.), from Italian ronfa, perhaps a corruption of trionfo triumph
(from French; compare trump). The game was in vogue c.1590-1630.


ruff (v.)

in cards, 1760, from ruff (n.). Related: Ruffed; ruffing.


ruffian (n.)

1530s, a boisterous, brutal fellow, one ready to commit any crime, from Middle French rufian a pimp
(15c.), from Italian ruffiano a pander, pimp, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Germanic source
related to rough (adj.), but Dutch roffiaan, German Ruffian are said to be from French. English
meaning might have been influenced by similarity of sound to rough. Related: Ruffianly.    The
Romanic words (such as Medieval Latin ruffianus, Proven&ccedil;al rufian, Catalan rufia, Spanish
rufian) preserve the sense of protector or owner of whores. For sense evolution in English, compare
bully (n.).


ruffle (v.)

early 14c., to disturb the smoothness of, perhaps from Old Norse hrufla to scratch, or Low German
ruffelen to wrinkle, curl, both of unknown origin. Meaning disarrange (hair or feathers) first
recorded late 15c.; sense of annoy, distract is from 1650s. Related: Ruffled; ruffling.


ruffle (n.)

ornamental frill, 1707, from ruffle (v.).


rufous (adj.)

reddish-brown, 1782, from Latin rufus red, reddish, red-haired, from Osco-Umbrian cognate of Latin
ruber red (see red (adj.1)).


Rufus

masc. proper name, literally red-haired, from Latin rufus (see rufous).


rug (n.)

1550s, coarse fabric, of Scandinavian origin; compare Norwegian dialectal rugga coarse coverlet,
from Old Norse rogg shaggy tuft, from Proto-Germanic *rawwa-, perhaps related to rag (n.) and rough
(adj.). Sense evolved to coverlet, wrap (1590s), then mat for the floor (1808). Meaning toupee is
theater slang from 1940. Cut a rug dance is slang first attested 1942. To sweep (something) under
the rug in the figurative sense is from 1954.


rugae (n.)

plural of ruga (1775), from Latin ruga a wrinkle in the face, from PIE *rug-, variant of *reue- (2)
to smash, knock down, tear up, dig up, uproot (see rough (adj.)).


rugby (n.)

type of football, 1864, after Rugby, public school where the game was played, from city of Rugby in
Warwickshire, central England. The place name is Rocheberie (1086), probably fortified place of a
man called *Hroca; with second element from Old English burh (dative byrig), replaced by 13c. with
Old Norse -by village due to the influence of Danish settlers. Otherwise it might be *Rockbury
today. Or first element perhaps is Old English hroc rook. Rugby Union formed 1871. Slang rugger for
rugby is from 1893.


rugged (adj.)

c.1300, rough, shaggy, careworn (originally of animals), from Old Norse rogg shaggy tuft (see rug).
The precise relationship to ragged is not quite clear, but the stem is no doubt ultimately the same
[OED]. Meaning vigorous, strong, robust is American English, by 1848.We were challenged with a
peace-time choice between the American system of rugged individualism and a European philosophy of
diametrically opposed doctrines -- doctrines of paternalism and state socialism. [Herbert Hoover,
speech in New York, Oct. 22, 1928]  Hoover said the phrase was not his own, and it is attested from
1897, though not in a patriotic context. Related: Ruggedly; ruggedness.


rugrat (n.)

also rug-rat, baby, child, by 1968; see rug + rat (n.).


ruin (n.)

late 14c., act of giving way and falling down, from Old French ruine a collapse (14c.), and directly
from Latin ruina a collapse, a rushing down, a tumbling down (source also of Spanish ruina, Italian
rovina), related to ruere to rush, fall violently, collapse, from PIE *reue- (2) to smash, knock
down, tear out, dig up (see rough (adj.)). Meaning complete destruction of anything is from 1670s.
Ruins remains of a decayed building or town is from mid-15c.; the same sense was in the Latin plural
noun.


ruin (v.)

1580s (transitive), from ruin (n.). Intransitive sense fall into ruin is from c.1600. Financial
sense is attested from 1660. Related: Ruined; ruining.


ruination (n.)

1660s, from verb ruinate to go to ruin (1540s), from Medieval Latin ruinatus, past participle of
ruinare, from Latin ruina (see ruin (n.)).


ruinous (adj.)

late 14c., going to ruin, from Old French ruinos (Modern French ruineux) or directly from Latin
ruinosus tumbling down, going to ruin, from ruina (see ruin (n.)). Meaning causing ruin is from mid-
15c. Related: Ruinously.


rule (n.)

c.1200, principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed from Old
French riule, Norman reule rule, custom, (religious) order (in Modern French partially re-Latinized
as r&#232;gle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula straight stick, bar, ruler;
figuratively a pattern, a model, related to regere to rule, straighten, guide (see regal). Replaced
Old English wealdan.    Meaning regulation governing play of a game, etc. is from 1690s. Phrase rule
of thumb first attested 1690s. Rule of law supremacy of impartial and well-defined laws to any
individual's power is from 1883. Meaning strip used for making straight lines or measuring is
recorded from mid-14c. Typography sense is attested from 1680s.


rule (v.)

c.1200, to control, guide, direct, from Old French riuler impose rule, from Latin regulare (see
regulate). Legal sense establish by decision is recorded from early 15c. Meaning mark with lines is
from 1590s. Meaning to dominate, prevail is from 1874. Rule Brittania, patriotic song, is from 1740.
Related: Ruled; ruling.


ruler (n.)

one who rules, late 14c., agent noun from rule (v.). Meaning instrument used for making straight
lines is c.1400 (compare rule (n.)).


ruling (n.)

determination by a judge or court on a point arising in the course of a trial or hearing, 1550s,
verbal noun from rule (v.).


ruly (adj.)

conforming to (religious) rule; amenable to rule, disciplined, orderly, reuleli; from rule (n.) +
-ly (2).


rum (n.)

liquor from sugar cane or molasses, 1650s, shortening of rumbullion (1651), rombostion (1652), of
uncertain origin, perhaps from rum (adj.).The chiefe fudling they make in the Island [i.e. Barbados]
is Rumbullion alias Kill-Devill, and this is made of suggar cane distilled, a hott, hellish and
terrible liquor. [A briefe Description of the Island of Barbados, 1651]The English word was borrowed
into Dutch, German, Swedish, Danish, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, and Russian. Used since
1800 in North America as a general (hostile) name for intoxicating liquors.    Rum I take to be the
name which unwashed moralists apply alike to the product distilled from molasses and the noblest
juices of the vineyard. Burgundy in all its sunset glow is rum. Champagne, soul of the foaming grape
of Eastern France, is rum. ... Sir, I repudiate the loathsome vulgarism as an insult to the first
miracle wrought by the Founder of our religion! [Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the
Breakfast-Table, 1891]


rum (adj.)

excellent, fine, good, valuable, 1560s, from rome fine (1560s), said to be from Romany rom male,
husband (see Romany). E.g. rum kicks Breeches of gold or silver brocade, or richly laced with gold
or silver [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785].    A very common 16c. cant word, by 1774
it also had come to mean odd, strange, bad, spurious, perhaps because it had been so often used
approvingly by rogues in reference to one another. This was the main sense after c.1800.


rum-runner (n.)

smuggler or transporter of illicit liquor, 1919, from rum (n.) + runner.


rumba (n.)

1919, from Cuban Spanish rumba, originally spree, carousal, derived from Spanish rumbo spree, party,
earlier ostentation, pomp, leadership, perhaps originally the course of a ship, from rombo rhombus,
in reference to the compass, which is marked with a rhombus. The verb is recorded from 1932.
Related: Rumbaed; rumbaing.


rumble (v.)

late 14c., make a deep, heavy, continuous sound, also move with a rolling, thundering sound, also
create disorder and confusion, probably related to Middle Dutch rommelen to rumble, Middle High
German rummeln, Old Norse rymja to shout, roar, all of imitative origin. Related: Rumbled; rumbling.


rumble (n.)

late 14c., from rumble (v.). Slang noun meaning gang fight is from 1946. Meaning backmost part of a
carriage is from 1808 (earlier rumbler, 1801), probably from the effect of sitting over the wheels;
hence rumble seat (1828).


rumbustious (adj.)

1778, an arbitrary formation perhaps suggested by rum (adj.) + boisterous, robustious, bumptious,
etc. Coined about the same time were rumbustical, rumgumptious.


rumen (n.)

first stomach of a ruminant, 1728, from Latin rumen the throat, of uncertain origin.


ruminant (n.)

1660s, from Latin ruminantem (nominative ruminans), present participle of ruminare to chew the cud
(see ruminate). As an adjective from 1670s.


ruminate (v.)

1530s, to turn over in the mind, also to chew cud (1540s), from Latin ruminatus, past participle of
ruminare to chew the cud; turn over in the mind, from rumen (genitive ruminis) gullet, of uncertain
origin. Related: Ruminated; ruminating.


rumination (n.)

c.1600, act of ruminating; act of meditating, from Latin ruminationem (nominative ruminatio) a
chewing the cud, noun of action from past participle stem of ruminare (see ruminate).


rummage (v.)

1540s, arrange (cargo) in a ship, from rummage (n.), 1520s, act of arranging cargo in a ship, a
shortening of Middle French arrumage arrangement of cargo, from arrumer to stow goods in the hold of
a ship, from a- to + rumer, probably from Germanic (compare Old Norse rum compartment in a ship, Old
High German rum space, Old English rum; see room (n.)). Or else from English room (n.) + -age.
Meaning to search closely (the hold of a ship), especially by moving things about first recorded
1610s. Related: Rummaged; rummaging. Rummage sale (1803) originally was a sale at docks of unclaimed
goods.


rummy (n.)

card game, 1910, rhummy, of unknown origin. Gin rummy is first attested 1941. Meaning drunkard is
1851, from rum (n.). Meaning opponent of temperance in U.S. politics is from 1860.


rumor (n.)

late 14c., from Old French rumor commotion, widespread noise or report (Modern French rumeur), from
Latin rumorem (nominative rumor) noise, clamor, common talk, hearsay, popular opinion, related to
ravus hoarse, from PIE *reu- to bellow. Related: Rumorous. Rumor mill is from 1887. Dutch rumoer,
German Rumor are from French.


rumor (v.)

1590s, spread a rumor; spread by way of rumor, from rumor (n.). Related: Rumored; rumoring.


rumour

chiefly British English spelling of rumor; see -or. Related: Rumoured; rumouring.


rump (n.)

hind-quarters, buttocks of an animal, mid-15c., from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish,
Norwegian rumpe, Swedish rumpa), from or corresponding to Middle Dutch romp, German Rumpf trunk,
torso. Sense of small remnant derives from tail and is first recorded 1640s in reference to the
English Rump Parliament (December 1648-April 1653). As an adjective from c.1600.


Rumpelstiltskin (n.)

1840, from German Rumpelstilzchen. The German form of the name is used in English from 1828.


rumple (v.)

c.1600, possibly a variant of rimple to wrinkle (c.1400), from Old English hrympel wrinkle (possibly
influenced by Middle Dutch rumpelen), related to Old English hrimpan to fold, wrinkle (see ramp
(v.)). Related: Rumpled; rumpling. As a noun from c.1500.


rumpus (n.)

1764, of unknown origin, prob. a fanciful formation [OED], possibly an alteration of robustious
boisterous, noisy (1540s; see robust). First record of rumpus room play room for children in a
family home is from 1938.


run (v.)

the modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which the first letters
sometimes switched places. The first is intransitive rinnan, irnan to run, flow, run together (past
tense ran, past participle runnen), cognate with Middle Dutch runnen, Old Saxon, Old High German,
Gothic rinnan, German rinnen to flow, run.    The second is Old English transitive weak verb
&aelig;rnan, earnan ride, run to, reach, gain by running (probably a metathesis of *rennan), from
Proto-Germanic *rannjanan, causative of the root *ren- to run. This is cognate with Old Saxon
renian, Old High German rennen, German rennen, Gothic rannjan.    Both are from PIE *ri-ne-a-,
nasalized form of root *reie- to flow, run  (see Rhine).    Of streams, etc., from c.1200; of
machinery, from 1560s. Meaning be in charge of is first attested 1861, originally American English.
Meaning seek office in an election is from 1826, American English. Phrase run for it take flight is
attested from 1640s. Many figurative uses are from horseracing or hunting (such as to run
(something) into the ground, 1836, American English).    To run across meet is attested from 1855,
American English. To run short exhaust one's supply is from 1752; to run out of in the same sense is
from 1713. To run around with consort with is from 1887. Run away flee in the face of danger is from
late 14c. To run late is from 1954.


run (n.)

a spell of running, mid-15c. (earlier ren, late 14c.), from run (v.). The Old English noun ryne
meant a flowing, a course, a watercourse. Modern sense of small stream first recorded 1580s, mostly
Northern English dialect and American English.    Meaning continuous stretch (of something) is from
1670s. Meaning series or rush of demands on a bank, etc. is first recorded 1690s. Meaning the
privilege of going through or over is from 1755. Baseball sense is from 1856. Meaning single trip by
a railroad train is from 1857. Military aircraft sense is from 1916. Meaning total number of copies
printed is from 1909. Meaning tear in a knitted garment is from 1922. Phrase a run for one's money
is from 1872 in a figurative sense, originally from horse racing, implying competition (1841).


run-down (adj.)

1866, of persons, with reference to health, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + down (adv.). From
1896 of places; 1894 of clocks. Earliest sense is oppressed (1680s).


run-in (n.)

quarrel, confrontation, 1905, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + in (adv.). From 1857 as an act of
running in.


run-of-the-mill (adj.)

unspectacular, 1909 in a literal sense, in reference to material yielded by a mill, etc., before
sorting for quality (compare common run usual, ordinary type, from 1712). Figurative use is from
1922.


run-through (n.)

a rehearsal, especially a hasty one, 1923, from the verbal phrase, from run (v.) + through (adv.).


run-up (n.)

1834, an act of running upward, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + up (adv.). Extended sense period
of time or sequence of events proceeding some important event is from 1966.


runabout (n.)

1540s, in reference to persons, from run (v.) + about (adv.). From 1890 as a small, light type of
carriage; later extended to motor cars.


runaround (n.)

also run-around, deceptive, evasive treatment, 1915, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + around
(adv.).


runaway (n.)

1540s, one who flees, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + away (adv.). Meaning an act of running
away is from 1724.


runcible

1871, a nonsense word coined by Edward Lear; used especially in runcible spoon spoon with three
short tines like a fork, which first took the name 1926.


runcinate (adj.)

1776, saw-toothed, from Modern Latin runcinatus, from Latin runcina a (carpenter's) plane.


rundown (n.)

in baseball, 1908, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + down (adv.). Meaning list of entries in a
horse race and the odds is from 1935; slang generalized sense of summary, account, list of
information or facts is from 1945.


rune (n.)

Old English run, rune secret, mystery, dark mysterious statement, (secret) council, also a runic
letter (runst&#230;f), from Proto-Germanic *runo (cognates: Old Norse run a secret, magic sign,
runic character, Old High German runa a secret conversation, whisper, Gothic runa), from PIE *ru-
no-, source of technical terms of magic in Germanic and Celtic (cognates: Gaelic run a secret,
mystery, craft, deceit, purpose, intention, desire, Welsh rhin a secret, charm, virtue). Also see
Runnymede.    The word entered Middle English as roun and by normal evolution would have become
Modern English *rown, but it died out mid-15c. when the use of runes did. The modern usage is from
late 17c., from German philologists who had reintroduced the word in their writings from a
Scandinavian source (such as Danish rune, from Old Norse run). The runic alphabet is believed to
have developed by 2c. C.E. from contact with Greek writing, with the letters modified to be more
easily cut into wood or stone.


rung (n.)

Old English hrung rod, bar, from Proto-Germanic *khrungo (cognates: Middle Low German runge, Old
High German runga stake, stud, stave, German Runge stake, stud, stave, Middle Dutch ronghe, Dutch
rong rung, Gothic hrugga staff), of unknown origin with no connections outside Germanic. Sense in
English narrowed to round or stave of a ladder (first attested late 13c.), but usage of cognate
words remains more general in other Germanic languages.    This [rungs] has generally been
considered as a mere corruption of rounds; and people of education use only this latter word. [John
Pickering, A Vocabulary or Collection of Words and Phrases which have been Supposed to be Peculiar
to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]


runic (adj.)

1660s, from Modern Latin runicus, from Old Norse run (see rune).


runnel (n.)

rivulet, 1570s, in Hakluyt, alteration of Middle English ryneil, from Old English rinelle, rynel, a
diminutive of ryne a stream (see run (n.)).


runner (n.)

c.1300, messenger on foot, agent noun from run (v.). Meaning one who runs is early 14c. Meaning
smuggler first recorded 1721; sense of police officer is from 1771. Meaning rooting stem of a plant
is from 1660s; that of embroidered cloth for a table is from 1888.


runner-up (n.)

1842, originally in dog racing, dog that loses only the final race; see runner + up. General sense
is from 1885.


running (n.)

Old English &#230;rning, verbal noun from run (v.); to be in (or out) of the running among (or not
among) the lead competitors in a race (1863) is a metaphor from horse racing, where make the running
set the pace is recorded from 1837. Running shoe is from 1884.


running (adj.)

present participle adjective from run (v.). Running mate originally was a horse entered in a race to
set the pace for another from the same stable who was intended to win (1865); U.S. vice-presidential
sense is recorded from 1888. Running dog first recorded 1937, from Chinese and North Korean
communist phrases used to describe supposed imperialist lackeys, such as Mandarin zou gou running
dog, on the notion of a dog that runs at its master's command. Running board first attested 1817, in
reference to ships and boats; 1907 of cars and trucks.


runny (adj.)

1817, from run (v.) + -y (2).


Runnymede

place in Surrey where the Magna Charta was signed, Middle English Ronimede, literally meadow on the
council island, from Old English runieg council island, from run in sense of council (see rune).


runoff (n.)

also run-off, precipitation water drained by streams and rivers, 1887, from run (v.) + off (adv.).
Meaning deciding race after a tie is from 1873; electoral sense is attested by 1910, American
English.


runt (n.)

c.1500, old or decayed tree stump, of unknown origin. Meaning extended to small ox or cow (1540s)
and by 1610s generally to undersized animals and people. Specific American English sense of smallest
of a litter (especially of pigs) is attested from 1841. Some see a connection to Middle Dutch runt
ox, but OED thinks this unlikely, and pronounces the word of obscure origin. Related: Runty (1807).


runway (n.)

customary track of an animal, especially a deer, 1833, American English, from run (v.) + way (n.).
Meaning artificial sloping track is attested from 1883; airfield sense is from 1923.


rupee (n.)

Indian coin, 1610s, from Hindi or Urdu rupiyah, from Sanskrit rupyah wrought silver, perhaps
originally something provided with an image, a coin, from rupah shape, likeness, image.


Rupert

masc. proper name, probably a blend of German Ruprecht and English Robert.


rupture (n.)

late 14c., originally medical, from Latin ruptura the breaking (of an arm or leg), fracture, from
past participle stem of rumpere to break, from PIE *reup- to snatch (see rip (v.)). Specifically as
abdominal hernia from early 15c.


rupture (v.)

1739, from rupture (n.). Related: Ruptured; rupturing. Ruptured duck (1945) was U.S. GI's dismissive
term (based on its design) for the discharge button they were awarded.


rural (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French rural (14c.), from Latin ruralis of the countryside, from rus (genitive
ruris) open land, country, from PIE *reue- (1) to open; space (see room (n.)).In early examples,
there is usually little or no difference between the meanings of rural and rustic, but in later use
the tendency is to employ rural when the idea of locality (country scenes, etc.) is prominent, and
rustic when there is a suggestion of the more primitive qualities or manners naturally attaching to
country life. [OED]  Related: Rurally.


rurban (adj.)

1918, a blend of rural and urban coined in reference to areas that have elements of both.


Ruritanian (adj.)

utopian, 1896, from Ruritania, name of an imaginary kingdom in The Prisoner of Zenda (1894) by
Anthony Hope (1863-1933), who coined it from Latin rus (genitive ruris) country (see rural) +
Latinate ending -itania (compare Mauritania).


ruse (n.)

early 15c., dodging movements of a hunted animal; 1620s, a trick, from Old French ruse, reuse
diversion, switch in flight; trick, jest (14c.), back-formed noun from reuser to dodge, repel,
retreat; deceive, cheat, from Latin recusare deny, reject, oppose, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + causari plead as a reason, object, allege, from causa reason, cause (see cause (n.)). It
also has been proposed that the French word may be from Latin rursus backwards, or a Vulgar Latin
form of refusare. Johnson calls it, A French word neither elegant nor necessary. The verb ruse was
used in Middle English.


rush (n.2)

a hasty driving forward, late 14c., from rush (v.). Sense of mass migration of people (especially to
a gold field) is from 1848, American English. Football/rugby sense from 1857. Meaning surge of
pleasure is from 1960s. Rush hour first recorded 1888. Rush order from 1896.


rush (v.)

mid-14c. (implied in rushing), to drive back or down, from Anglo-French russher, from Old French
ruser to dodge, repel (see ruse). Meaning to do something quickly is from 1650s; transitive sense of
to hurry up (someone or something) is from 1850. U.S. Football sense originally was in rugby (1857).
Fraternity/sorority sense is from 1896 (originally it was what the fraternity did to the student);
from 1899 as a noun in this sense. Earlier it was a name on U.S. campuses for various tests of
strength or athletic skill between freshmen and sophomores as classes (1860).


rush (n.1)

plant growing in marshy ground, Old English resc, earlier risc, from Proto-Germanic *rusk-
(cognates: Middle Low German rusch, Middle High German rusch, German Rausch, West Frisian risk,
Dutch rusch), from PIE *rezg- to plait, weave, wind (cognates: Latin restis cord, rope).    Old
French rusche probably is from a Germanic source. Used for making torches and finger rings, also
strewn on floors when visitors arrived; it was attested a type of something of no value from c.1300.
See OED for spelling variations.


rusk (n.)

light, crisp bits of bread or biscuit, 1590s, from Spanish or Portuguese rosca roll, twist of bread,
literally coil, anything round and spiral, of unknown origin, perhaps from a pre-Latin Iberian word.


Russell

masc. proper name, from Old French rous-el, diminutive of rous red, used as a personal name. See
russet.


russet (n.)

mid-13c., cloth of reddish-brown color, also (early 15c.) the color of this, from Old French
rousset, from rosset (adj.) reddish, diminutive of ros, rous red, from Latin russus, which is
related to ruber red, from PIE *reudh- red (see red (adj.1)). As an adjective from late 14c. The
word was applied to a type of apples first in 1620s, to a type of pears 1725.


Russia

1530s, from Medieval Latin Russi the people of Russia, from Rus, the native name of the people and
the country (source of Arabic Rus, Medieval Greek Rhos), originally the name of a group of Swedish
merchant/warriors who established themselves around Kiev 9c. and founded the original Russian
principality; perhaps from Ruotsi, the Finnish name for Sweden, from Old Norse Ro&#254;rslandi, the
land of rowing, old name of Roslagen, where the Finns first encountered the Swedes. This is from Old
Norse ro&#240;r steering oar, from Proto-Germanic *rothra- rudder, from PIE *rot-ro-, from root
*ere- (1) to row (see row (v.)).    Derivation from the IE root for red, in reference to hair color,
is considered less likely. Russian city-states were founded and ruled by Vikings and their
descendants. The Russian form of the name, Rossiya, appears to be from Byzantine Greek Rhosia.
Russification is from 1842.


Russian (n.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin Russianus, from Russia (see Russia). Slang or colloquial Russki Russian
(1858) is from Russian Russkiy. Russian roulette attested from 1937. Russian dressing for salads is
from 1915.


Russo-

word-forming element meaning pertaining to Russia, Russians, or the Russian language, from comb.
form of Medieval Latin Russi (plural) the Russians (see Russia).


rust (v.)

early 13c., from rust (n.). Transitive sense cause to rust is from 1590s. Related: Rusted; rusting.


rust (n.)

red oxide of iron, Old English rust rust; moral canker, related to rudu redness, from Proto-Germanic
*rusta- (cognates: Frisian rust, Old High German and German rost, Middle Dutch ro(e)st), from PIE
*reudh-s-to- (cognates: Lithuanian rustas brownish, rudeti to rust; Latin robigo, Old Church
Slavonic ruzda rust), from root *reudh- red (see red (adj.1)).    As a plant disease, attested from
mid-14c. Rust Belt decayed urban industrial areas of mid-central U.S. (1984) was popularized, if not
coined, by Walter Mondale's presidential campaign.


rustic (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin rusticus of the country, rural; country-like, plain, simple, rough, coarse,
awkward, from rus (genitive ruris) open land, country (see rural). Noun meaning a country person,
peasant is from 1550s (also in classical Latin). Related: Rustical (early 15c.).


rusticate (v.)

1650s, from Latin rusticatus, past participle of rusticarti to live in the country (see
rustication). Related: Rusticated; rusticating.


rustication (n.)

1620s, to reside in the country, back-formation from rustication, or else from Latin rusticationem
(nominative rusticatio) act or fact of living in the country, noun of action from past participle
stem of rusticari live or stay in the country, from rusticus (see rustic). Meaning send into the
country is from 1714.


rusticity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French rusticite (15c.), from Latin rusticitatem (nominative rusticitas) country
life, from rusticus (see rustic (adj.)).


rustle (v.)

to emit soft, rapid sounds, late 14c. (implied in rustling), of uncertain origin, perhaps imitative
(compare Middle Low German ruschen, Middle Dutch ruusscen, German rauschen to rustle). Related:
Rustled; rustling. Meaning steal (especially cattle) first attested 1882, probably from earlier
American English slang sense of move about vigorously (1844), perhaps a separate word, compounded
from rush and hustle.


rustle (n.)

1759, from rustle (v.).


rustler (n.)

1820, one who rustles, agent noun from rustle (v.). American English meaning cattle thief is from
1882.


rusty (adj.)

Old English rustig; see rust (n.) + -y (2). Cognate with Frisian roastich, Middle Dutch roestich,
Dutch roestig, Old High German rostag, German rostig. In the 16th and 17th centuries frequently used
as a term of general disparagement [OED]. Of bodily skills, impaired by neglect, from c.1500; of
mental qualities, accomplishments, etc., first attested 1796.


rut (n.1)

narrow track worn or cut in the ground, 1570s, probably from Middle English route (see route (n.));
though OED finds this improbable. Metaphoric meaning narrow, monotonous routine; habitual mode of
behavior first attested 1839.


rut (n.2)

annually recurring sexual excitement in animals; animal mating season (originally of deer), early
15c., from Old French rut, ruit, from Late Latin rutigum (nominative rugitus) a bellowing, from past
participle of Latin rugire to bellow, from PIE imitative root *reu-. The verb is recorded from early
15c. Related: Rutting.


rutabaga (n.)

1799, from Swedish dialectal (West G&ouml;tland) rotabagge, from rot root (see root (n.)) + bagge
bag (see bag (n.)). Slang meaning dollar is from 1940s.


Ruth

fem. proper name, biblical ancestor of David, from Hebrew Ruth, probably a contraction of reuth
companion, friend, fellow woman.


ruth (n.)

sorrow for the misery of another; repentance, regret, c.1200, ruthe, from Old Norse hrygg&eth; ruth,
sorrow, from hryggr sorrowful, grieved (see rue (v.)) + Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho
(see -th (2)). Or else formed in English from reuwen to rue on the model of true/truth, etc. The Old
English word was rue (n.2).


Ruthenian (adj.)

1850, of or pertaining to the Ukrainian people (earlier Ruthene, 1540s), from Medieval Latin Rutheni
the Little Russians, a derivative of Russi (see Russia). For consonant change, compare Medieval
Latin Prut(h)eni, from Prussi Prussians. Another word in the same sense was Russniak.


ruthenium (n.)

metallic element, 1845, named by Russian chemist Karl Klauss, from a name proposed earlier (1828) in
reference to a metal extracted from ores from the Ural Mountains of Russia (see Ruthenian).


ruthless (adj.)

early 14c., from reuthe pity, compassion (see ruth) + -less. Ruthful (early 13c.) has fallen from
use since late 17c. except as a deliberate archaism. Related: Ruthlessly; ruthlessness.


Ruy Lopez (n.)

type of chess opening, 1876, from Ruy L&oacute;pez de Segura (fl. 1560), Spanish bishop and writer
on chess, who developed it.


RV (n.)

short for recreational vehicle, by 1967.


Rwanda

African nation, named for indigenous people there, whose word for themselves is of unknown origin.


rye (n.)

Old English ryge, from Proto-Germanic *ruig (cognates: Old Saxon roggo, Old Norse rugr, Old Frisian
rogga, Middle Dutch rogghe, Old High German rocko, German Roggen), related to or from Balto-Slavic
words (such as Old Church Slavonic ru&#382;i, Russian rozh' rye; Lithuanian rugys grain of rye,
plural rugiai), from a European PIE root *wrughyo- rye. Meaning whiskey (made from rye) first
attested 1835. Rye bread attested from mid-15c.


