&#039;s

suffix forming the possessive singular case of most Modern English nouns; its use gradually was
extended in Middle English from Old English -es, the most common genitive inflection of masculine
and neuter nouns (such as d&aelig;g day, genitive d&aelig;ges day's).    Old English also had
genitives in -e, -re, -an, as well as mutation-genitives (boc book, plural bec), and the -es form
never was used in plural (where -a, -ra, -na prevailed), thus avoiding the verbal ambiguity of words
like kings'.    In Middle English, both the possessive singular and the common plural forms were
regularly spelled es, and when the e was dropped in pronunciation and from the written word, the
habit grew up of writing an apostrophe in place of the lost e in the possessive singular to
distinguish it from the plural. Later the apostrophe, which had come to be looked upon as the sign
of the possessive, was carried over into the plural, but was written after the s to differentiate
that form from the possessive singular. By a process of popular interpretation, the 's was supposed
to be a contraction for his, and in some cases the his was actually restored. [Samuel C. Earle, et
al, Sentences and their Elements, New York: Macmillan, 1911]    As a suffix forming some adverbs, it
represents the genitive singular ending of Old English masculine and neuter nouns and some
adjectives.


-s (1)

suffix forming almost all Modern English plural nouns, gradually extended in Middle English from Old
English -as, the nominative plural and accusative plural ending of certain strong masculine nouns
(such as d&aelig;g day, nominative/accusative plural dagas days). The commonest Germanic declension,
traceable back to the original PIE inflection system, it is also the source of the Dutch -s plurals
and (by rhotacism) Scandinavian -r plurals (such as Swedish dagar).    Much more uniform today than
originally; Old English also had a numerous category of weak nouns that formed their plurals in -an,
and other strong nouns that formed plurals with -u. Quirk and Wrenn, in their Old English grammar,
estimate that 45 percent of the nouns a student will encounter will be masculine, nearly four-fifths
of them with genitive singular -es and nominative/accusative plural in -as. Less than half, but
still the largest chunk.    The triumphs of -'s possessives and -s plurals represent common patterns
in language: using only a handful of suffixes to do many jobs (such as -ing), and the most common
variant squeezing out the competition. To further muddy the waters, it's been extended in slang
since 1936 to singulars (such as ducks, sweets, babes) as an affectionate or diminutive suffix.
Old English single-syllable collectives (sheep, folk) as well as weights, measures, and units of
time did not use -s. The use of it in these cases began in Middle English, but the older custom is
preserved in many traditional dialects (ten pound of butter; more than seven year ago; etc.).


-s (2)

third person singular present indicative suffix of verbs, it represents Old English -es, -as, which
began to replace -e&eth; in Northumbrian 10c., and gradually spread south until by Shakespeare's
time it had emerged from colloquialism and -eth began to be limited to more dignified speeches.


-saurus

element used in forming dinosaur names, from Latinized comb. form of Greek sauros lizard, of unknown
origin; possibly related to saulos twisting, wavering.


-sch-

this letter group can represent five distinct sounds in English; it first was used by Middle English
writers to render Old English sc-, the pronunciation of which then simplified to -sh- (an evolution
that also took place in Middle Dutch and Middle High German). Sometimes it was miswritten for -ch-.
It also was taken in from German (schnapps) and Yiddish (schlemiel). In words derived from classical
languages, it represents Latin sch-, Greek skh- but in some of these words (such as schism) the
English spelling is a restoration and the pronunciation does not follow it.


-scope

word-forming element indicating an instrument for seeing, from Late Latin -scopium, from Greek
-skopion, from skopein to look at, examine (see scope (n.1)).


-scopy

word-forming element meaning viewing, examining, observing, from Modern Latin -scopium, from Greek
-skopion, from skopein to look at, examine (see scope (n.1)).


-ship

word-forming element meaning quality, condition; act, power, skill; office, position; relation
between, Middle English -schipe, from Old English -sciepe, Anglian -scip state, condition of being,
from Proto-Germanic *-skapaz (cognates: Old Norse -skapr, Danish -skab, Old Frisian -skip, Dutch
-schap, German -schaft), from *skap- to create, ordain, appoint, from PIE root *(s)kep- (see shape
(v.)).


-sis

suffix in Greek-derived nouns denoting action, process, state, condition, from Greek -sis, which is
identical in meaning with Latin -entia, English -ing (1).


-sk

reflexive suffix in words of Danish origin (such as bask, literally to bathe oneself), contracted
from Old Norse sik, reflexive pronoun corresponding to Gothic sik, Old High German sih, German sich
himself, herself, itself, from PIE root *s(w)e- (source of Latin se himself; see idiom).


-some (1)

word-forming element used in making adjectives from nouns or adjectives (and sometimes verbs) and
meaning tending to; causing; to a considerable degree, from Old English -sum, identical with som
(see some). Cognate with Old Frisian -sum, German -sam, Old Norse -samr; also related to same.


-some (2)

suffix added to numerals meaning a group of (that number), as in twosome, from pronoun use of Old
English sum some (see some). Originally a separate word used with the genitive plural (as in sixa
sum six-some); the inflection disappeared in Middle English and the pronoun was absorbed. Use of
some with a number meaning approximately also was in Old English.


-some (3)

word-forming element meaning the body, Modern Latin, from Greek soma the body (see somato-).


-sophy

word-forming element meaning knowledge, from Old French -sophie, from Latin -sophia, from Greek
-sophia, from sophia skill, wisdom, knowledge (see Sophia).


-stan

place-name element in Afghanistan, Pakistan, etc., from Persian -stan country, from Indo-Iranian
*stanam place, literally where one stands, from PIE *sta-no-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand
(see stet).


-stat

word-forming element used in making names of devices for stabilizing or regulating (such as
thermostat), from Greek statos standing, stationary, from PIE *ste-to-, suffixed form of root *sta-
to stand (see stet). First used in heliostat an instrument for causing the sun to appear stationary
(1742).


-ster

Old English -istre, from Proto-Germanic *-istrijon, feminine agent suffix used as the equivalent of
masculine -ere (see -er (1)). Also used in Middle English to form nouns of action (meaning a person
who ...) without regard for gender.    The genderless agent noun use apparently was a broader
application of the original feminine suffix, beginning in the north of England, but linguists
disagree over whether this indicates female domination of weaving and baking trades, as represented
in surnames such as Webster, Baxter, Brewster, etc. (though spinster probably carries an originally
female ending). Also whitester one who bleaches cloth. In Modern English, the suffix has been
productive in forming derivative nouns (gamester, punster, etc.).


s&#039;mores

snack treat, 1937, from childish contraction of some more, as in I'd like some more of those. S'more
as a contraction is recorded by 1887.


S.O.L.

initialism (acronym) from shit out of luck (though sometimes euphemised), 1917, World War I military
slang. Applicable to everything from death to being late for mess [R. Lord, Captain Boyd's Battery
A.E.F.]


S.P.Q.R.

the insignia of Rome, from Latin Senatus Populusque Romanus the Senate and People of Rome.


S.T.D.

1975 as an abbreviation of sexually transmitted disease. Earlier it was an abbreviation of Latin
Sacrosanctae Theologiae Doctor Doctor of Sacred Theology.


S.W.A.T.

also SWAT, 1968, acronym said to be for Special Weapons and Tactics squad or team; or Special
Weapons Attack Team.


s/he (pron.)

artificial genderless pronoun, attested from 1977; from he + she.


Saar

river in western Germany, from PIE root *ser- (2) to run, flow (see serum).


Sabaoth (n.)

early 14c., from Late Latin, from Greek Sabaoth, rendering Hebrew tzebhaoth hosts, armies, plural of
tzabha army, from tzaba he waged war, he served. A word translated in English in the Old Testament
by the phrase the Lord of Hosts, but originally left untranslated in the New Testament and in the Te
Deum in the designation Lord of Sabaoth; often confused with sabbath.


sabaton (n.)

type of armored foot-covering, also sabbaton, early 14c., ultimately from Proven&#231;al sabato,
equivalent of French savate (see sabotage (n.)).


sabbat (n.)

witches' sabbath, 1650s, special application of the French form of sabbath.


Sabbatarian (n.)

1610s, a Christian unusually strict about Sabbath observation, from Latin Sabbatarius (adj.), from
Sabbatum (see Sabbath). Meaning member of a Christian sect which maintained the Sabbath should be
observed on the seventh day is attested from 1640s; earlier sabbatary (1590s). Related:
Sabbatartianism.


Sabbath (n.)

Old English sabat Saturday as a day of rest, as observed by the Jews, from Latin sabbatum, from
Greek sabbaton, from Hebrew shabbath, properly day of rest, from shabath he rested. Spelling with
-th attested from late 14c., not widespread until 16c.    The Babylonians regarded seventh days as
unlucky, and avoided certain activities then; the Jewish observance might have begun as a similar
custom. Among European Christians, from the seventh day of the week it began to be applied early
15c. to the first day (Sunday), though no definite law, either divine or ecclesiastical, directed
the change [Century Dictionary], but elaborate justifications have been made. The change was driven
by Christians' celebration of the Lord's resurrection on the first day of the week, a change
completed during the Reformation.    The original meaning is preserved in Spanish Sabado, Italian
Sabbato, and other languages' names for Saturday. Hungarian szombat, Rumanian simbata, French
samedi, German Samstag Saturday are from Vulgar Latin sambatum, from Greek *sambaton, a vulgar
nasalized variant of sabbaton. Sabbath-breaking attested from 1650s.


sabbatical (adj.)

1640s, of or suitable for the Sabbath, from Latin sabbaticus, from Greek sabbatikos of the Sabbath
(see Sabbath). Noun meaning a year's absence granted to researchers (originally one year in seven,
to university professors) is from 1934, short for sabbatical year, etc., first recorded 1886 (the
thing itself is attested from 1880, at Harvard), related to sabbatical year (1590s) in Mosaic law,
the seventh year, in which land was to remain untilled and debtors and slaves released.


Sabean (n.)

inhabitant of the region of Arabia now known as Yemen, from Latin Sabaeus, from Greek Sabaios the
people of Saba, the region's capital city, from Arabic Saba'. In ancient times it was an important
transit point for spices, perfumes, precious stones, etc., imported to Europe from India.


saber (n.)

type of single-edged sword, 1670s, from French sabre heavy, curved sword (17c.), alteration of sable
(1630s), from German Sabel, S&#228;bel, probably ultimately from Hungarian szablya saber, literally
tool to cut with, from szabni to cut.    The Balto-Slavic words (Russian sablya, Polish szabla
sword, saber, Lithuanian shoble) perhaps also are from German. Italian sciabla seems to be directly
from Hungarian. Saber-rattling militarism is attested from 1922. Saber-toothed cat (originally
tiger) is attested from 1849.


Sabian (n.)

an adherent of a religious sect mentioned thrice in the Qu'ran (in which they are classified with
Christians, and Jews as true believers worth of toleration by Muslims), 1610s, from Arabic, of
uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1748.    Perhaps the reference is to a Gnostic sect akin to
the later Mand&aelig;ans (if the word derives, as some think it does, from Arabic ch'bae to baptize,
Aramaic tzebha he dipped, dyed); but it has the appearance of derivation from the Semitic root of
Hebrew tzabha host (see Sabaoth), and as the Sabians were thought in the Middle Ages to have been
star-worshippers, it was interpreted as referring to the host of heaven. Related: Sabaism.


Sabin

in reference to polio vaccine, 1955, from name of Russian-born U.S. microbiologist Albert B. Sabin
(1906-1993).


Sabine (adj.)

pertaining to a people in ancient Italy, late 14c., from Latin Sabinus (in poetic Latin often
Sabellus), perhaps literally of its own kind and connected to root of Sanskrit sabha gathering of
village community, Russian sebr neighbor, friend, Gothic sibja, Old High German sippa blood-
relationship, peace, alliance, Old English sibb relationship; peace; see sibling).


sable (n.1)

fur or pelt of the European sable (Martes zibellina), early 15c., from Middle French sable (also
martre sable sable martin), in reference to the mammal or its fur, borrowed in Old French from
Germanic (Middle Dutch sabel, Middle Low German sabel, Middle High German zobel), ultimately from a
Slavic source (compare Russian, Czech sobol, Polish sob&oacute;l, the name of the animal), which
itself is borrowed from an East-Asiatic language [Klein], but Russian sources (such as Vasmer) find
none of the proposed candidates satisfactory.


sable (n.2)

black as a heraldic color, early 14c., commonly identified with sable (n.1), but the animal's fur is
brown and this may be a different word of unknown origin; or it might reflect a medieval custom
(unattested) of dyeing sable fur black. As an adjective from late 14c. Emblematic of mourning or
grief from c.1600; c.1800 as black with reference to Africans and their descendants, often with mock
dignity.


sabotage (n.)

1907 (from 1903 as a French word in English), from French sabotage, from saboter to sabotage,
bungle, literally walk noisily, from sabot wooden shoe (13c.), altered (by association with Old
French bot boot) from Middle French savate old shoe, from an unidentified source that also produced
similar words in Old Proven&ccedil;al, Portuguese, Spanish (zapata), Italian (ciabatta), Arabic
(sabbat), and Basque (zapata).    In French, and at first in English, the sense of deliberately and
maliciously destroying property originally was in reference to labor disputes, but the oft-repeated
story (as old as the record of the word in English) that the modern meaning derives from strikers'
supposed tactic of throwing shoes into machinery is not supported by the etymology. Likely it was
not meant as a literal image; the word was used in French in a variety of bungling senses, such as
to play a piece of music badly. This, too, was the explanation given in some early usages.
SABOTAGE [chapter heading] The title we have prefixed seems to mean scamping work. It is a device
which, we are told, has been adopted by certain French workpeople as a substitute for striking. The
workman, in other words, purposes to remain on and to do his work badly, so as to annoy his
employer's customers and cause loss to his employer. [The Liberty Review, January 1907]   <hr />
You may believe that sabotage is murder, and so forth, but it is not so at all. Sabotage means
giving back to the bosses what they give to us. Sabotage consists in going slow with the process of
production when the bosses go slow with the same process in regard to wages. [Arturo M. Giovannitti,
quoted in report of the Sagamore Sociological Conference, June 1907]   <hr />   In English,
malicious mischief would appear to be the nearest explicit definition of sabotage, which is so much
more expressive as to be likely of adoption into all languages spoken by nations suffering from this
new force in industry and morals. Sabotage has a flavor which is unmistakable even to persons
knowing little slang and no French .... [Century Magazine, November 1910]


sabotage (v.)

1912, from sabotage (n). Related: Sabotaged; sabotaging.


saboteur (n.)

1912 (from 1909 as a French word in English), a borrowing of the French agent noun from sabotage
(see sabotage (n.)).


Sabra (n.)

Jew born in Palestine (or, after 1948, Israel), 1945, from Modern Hebrew sabrah, literally prickly
pear.


sabre (n.)

see saber.


Sabrina

fem. proper name, personified as a nymph by Milton in Comus (1634), from a Welsh tale of a maiden
drowned in the river Severn by her stepmother, a legend found in Geoffrey of Monmouth and Giraldus
Cambrensis. The name appears to be the Romanized form of the name of the River Severn (Welsh Hafren,
Habren), which is Celtic and of unknown origin; it perhaps means boundary. Sabrina neckline is from
the 1954 film Sabrina starring Audrey Hepburn.


sabulous (adj.)

sandy, 1630s, from Latin sabulosus, from sabulum coarse sand (see sand (n.)).


sac (n.)

biological pocket, 1741, from French sac, from Latin saccus bag (see sack (n.1)).


Sac

central Algonquian people who lived near the upper Mississippi before the Black Hawk War of 1832,
from French Canadian Saki, probably a shortened borrowing of Ojibwa (Algonquian) /osa:ki:/,
literally person of the outlet (of the Saginaw River, which itself contains their name, and means
literally in the Sauk country).


Sacagawea

also Sacajawea, name of the Shoshoni woman who accompanied the Lewis &amp; Clark expedition.  She
had been a captive among the Hidatsas (a Siouan people), and her Hidatsa name was tsaka'aka wi'a,
lit. 'bird woman' (Hartley, 2002). Her Shoshoni name, rendered as Sacajawea and translated 'boat
launcher,' may have been a folk-etymological transformation of the Hidatsa term (Shaul, 1972).
[Bright]    Her image appeared on U.S. dollar coins from 2000.


saccade (n.)

1705, from French saccade a jerk, from obsolete saquer to shake, pull, dialectal variant of Old
French sachier, ultimately from Latin saccus sack (see sack (n.1)). Related: Saccadic.


saccharin (n.)

white crystalline compound used as a sugar substitute, 1885, from German, coined 1879 by Russian-
born chemist Constantin Fahlberg (1850-1910), who discovered it by accident, from Latin saccharon
(see saccharine). Marketed from 1887 as saccharine.


saccharine (adj.)

1670s, of or like sugar, from Medieval Latin saccharum sugar, from Latin saccharon sugar, from Greek
sakkharon, from Pali sakkhara, from Sanskrit sarkara gravel, grit (see sugar). Metaphoric sense of
overly sweet first recorded 1841. For the sugar substitute, see saccharin.


sacerdotal (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French sacerdotal and directly from Latin sacerdotalis of or pertaining to a
priest, from sacerdos (genitive sacerdotis) priest, literally offerer of sacrifices, from sacer holy
(see sacred) + stem of dare to give (see date (n.1)).


sachem (n.)

chief of an American Indian tribe, 1620s, from Narragansett (Algonquian) sachim chief, ruler,
cognate with Abenaki sangman, Delaware sakima, Micmac sakumow, Penobscot sagumo. Applied jocularly
to a prominent member of any society from 1680s; specific political use in U.S. is from 1890, from
its use as the title of the 12 high officials of the Tammany Society of New York.


sachet (n.)

small perfumed bag, 1838, from French sachet (12c.), diminutive of sac (see sac). A reborrowing of a
word that had been used 15c. in the sense small bag, wallet.


sack (n.1)

large bag, Old English sacc (West Saxon), sec (Mercian), s&aelig;c (Old Kentish) large cloth bag,
also sackcloth, from Proto-Germanic *sakkiz (cognates: Middle Dutch sak, Old High German sac, Old
Norse sekkr, but Gothic sakkus probably is directly from Greek), an early borrowing from Latin
saccus (also source of Old French sac, Spanish saco, Italian sacco), from Greek sakkos, from Semitic
(compare Hebrew saq sack).    The wide spread of the word is probably due to the Biblical story of
Joseph, in which a sack of corn figures (Gen. xliv). Baseball slang sense of a base is attested from
1913. Slang meaning bunk, bed is from 1825, originally nautical. The verb meaning go to bed is
recorded from 1946. Sack race attested from 1805.


sack (n.2)

a dismissal from work, 1825, from sack (n.1), perhaps from the notion of the worker going off with
his tools in a bag; the original formula was to give (someone) the sack. It is attested earlier in
French (on luy a donn&eacute; son sac, 17c.) and Dutch (iemand de zak geven).


sack (n.4)

sherry, 1530s, alteration of French vin sec dry wine, from Latin siccus dry (see siccative).


sack (v.1)

to plunder, 1540s, from Middle French sac, in the phrase mettre &agrave; sac put it in a bag, a
military leader's command to his troops to plunder a city (parallel to Italian sacco, with the same
range of meaning), from Vulgar Latin *saccare to plunder, originally to put plundered things into a
sack, from Latin saccus bag (see sack (n.1)). The notion is probably of putting booty in a bag.


sack (n.3)

plunder; act of plundering, the plundering of a city or town after storming and capture, 1540s, from
French sac pillage, plunder, from Italian sacco (see sack (v.1)).


sack (v.2)

put in a bag, late 14c., from sack (n.1). Related: Sacked; sacking.


sack (v.4)

type of U.S. football play, 1969, from sack (v.1) in the sense of to plunder or sack (v.2) on the
notion of put in a bag. As a noun from 1972.


sack (v.3)

dismiss from work, 1841, from sack (n.2). Related: Sacked; sacking.


sackbut (n.)

medieval wind instrument, c.1500, from French saquebute, a bass trumpet with a slide like a
trombone; presumably identical with Old North French saqueboute (14c.), a lance with an iron hook
for pulling down mounted men, said to be from Old North French saquier to pull, draw + bouter to
thrust, from Germanic *buton (see butt (v.)). Originally in English with many variant spellings,
including sagbutt, shakbott, shagbush.    In Dan. iii:5, used wrongly to translate Aramaic sabbekha,
name of a stringed instrument (translated correctly in Septuagint as sambuke, and in Vulgate as
sambuca, both names of stringed instruments, and probably ultimately cognate with the Aramaic word).
The error began with Coverdale (1535), who evidently thought it was a wind instrument and rendered
it with shawm; the Geneva translators, evidently following Coverdale, chose sackbut because it
sounded like the original Aramaic word, and this was followed in KJV and Revised versions.


sackcloth (n.)

penitential or grieving garb, late 13c., literally cloth of which sacks are made, from sack (n.1) +
cloth. In the Biblical sense it was of goats' or camels' hair, the coarsest possible clothing.


sacral (adj.)

1767, in anatomy, of or pertaining to the sacrum, from Modern Latin sacralis. In anthropology,
pertaining to religious rites, 1882, from Latin sacrum sacred thing, rite (see sacred). Related:
sacralization.


sacrament (n.)

outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace, also the eucharist, c.1200, from Old French
sacrament consecration; mystery (12c., Modern French sacrement) and directly from Latin sacramentum
a consecrating (also source of Spanish sacramento, German Sakrament, etc.), from sacrare to
consecrate (see sacred); a Church Latin loan-translation of Greek mysterion (see mystery).
Meaning a holy mystery in English is from late 14c. The seven sacraments are baptism, penance,
confirmation, holy orders, the Eucharist, matrimony, and anointing of the sick (extreme unction).


sacramental (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French sacramental or directly from Late Latin sacramentalis, from sacramentum
(see sacrament). As a noun, religious practice or object, mid-15c.


Sacramento

California city, settled 1839, named for its river (1808), from Spanish sacramento, in honor of the
Holy Sacrament (see sacrament).


sacre bleu (interj.)

stereotypical French oath, 1869, from French sacr&eacute; bleu, literally holy blue, a euphemism for
sacr&eacute; Dieu (1768), holy God. From Old French sacrer, from Latin sacrare (see sacred).


sacred (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from obsolete verb sacren to make holy (c.1200), from Old
French sacrer consecrate, anoint, dedicate (12c.) or directly from Latin sacrare to make sacred,
consecrate; hold sacred; immortalize; set apart, dedicate, from sacer (genitive sacri) sacred,
dedicated, holy, accursed, from Old Latin saceres, from PIE root *sak- to sanctify. Buck groups it
with Oscan sakrim, Umbrian sacra and calls it a distinctive Italic group, without any clear outside
connections. Related: Sacredness.    Nasalized form is sancire make sacred, confirm, ratify, ordain.
Sacred cow object of Hindu veneration, is from 1891; figurative sense of one who must not be
criticized is first recorded 1910, reflecting Western views of Hinduism. Sacred Heart the heart of
Jesus as an object of religious veneration is from 1765.


sacrifice (n.)

late 13c., offering of something (especially a life) to a deity as an act of propitiation or homage;
mid-14c., that which is offered in sacrifice, from Old French sacrifise sacrifice, offering (12c.),
from Latin sacrificium, from sacrificus performing priestly functions or sacrifices, from sacra
sacred rites (properly neuter plural of sacer sacred; see sacred) + root of facere to do, perform
(see factitious).    Latin sacrificium is glossed in Old English by ansegdniss. Sense of act of
giving up one thing for another; something given up for the sake of another is first recorded 1590s.
Baseball sense first attested 1880.


sacrifice (v.)

c.1300, to offer something (to a deity, as a sacrifice), from sacrifice (n.). Meaning surrender,
give up, suffer to be lost is from 1706. Related: Sacrificed; sacrificing. Agent noun forms include
sacrificer, sacrificator (both 16c., the latter from Latin); and sacrificulist (17c.).


sacrificial (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin sacrificium a sacrifice (see sacrifice (n.)) + -al (1). Related: Sacrificially.


sacrilege (n.)

c.1300, crime of stealing what is consecrated to God, from Old French sacrilege (12c.), from Latin
sacrilegium temple robbery, a stealing of sacred things, from sacrilegus stealer of sacred things,
noun use of adjective, from phrase sacrum legere to steal sacred things, from sacrum sacred object
(from neuter singular of sacer sacred; see sacred) + legere take, pick up (see lecture (n.)). Second
element is not from religion. Transferred sense of profanation of anything held sacred is attested
from late 14c.


sacrilegious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin sacrilegiosum, from sacrilegium (see sacrilege). As a noun, one who commits a
sacrilege, early 14c. Related: Sacrilegiously; sacrilegiousness.


sacristan (n.)

officer charged with looking after the buildings and property of a church or religious house, early
14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Medieval Latin sacristanus, from Latin sacrista, from sacer
(genitive sacri) sacred (see sacred). Compare sexton, which is a doublet.


sacristy (n.)

repository for sacred things, mid-15c., from Anglo-French sacrestie, from Medieval Latin sacrista,
from Latin sacer sacred (see sacred).


sacro-

word-forming element meaning of or involving the sacrum, the bone at the base of the spine. E.g.
sacro-iliac.


sacrosanct (adj.)

superlatively sacred or inviolable, c.1600, from Latin sacrosanctus protected by religious sanction,
consecrated with religious ceremonies, from sacro, ablative of sacrum religious sanction (from
neuter singular of sacer sacred) + sanctus, past participle of sancire make sacred (for both, see
sacred). Earlier in partially anglicized form sacro-seint (c.1500).


sacrum (n.)

bone at the base of the spine, 1753, from Late Latin os sacrum sacred bone, from Latin os bone (see
osseous) + sacrum, neuter of sacer sacred (see sacred). Said to be so called because the bone was
the part of animals that was offered in sacrifices. Translation of Greek hieron osteon. Greek hieros
also can mean strong, and some sources suggest the Latin is a mistranslation of Galen, who was
calling it the strong bone.


sad (adj.)

Old English s&aelig;d sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of,
from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;r, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High
German sat, German satt, Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, sated, full), from PIE *seto- (cognates: Latin
satis enough, sufficient, Greek hadros thick, bulky, Old Church Slavonic sytu, Lithuanian sotus
satiated, Old Irish saith satiety, sathach sated), from root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Sanskrit
a-sinvan insatiable).    Sense development passed through the meaning heavy, ponderous (i.e. full
mentally or physically), and weary, tired of before emerging c.1300 as unhappy. An alternative
course would be through the common Middle English sense of steadfast, firmly established, fixed (as
in sad-ware tough pewter vessels) and serious to grave. In the main modern sense, it replaced Old
English unrot, negative of rot cheerful, glad.    Meaning very bad is from 1690s. Slang sense of
inferior, pathetic is from 1899; sad sack is 1920s, popularized by World War II armed forces
(specifically by cartoon character invented by Sgt. George Baker, 1942, and published in U.S. Armed
Forces magazine Yank), probably a euphemistic shortening of common military slang phrase sad sack of
shit.


saddelry (n.)

mid-15c., occupation or trade of a saddler, from saddler + -y (1). From 1841 as place where saddles
are made or sold.


sadden (v.)

to make sorrowful, 1620s, from sad + -en (1). Earlier verb was simply sade, from Old English sadian,
which also could be the immediate source of the modern verb. Intransitive meaning to become sad is
from 1718. Related: Saddened; saddening.


saddle (n.)

Old English sadol seat for a rider, from Proto-Germanic *sathulaz (cognates: Old Norse
s&ouml;&eth;ull, Old Frisian sadel, Dutch zadel, zaal, German Sattel saddle), from PIE *sed- (1) to
sit (cognates: Latin sedere to sit, Old Church Slavonic sedlo saddle; see sedentary). Figurative
phrase in the saddle in an active position of management is attested from 1650s. Saddle stitch (n.)
was originally in bookbinding (1887).


saddle (v.)

Old English sadolian to put a riding saddle on; see saddle (n.). The meaning to load with a burden
is first recorded 1690s. Related: Saddled; saddling.


saddle-tree (n.)

framework of a saddle, early 15c., from saddle (n.) + tree (n.) in the wood sense.


saddleback (n.)

1540s and thereafter in various senses (of landforms, oysters, etc.), from saddle (n.) + back (n.).


saddlebag (n.)

also saddle-bag, 1774, from saddle (n.) + bag (n.).


saddler (n.)

maker of saddles, c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), agent noun from saddle (v.).


Sadducee (n.)

Old English, from Late Latin Sadducaei (plural), from Greek Zaddoukaios, an inexact transliteration
of Hebrew tzedoqi, from personal name Tzadhoq Zadok (2 Sam. viii:17), the high priest from whom the
priesthood of the captivity claimed descent. According to Josephus, the sect denied the resurrection
of the dead and the existence of angels and spirits; but later historians regard them as more the
political party of the priestly class than a sect per se. Related: Sadducean.


Sadie

fem. proper name, a familiar form of Sarah. Sadie Hawkins Day (1939) is from name of a character in
U.S. newspaper cartoon strip Li'l Abner, by Al Capp (1909-1979); in reference to a day in early
November in which women take the lead in romantic matters.


sadism (n.)

love of cruelty, 1888, from French sadisme, from the name of Count Donatien A.F. de Sade
(1740-1815). Not a marquis, though usually now called one, he was notorious for cruel sexual
practices he described in his novels.


sadist (n.)

1892, from sadism + -ist.


sadistic (adj.)

1892, after German sadistisch; see sadism. Related: Sadistically.


sadly (adv.)

c.1300, heavily, also solidly, from sad + -ly (2). Meaning sorrowfully is mid-14c.


sadness (n.)

early 14c., seriousness, from sad + -ness. Meaning sorrowfulness is c.1500, perhaps c.1400.


sado-masochism (n.)

also sadomasochism, 1916, from comb. form of sadism + masochism. Abbreviation S &amp; M first
attested 1965. An earlier word for sexualities that focused on violence was algolagnia (1900),
Modern Latin, coined in German in 1892 by German doctor and paranormalist Albert von Schrenck-
Notzing (1862-1929) from Greek algos pain + lagneia lust.


sado-masochist (n.)

also sadomasochist, 1919; from comb. form of sadist + masochist. Related: Sadomasochistic; sado-
masochistic. Earlier was sadistic-masochistic (1892).


safari (n.)

1890 (attested from 1860 as a foreign word), from Swahili, literally journey, expedition, from
Arabic, literally referring to a journey, from safar journey (which itself is attested in English as
a foreign word from 1858). Used from 1920s of various articles of clothing suitable for safaris.


safe (n.)

chest for keeping food or valuables, early 15c., save, from Middle French en sauf in safety, from
sauf (see safe (adj.)). Spelling with -f- first recorded 1680s, from influence of safe (adj.).


safe (adj.)

c.1300, unscathed, unhurt, uninjured; free from danger or molestation, in safety, secure; saved
spiritually, redeemed, not damned; from Old French sauf protected, watched-over; assured of
salvation, from Latin salvus uninjured, in good health, safe, related to salus good health, saluber
healthful, all from PIE *solwos from root *sol- whole (cognates: Latin solidus solid, Sanskrit
sarvah uninjured, intact, whole, Avestan haurva- uninjured, intact, Old Persian haruva-, Greek holos
whole).    As a quasi-preposition from c.1300, on model of French and Latin cognates. From late 14c.
as rescued, delivered; protected; left alive, unkilled. Meaning not exposed to danger (of places) is
attested from late 14c.; of actions, etc., free from risk, first recorded 1580s. Meaning sure,
reliable, not a danger is from c.1600. Sense of conservative, cautious is from 1823. Paired
alliteratively with sound (adj.) from late 14c. The noun safe-conduct (late 13c.) is from Old French
sauf-conduit (13c.).


safe-keeping (n.)

early 15c., from safe (adj.) + verbal noun from keep (v.).


safecracker (n.)

also safe-cracker, 1897, from safe (n.) + agent noun from crack (v.). Originally in reference to
thieves who used dynamite.


safeguard (n.)

late 14c., protection, safety, from Middle French sauvegarde safekeeping, safeguard (13c.), from Old
French salve, sauve (fem. of sauf; see safe (adj.)) + garde a keeping (see guard (n.)). Meaning
something that offers security from danger is recorded from late 15c.


safeguard (v.)

mid-15c., from safeguard (n.). Related: Safeguarded; safeguarding.


safely (adv.)

late 13c., without risk; without harm; mid-14c., without risk of error, from safe (adj.) + -ly (2).


safety (n.)

early 14c., from Old French sauvete safety, safeguard; salvation; security, surety, earlier salvetet
(11c., Modern French sauvet&#233;), from Medieval Latin salvitatem (nominative salvitas) safety,
from Latin salvus (see safe (adj.)). Meaning trigger-lock on a gun is attested from 1881.    As a
North American football position, first recorded 1931. As a type of score against one's own team,
1881. Safety-valve, which diminishes the risk of explosion, is from 1797; figurative sense recorded
from 1818. Safety-net in literal sense (in machinery) by 1916, later of aerial circus performances
(1920s); figurative use by 1950. Safety-first as an accident-prevention slogan first recorded 1873.


safety-pin (n.)

1857, from safety + pin (n.).


saffron (n.)

c.1200, from Old French safran (12c.), from Medieval Latin safranum (cognate with Italian zafferano,
Spanish azafran), ultimately from Arabic az-za'faran, which is of unknown origin. As a color word
and an adjective, late 14c. German Safran is from French; Russian shafran' is from Arabic.


sag (v.)

late 14c., possibly from a Scandinavian source related to Old Norse sokkva to sink, or from Middle
Low German sacken to settle, sink (as dregs in wine), from denasalized derivative of Proto-Germanic
base *senkwanan to sink (see sink (v.)). A general North Sea Germanic word (compare Dutch zakken,
Swedish sacka, Danish sakke). Of body parts from 1560s; of clothes from 1590s. Related: Sagged;
sagging.


sag (n.)

1580s, in nautical use, from sag (v.). From 1727 of landforms; 1861 of wires, cables, etc.


saga (n.)

1709, an antiquarians' revival to describe the medieval prose narratives of Iceland and Norway, from
Old Norse saga saga, story, cognate with Old English sagu a saying (see saw (n.2)). Properly, a
narrative composition of Iceland or Norway in the Middle Ages, or one that has their
characteristics. Meaning long, convoluted story is from 1857.


sagacious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin sagacem (nominative sagax) of quick perception; see sagacity. Related:
Sagaciously.


sagacity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French sagacit&eacute;, from Latin sagacitatem (nominative sagacitas) keenness
of perception, quality of being acute, from sagax (genitive sagacis) of quick perception, acute,
related to sagus prophetic, sagire perceive keenly, from PIE root *sag- to track down, trace, seek
(cognates: Old English secan to seek; see seek). Also used 17c.-18c. of animals, meaning acute sense
of smell.


sagamore (n.)

king or chief among some Native American tribes, 1610s, sagamo, from Abenaki (Algonquian) zogemo
chief, ruler, from the same root as sachem.


sage (n.1)

kind of herb (Salvia officinalis), early 14c., from Old French sauge (13c.), from Latin salvia, from
salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). So called for its healing or preserving qualities (it was used to
keep teeth clean and relieve sore gums, and boiled in water to make a drink to alleviate arthritis).
In English folklore, sage, like parsley, is said to grow best where the wife is dominant. In late
Old English as salvie, directly from Latin. Compare German Salbei, also from Latin.


sage (adj.)

wise, c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sage wise, knowledgeable, learned; shrewd,
skillful (11c.), from Gallo-Roman *sabius, from Vulgar Latin *sapius, from Latin sapere have a
taste, have good taste, be wise, from PIE root *sap- to taste (see sap (n.1)). Meaning characterized
by wisdom is from 1530s. Related: Sageness.


sage (n.2)

man of profound wisdom, mid-14c., from sage (adj.). Originally applied to the Seven Sages -- Thales,
Solon, Periander, Cleobulus, Chilon, Bias, and Pittacus.


sagebrush (n.)

1850, from sage (n.1), to which it has no biological affinity, + brush (n.2). Said to be so called
for resemblance of its appearance or odor.    Sage-brush is very fair fuel, but as a vegetable it is
a distinguished failure. Nothing can abide the taste of it but the jackass and his illegitimate
child, the mule. [Mark Twain, Roughing It]


sagely (adv.)

c.1400, from sage (adj.) + -ly (2).


saggy (adj.)

1848, from sag (n.) + -y (2). Related: Saggily; sagginess.


sagittal (adj.)

shaped like or resembling an arrow, 1540s, from Modern Latin sagittalis, from Latin sagitta arrow
(see Sagittarius).


Sagittarius (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin, literally archer, properly pertaining to arrows,
from sagitta arrow, which probably is from a pre-Latin Mediterranean language. Meaning person born
under Sagittarius (properly Sagittarian) is attested from 1940. It represents a centaur drawing a
bow, but to modern observers unfamiliar with either it looks vaguely like a teapot.


sago (n.)

starch made of the piths of palms, 1570s, via Portuguese and Dutch from Malay sagu, the name of the
palm tree from which it is obtained (attested in English in this sense from 1550s). Also borrowed in
French (sagou), Spanish (sagu), German (Sago).


saguaro (n.)

type of large branching columnar cactus of the North American desert, 1856, from Mexican Spanish,
from a native name of unknown origin, perhaps from Yaqui (Sonoran).


Sahara

1610s, from Arabic &ccedil;ahra desert (plural &ccedil;ahara), according to Klein, noun use of fem.
of the adjective asharu yellowish red. Related: Saharan.


Sahel

from Arabic sahil sea coast, shore. Originally in reference to the coastal region. Related:
Sahelian.


sahib (n.)

respectful address to Europeans in India, 1670s, from Hindi or Urdu sahib master, lord, from Arabic
sahib, originally friend, companion, from sahiba he accompanied. Female form (European lady) is
memsahib.


said (adj.)

named or mentioned before, c.1300, past participle adjective from say (v.).


Saigon

southern Vietnamese city, capital of former South Vietnam, named for its river, which bears a name
of uncertain origin.


sail (n.)

Old English segl sail, veil, curtain, from Proto-Germanic *seglom (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish
segel, Old Norse segl, Old Frisian seil, Dutch zeil, Old High German segal, German Segel), of
obscure origin with no known cognates outside Germanic (Irish seol, Welsh hwyl sail are Germanic
loan-words). In some sources (Klein, OED) referred to PIE root *sek- to cut, as if meaning a cut
piece of cloth. To take the wind out of (someone's) sails (1888) is to deprive (someone) of the
means of progress, especially by sudden and unexpected action, as by one vessel sailing between the
wind and another vessel, [The Encyclopaedic Dictionary, 1888].


sail (v.)

Old English segilan travel on water in a ship; equip with a sail, from the same Germanic source as
sail (n.); cognate with Old Norse sigla, Middle Dutch seghelen, Dutch zeilen, Middle Low German
segelen, German segeln. Meaning to set out on a sea voyage, leave port is from c.1200. Related:
Sailed; sailing.


sailboat (n.)

also sail-boat, 1769, from sail (n.) + boat (n.).


sailing (n.)

Old English seglinge, verbal noun from the source of sail (v.).


sailor (n.)

c.1400, sailer, agent noun from sail (v.). Spelling with -o- arose 16c., probably by influence of
tailor, etc., and to distinguish the meaning seaman, mariner from thing that sails. It replaced much
older seaman and mariner (q.q.v.). Old English also had merefara sailor. Applied as an adjective
from 1870s to clothing styles and items based on a sailor's characteristic attire.


sain (v.)

to cross oneself; to mark with the sign of the cross, Old English segnian, from Latin signare to
sign (in Church Latin to make the sign of the Cross); see sign (n.). A common Germanic borrowing,
cognate with Old Saxon segnon, Dutch zegenen, Old High German seganon, German segnen to bless, Old
Norse signa.


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


saint (v.)

to enroll (someone) among the saints, late 14c., from saint (n.). Related: Sainted; sainting.


sainthood (n.)

1540s, from saint (n.) + -hood.


saintly (adj.)

1620s, from saint (n.) + -ly (1). Related: Saintliness.


sake (n.2)

Japanese rice liquor, 1680s, from Japanese sake, literally alcohol.


sake (n.1)

purpose, Old English sacu a cause at law, crime, dispute, guilt, from Proto-Germanic *sako affair,
thing, charge, accusation (cognates: Old Norse s&ouml;k charge, lawsuit, effect, cause, Old Frisian
seke strife, dispute, matter, thing, Dutch zaak lawsuit, cause, sake, thing, German sache thing,
matter, affair, cause), from PIE root *sag- to investigate, seek out (cognates: Old English secan,
Gothic sokjan to seek; see seek).    Much of the word's original meaning has been taken over by case
(n.1), cause (n.), and it survives largely in phrases for the sake of (early 13c.) and for _______'s
sake (c.1300, originally for God's sake), both probably are from Norse, as these forms have not been
found in Old English.


saki (n.)

see sake (n.2).


sakura

1884, from Japanese.


sal (n.)

chemical name for salt, late 14c., from Old French sal, from Latin sal (genitive salis) salt (see
salt (n.)). For sal ammoniac ammonium chloride (early 14c.), see ammonia.


sal volatile (n.)

1650s, Modern Latin, literally volatile salt (see salt (n.) + volatile); ammonium carbonate,
especially as used in reviving persons who have fainted.


salaam

Muslim greeting, 1610s, from Arabic salam (also in Urdu, Persian), literally peace (compare Hebrew
shalom); in full, (as)salam 'alaikum peace be upon you, from base of salima he was safe (compare
Islam, Muslim).


salacious (adj.)

1660s, from Latin salax (genitive salacis) lustful, probably originally fond of leaping, as in a
male animal leaping on a female in sexual advances, from salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).
Earliest form of the word in English is salacity (c.1600). Related: Salaciously; salaciousness.


salad (n.)

late 14c., from Old French salade (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *salata, literally salted, short for
herba salata salted vegetables (vegetables seasoned with brine, a popular Roman dish), from fem.
past participle of *salare to salt, from Latin sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt (n.)).    Dutch
salade, German Salat, Swedish salat, Russian salat are from Romanic languages. Salad days time of
youthful inexperience (perhaps on notion of green) is first recorded 1606 in Shakespeare and
probably owes its survival, if not its existence, to him. Salad bar first attested 1940, American
English.


Saladin

Sultan of Egypt and Syria 1174-93, in full Salah-ad-din Yusuf ibn-Ayyub (1137-1193).


salamander (n.)

mid-14c., legendary lizard-like creature that can live in fire, from Old French salamandre legendary
fiery beast, also cricket (12c.), from Latin salamandra, from Greek salamandra, probably of eastern
origin.     The application in zoology to a tailed amphibian (known natively as an eft or newt) is
first recorded 1610s. Aristotle, and especially Pliny, are responsible for the fiction of an animal
that thrives in and extinguishes fires. The eft lives in damp logs and secretes a milky substance
when threatened, but there is no obvious natural explanation its connection with the myth.    Also
used 18c. for a woman who lives chastely in the midst of temptations (after Addison), and a soldier
who exposes himself to fire in battle. To rub someone a salamander was a 19c. form of German student
drinking toast (einem einen salamander reiben). Related: Salamandrine; salamandroid.


salami (n.)

salted, flavored Italian sausage, 1852, from Italian salami, plural of salame spiced pork sausage,
from Vulgar Latin *salamen, from *salare to salt, from Latin sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt
(n.)).


salary (n.)

late 13c., compensation, payment, whether periodical, for regular service or for a specific service;
from Anglo-French salarie, Old French salaire wages, pay, reward, from Latin salarium salary,
stipend, pension, originally salt-money, soldier's allowance for the purchase of salt, noun use of
neuter of adjective salarius pertaining to salt, from sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt (n.)).
Japanese sarariman male salaried worker, literally salary-man, is from English.


salary (v.)

to pay a regular salary to, late 15c., from salary (n.). Related: Salaried, which as an adjective in
reference to positions originally was contrasted with honorary; lately with hourly.


salat (n.)

Islamic ritual prayer, from Arabic salah prayer.


sale (n.)

late Old English sala a sale, act of selling, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse sala
sale, from Proto-Germanic *salo (cognates: Old High German sala, Swedish salu, Danish salg), from
PIE root *sal- (3) to grasp, take. Sense of a selling of shop goods at lower prices than usual first
appeared 1866. Sales tax attested by 1886. Sales associate by 1946. Sales representative is from
1910.


saleable (adj.)

also salable, 1520s, from sale + -able. Related: Salability; saleability.


Salem

place mentioned in Gen. xiv:18, from Hebrew Shalem, usually said to be another word for Jerusalem
and to mean peace (compare Hebrew shalom, Arabic salaam). Common as a Baptist and Methodist
meetinghouse name, so much so that by mid-19c. it (along with Bethel and Ebenezer) had come to be
used in Britain generically to mean non-conformist chapel.


salep (n.)

1736, drug from starch or jelly made from dried tubers of orchid-like plants, from Turkish salep,
from dialectal pronunciation of Arabic thaeleb, which usually is taken to be a shortening of khasyu
'th-thaeleb, literally fox's testicles (compare native English name dogstones).


salesman (n.)

1520s, from genitive of sale (compare craftsman, tradesman) + man (n.).


salesmanship (n.)

1853, from salesman + -ship.    The modern system of salesmanship has become so much like
persecution reduced to a science, that it is quite a luxury to be allowed the use of your own
discretion, without being dragooned, by a shopkeeper's deputy, into looking at what you do not care
to see, or buying what you would not have. A man in his sane mind, with the usual organs of speech,
has a right to be treated as if he knows what he wants, and is able to ask for it. [The Literary
World, Feb. 26, 1853]


salesperson (n.)

1920, from genitive of sale + person.


saleswoman (n.)

1704, from genitive of sale + woman.


Salic (adj.)

based on or contained in the law code of the Salian Franks, 1540s, from French Salique, from
Medieval Latin Salicus, from the Salian Franks, a tribe that once lived near the Zuider Zee, the
ancestors of the Merovingian kings, literally those living near the river Sala (modern Ijssel).
Salic Law, code of law of Germanic tribes, was invoked 1316 by Philip V of France to exclude a woman
from succeeding to the throne of France (and later to combat the French claims of Edward III of
England), but the precise meaning of the passage is unclear.


salience (n.)

1836, quality of leaping; see salient (adj.) + -ence. Meaning quality of standing out is from 1849.


saliency (n.)

1660s, leaping, jumping; see salient (adj.) + -cy. From 1834 as salience.


salient (adj.)

1560s, leaping, a heraldic term, from Latin salientem (nominative saliens), present participle of
salire to leap, from PIE root *sel- (4) to jump (cognates: Greek hallesthai to leap, Middle Irish
saltraim I trample, and probably Sanskrit ucchalati rises quickly).    It was used in Middle English
as an adjective meaning leaping, skipping. The meaning pointing outward (preserved in military
usage) is from 1680s; that of prominent, striking first recorded 1840, from salient point (1670s),
which refers to the heart of an embryo, which seems to leap, and translates Latin punctum saliens,
going back to Aristotle's writings. Hence, the starting point of anything.


salient (n.)

1828, from salient (adj.).


salination (n.)

1705; see saline (adj.) -ation.


saline (adj.)

made of salt, c.1500, probably from a Latin word related to salinum salt cellar and salinae salt
pits, from sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt (n.)). Also in Middle English as a noun meaning salt
pit (13c.). Saline solution attested from 1833.


salinity (n.)

1650s; see saline + -ity.


Salisbury steak (n.)

1897, from J.H. Salisbury (1823-1905), U.S. physician and food specialist, who promoted it.
Incorrect use for hamburger traces to World War I and the deliberate attempt to purify American
English of German loan words.


Salish (n.)

self-designation of the Native American people of Montana also known as Flathead, from a term
containing -ish people. The language group that includes their tongue has been called Salishan.


saliva (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French salive, from Latin saliva spittle, of unknown origin (perhaps, as
Tucker suggests, somehow derived from the base of sallow (adj.)).


salivary (adj.)

1709, from Latin salivarius, from saliva (see saliva).


salivate (v.)

1650s, cause to produce saliva; intransitive sense from 1680s, from Latin salivatus, past participle
of salivare, from saliva (see saliva). Figurative use in reference to anticipation by 1965. Related:
Salivated; salivating.


salivation (n.)

1590s, from French salivation or directly from Latin salivationem (nominative salivatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of salivare (see salivate).


Salk

in reference to vaccine against poliomyelitis, 1954, from U.S. virologist Jonas Edward Salk
(1914-1995), who developed it.


sallow (n.)

shrubby willow plant, Old English sealh (Anglian salh), from Proto-Germanic *salhjon (cognates: Old
Norse selja, Old High German salaha, and first element in German compound Salweide), from PIE
*sal(i)k- willow (cognates: Latin salix willow, Middle Irish sail, Welsh helygen, Breton halegen
willow). French saule willow is from Frankish salha, from the Germanic root. Used in Palm Sunday
processions and decorations in England before the importing of real palm leaves began.


sallow (adj.)

Old English salo dusky, dark (related to sol dark, dirty), from Proto-Germanic *salwa- (cognates:
Middle Dutch salu discolored, dirty, Old High German salo dirty gray, Old Norse s&ouml;lr dirty
yellow), from PIE root *sal- dirty, gray (cognates: Old Church Slavonic slavojocije grayish-blue
color, Russian solovoj cream-colored). Related: Sallowness.


Sally

fem. proper name, alteration of Sarah (compare Hal from Harry, Moll from Mary, etc.). Sally Lunn
cakes (1780) supposedly named for the woman in Bath who first made them and sold them in the
streets. Sally Ann as a nickname for Salvation Army is recorded from 1927.


sally (n.)

1540s, a sudden rush, dash, or springing forth; specifically of troops from a besieged place,
attacking the besiegers, from Middle French saillie a rushing forth, noun use of fem. past
participle of saillir to leap, from Latin salire to leap (see salient (adj.)). Sally-port gate or
passage in a fortification to afford free egress to troops in making a sally is from 1640s.


sally (v.)

1540s, from sally (n.). Related: Sallied; sallying.


salmagundi (n.)

1670s, from French salmigondis (16c.), originally seasoned salt meats (compare French salmis salted
meats), from Middle French salmigondin (16c.), of uncertain origin; Watkins derives it from Latin
sal salt + condire to season, flavor. Probably related to or influenced by Old French salemine
hodgepodge of meats or fish cooked in wine, which was borrowed in Middle English as salomene (early
14c.). Figurative sense of mixture of various ingredients is from 1761; it was the title of
Washington Irving's satirical publication (1807-08). In dialect, salmon-gundy, solomon-gundy..


salmon (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem
(nominative salmo) a salmon, probably originally leaper, from salire to leap (see salient (adj.)),
though some dismiss this as folk etymology. Another theory traces it to Celtic. Replaced Old English
l&aelig;x, from PIE *lax, the more usual word for the fish (see lox). In reference to a color, from
1786.


Salmonella (n.)

1913, the genus name, coined 1900 in Modern Latin by J. Ligni&egrave;res in reference to U.S.
veterinary surgeon Daniel E. Salmon (1850-1914), who isolated a type of the bacteria in 1885.


Salome

fem. proper name, from Late Latin, from Greek Salome, related to Salomon (see Solomon).


salon (n.)

1690s, large room or apartment in a palace or great house, from French salon reception room (17c.),
from Italian salone large hall, from sala hall, from a Germanic source (compare Old English sele,
Old Norse salr hall, Old High German sal hall, house, German Saal), from Proto-Germanic *salaz, from
PIE *sel- (1) human settlement (cognates: Old Church Slavonic selo courtyard, village, obsolete
Polish siolo, Russian selo village, Lithuanian sala village).    Sense of reception room of a
Parisian lady is from 1810; meaning gathering of fashionable people first recorded 1888 (the woman
who hosts one is a salonni&egrave;re). Meaning annual exhibition of contemporary paintings and
sculpture in Paris is from its originally being held in one of the salons of the Louvre. Meaning
establishment for hairdressing and beauty care is from 1913.


saloon (n.)

1728, anglicized form of salon, and originally used interchangeable with it. Meaning large hall in a
public place for entertainment, etc. is from 1747; especially a passenger boat from 1817, also used
of railway cars furnished like drawing rooms (1842). Sense of public bar developed by 1841, American
English.


saloop (n.)

sassafras tea, variously flavored, 1712, originally a variant of salep (q.v.).


Salopian (adj.)

pertaining to Shropshire; see Shropshire.


salsa (n.)

kind of sauce, 1846; kind of dance music, 1975, from Spanish, literally sauce, from Vulgar Latin
*salsa condiment (see sauce (n.)). In American Spanish especially used of a kind of relish with
chopped-up ingredients; the music so called from its blend of Latin jazz and rock styles.


salsify (n.)

biennial plant, 1710, from French salsifis, earlier sercifi, sassify (16c.), probably from Italian
erba salsifica, from Old Italian salsifica, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Latin sal salt +
fricare to rub.


SALT (n.)

Cold War U.S.-U.S.S.R. nuclear weapons negotiations, 1968, acronym for Strategic Arms Limitation
Talks (which would make SALT talks redundant, but the last element sometimes also is understood as
treaty).


salt (n.)

Old English sealt salt (n.; also as an adjective, salty, briny), from Proto-Germanic *saltom
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Gothic salt, Dutch zout, German Salz), from PIE *sal-
salt (cognates: Greek hals salt, sea, Latin sal, Old Church Slavonic soli, Old Irish salann, Welsh
halen salt).    Modern chemistry sense is from 1790. Meaning experienced sailor is first attested
1840, in reference to the salinity of the sea. Salt was long regarded as having power to repel
spiritual and magical evil. Many metaphoric uses reflect that this was once a rare and important
resource, such as worth one's salt (1830), salt of the earth (Old English, after Matt. v:13). Belief
that spilling salt brings bad luck is attested from 16c. To be above (or below) the salt (1590s)
refers to customs of seating at a long table according to rank or honor, and placing a large salt-
cellar in the middle of the dining table.   Salt-lick first recorded 1751; salt-marsh is Old English
sealtne mersc; salt-shaker is from 1882. Salt-and-pepper of dark and light color first recorded
1915. To take something with a grain of salt is from 1640s, from Modern Latin cum grano salis.


salt (v.)

Old English sealtan, from Proto-Germanic *salto- (see salt (n.)), and in part from the noun.
Related: Salted; salting.


salt river (n.)

a tidal river, 1650s; as a proper name, used early 19c. with reference to backwoods inhabitants of
the U.S., especially Kentucky. U.S. political slang phrase to row (someone) up Salt River send
(someone) to political defeat probably owes its origin to this, as the first attested use (1828) is
in a Kentucky context.


salt water (n.)

Old English sealtera watera. As an adjective from 1520s. Salt-water taffy attested by 1886; so
called because it originally was sold at seashore resorts, especially Atlantic City, N.J. (see
taffy).


salt-box (n.)

also saltbox, receptacle for keeping salt for domestic use, 1610s, from salt (n.) + box (n.). As a
type of frame house, 1876, so called from resemblance of shape.


salt-cellar (n.)

mid-15c., from salt (n.) + saler salt-cellar (14c.), from Old French salier salt box (Modern French
sali&#232;re), from Latin salarium, noun use of adjective meaning pertaining to salt, from a
diminutive of Latin sal salt. As the connection between *saler and salt was lost, salt- was tacked
on to the beginning; second element altered on model of cellar.


saltation (n.)

a leap, a bound, 1620s, from Latin saltationem (nominative saltatio) a dancing; dance, noun of
action from past participle stem of saltare to hop, dance, frequentative of salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)).


saltine (n.)

salted flat cracker, 1907, short for saltine cracker (1894), from salt (n.) + -ine (1).


saltiness (n.)

1660s, from salty + -ness.


saltire (n.)

c.1400, an ordinary that resembles a St. Andrew's Cross on a shield or flag, consisting of a bend
dexter and a bend sinister crossing each other, from Middle French saultoir, literally stirrup, from
Medieval Latin saltatorium, properly neuter of Latin saltatorius pertaining to leaping, from salire
to leap (see salient (adj.)). The connection between a stirrup and the diagonal cross is perhaps the
two deltoid shapes that comprise the cross.


saltpeter (n.)

potassium nitrate, c.1500, earlier salpetre (early 14c.), from Old French salpetre, from Medieval
Latin sal petrae salt of rock, from Latin sal salt (see salt (n.)) + petra rock, stone (see
petrous). So called because it looks like salt encrusted on rock.


saltpetre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of saltpeter (q.v.); for ending, see -re.


salty (adj.)

mid-15c., tasting of salt, impregnated with salt, from salt (n.) + -y (2). Meaning racy is from
1866, from salt in the sense of that which gives life or pungency (1570s, originally of words or
wit). Meaning racy, sexy is from 1866. U.S. slang sense of angry, irritated is first attested 1938
(probably from similar use with regard to sailors, tough, aggressive, attested by 1920), especially
in phrase jump salty to unexpectedly become enraged. Related: Saltily.


salubrious (adj.)

1540s, from Latin salubris promoting health, healthful, from salus (genitive salutis) welfare,
health (see salute (v.)). Related: Salubriously; salubriousness.


salubrity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin salubritas, from salubris promoting health, healthful (see salubrious).


salud

Spanish, literally (good) health; first attested in English 1931. French equivalent salut attested
in English by 1921.


salutary (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French salutaire beneficial, or directly from Latin salutaris healthful, from
salus (genitive salutis) good health (see salute).


salutation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French salutacion greeting, from Latin salutationem (nominative salutatio) a
greeting, saluting, noun of action from past participle stem of salutare to greet (see salute (v.)).
As a word of greeting (elliptical for I offer salutation) it is recorded from 1530s. Related:
Salutations.


salutatorian (n.)

1841, American English, from salutatory of the nature of a salutation, here in the specific sense
designating the welcoming address given at a college commencement (1702) + -ian. The address was
originally usually in Latin and given by the second-ranking graduating student.


salutatory (adj.)

1690s, pertaining to a salutation, from Latin salutatorius pertaining to visiting or greeting, from
salut-, past participle stem of salutare to greet (see salute (v.)). From 1702 in reference to an
address which welcomes those attending commencement exercises.


salute (v.)

late 14c., to greet courteously and respectfully, earlier salue (c.1300), from Latin salutare to
greet, pay respects, literally wish health to, from salus (genitive salutis) greeting, good health,
related to salvus safe (see safe (adj.)). The military and nautical sense of display flags, fire
cannons, etc., as a mark of respect is recorded from 1580s; specific sense of raise the hand to the
cap in the presence of a superior officer is from 1844.


salute (n.)

c.1400, act of saluting, respectful gesture of greeting, salutation, from salute (v.). The military
sense is from 1690s; specifically of the hand-to-cap gesture from 1832.


salvage (n.)

1640s, payment for saving a ship from wreck or capture, from French salvage (15c.), from Old French
salver to save (see save (v.)). The general sense of the saving of property from danger is attested
from 1878. Meaning recycling of waste material is from 1918, from the British effort in World War I.


salvage (v.)

1889, from salvage (n.). Related: Salvaged; salvaging.


salvageable (adj.)

by 1915, from salvage (v.) + -able. Salvable is from 1660s in reference to souls; 1797 in reference
to ships' cargoes.


salvation (n.)

c.1200, originally in the Christian sense, the saving of the soul, from Old French salvaciun and
directly from Late Latin salvationem (nominative salvatio, a Church Latin translation of Greek
soteria), noun of action from past participle stem of salvare to save (see save (v.)). In general
(non-religious) sense, attested from late 14c. Meaning source of salvation is from late 14c.
Salvation Army is from 1878, founded by the Rev. William Booth.


salve (n.)

Old English sealf healing ointment, from West Germanic *salbo- oily substance (cognates: Old Saxon
salba, Middle Dutch salve, Dutch zalf, Old High German salba, German salbe ointment), from PIE
*solpa-, from root *selp- fat, butter (cognates: Greek elpos fat, oil, Sanskrit sarpis melted
butter). The figurative sense of something to soothe wounded pride, etc. is from 1736.


salve (v.1)

Old English sealfian anoint (a wound) with salve, from Proto-Germanic *salbojanan (cognates: Dutch
zalven, German salben, Gothic salbon to anoint), from the root of salve (n.). Figurative use from
c.1200. Related: Salved; salving.


salve (v.2)

to save from loss at sea, 1706, back-formation from salvage (n.) or salvable. Related: Salved;
salving.


salver (n.)

1660s, tray, formed in English on the model of platter, etc., from French salve tray used for
presenting objects to the king (17c.), from Spanish salva a testing of food or drink to test for
poison (a procedure known as pre-gustation), hence tray on which food was placed to show it was safe
to eat, from salvar to save, render safe, from Late Latin salvare (see save (v.)).


salvia (n.)

1844, from Latin salvia the plant sage (see sage (n.1)).


salvific (adj.)

1590s, from Latin salvificus saving, from salvus (see safe (adj.)).


salvo (n.)

1719, alteration of salva (1590s) simultaneous discharge of guns, from Italian salva salute, volley
(French salve, 16c., is from Italian), from Latin salve hail!, literally be in good health!, the
usual Roman greeting, regarded as imperative of salvere to be in good health, but properly vocative
of salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). The notion is of important visitors greeted with a volley of
gunfire into the air; applied afterward to any concentrated fire from guns.


SAM

1958, acronym for surface to air missile.


Sam Browne

type of belt with shoulder strap, 1915, from Sir Samuel James Browne (1824-1901), British general
who invented it.


Sam Hill

euphemism for Hell, 1839, American English, of unknown origin.


samadhi (n.)

intense esoteric meditation through yoga, 1795, from Sanskrit samadhi-, literally a putting or
joining together, from sam- together + a- toward + stem of dadhati puts, places (see factitious).


samara (n.)

dried fruit of certain trees, from Latin samara the seed of the elm, variant of samera, perhaps from
Gaulish.


Samaria

from Greek Samareia, from Aramaic Shamerayin, ultimately from Hebrew Shomeron, from Shemer, name of
the owner who sold the site to King Omri (see 1 Kings xvi:24).


Samaritan (n.)

Old English, inhabitant of Samaria, a district of Palestine, from Late Latin Samaritanus, from Greek
Samareia (see Samaria). A non-Hebrew race was settled in its cities by the king of Assyria after the
removal of the Israelites from the country. They later adopted some Jewish ways, but largely
remained apart. Figurative use with reference to the good Samaritan is first recorded 1630s, from
Luke x:33. Related: Samaritanism.


Samarra

city in north-central Iraq; phrase an appointment in Samarra indicating the inevitability of death
is from an old Arabic tale (first in English apparently in W. Somerset Maugham's play Sheppey,
1933), in which a man encounters Death (with a surprised look on his bony face) one day in the
marketplace in Baghdad; he flees in terror and by dusk has reached Samarra. Death takes him there,
and, when questioned, replies, I was astonished to see him in Baghdad, for I had an appointment with
him tonight in Samarra.


samba (n.)

Brazilian dance of African origin, 1885, Zemba, from Portuguese samba, shortened form of zambacueca,
a type of dance, probably altered (by influence of zamacueco stupid) from zambapalo, the name of a
grotesque dance, itself an alteration of zampapalo stupid man, from zamparse to bump, crash. As a
verb from 1949.


sambo (n.2)

stereotypical name for male black person (now only derogatory), 1818, American English, probably a
different word from sambo (n.1); like many such words (Cuffy, Rastus, etc.) a common personal name
among U.S. blacks in the slavery days (first attested 1704 in Boston), probably from an African
source, such as Foulah sambo uncle, or a similar Hausa word meaning second son.    It could be used
without conscious racism or contempt until circa World War II. When the word fell from polite usage,
collateral casualties included the enormously popular children's book The Story of Little Black
Sambo (by Helen Bannerman), which is about an East Indian child, and the Sambo's Restaurant chain, a
U.S. pancake-specialty joint originally opened in Santa Barbara, Calif., in 1957 (the name
supposedly from a merging of the names of the founders, Sam Battistone and Newell Bo Bohnett, but
the chain's decor and advertising leaned heavily on the book), which once counted 1,200 units coast-
to-coast. Civil rights agitation against it began in 1970s and the chain collapsed, though the
original restaurant still is open. Many of the defunct restaurants were taken over by rival Denny's.


sambo (n.1)

person of mixed blood in America and Asia, 1748, perhaps from Spanish zambo bandy-legged, probably
from Latin scambus bow-legged, from Greek skambos. Used variously in different regions to indicate
some mixture of African, European, and Indian blood; common senses were child of black and Indian
parentage and offspring of a black and a mulatto.


sambuca (n.)

Italian liqueur resembling anisette, 1971, from Italian, from Latin sambucus elder tree.


same (adj.)

perhaps abstracted from Old English swa same the same as, but more likely from Old Norse same, samr
same, both from Proto-Germanic *sama- same (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic sama, Old
High German samant, German samt together, with, Gothic samana together, Dutch zamelen to collect,
German zusammen together), from PIE *samos same, from root *sem- (1) one, also as one (adv.),
together with (cognates: Sanskrit samah even, level, similar, identical; Avestan hama similar, the
same; Greek hama together with, at the same time, homos one and the same, homios like, resembling,
homalos even; Latin similis like; Old Irish samail likeness; Old Church Slavonic samu himself).
Old English had lost the pure form of the word; the modern word replaced synonymous ilk. As a
pronoun from c.1300. Colloquial phrase same here as an exclamation of agreement is from 1895. Same
difference curious way to say equal, is attested from 1945.


same-sex (adj.)

with reference to homosexuality, 1981, from same + sex (n.).


sameness (n.)

1580s, from same + -ness.


Samhain (n.)

1888, from Irish samhain (Gaelic samhuinn), from Old Irish samain, literally summer's end, from Old
Irish sam summer (see summer (n.1)) + fuin end. Nov. 1, the Celtic festival of the start of winter
and of the new year.


Sami (n.)

native name for Lapp, 1797, from the Lapp self-designation; of uncertain origin.


samisen (n.)

Japanese three-stringed instrument, 1610s, from Chinese san-hsien, literally three-strings, from san
three + hsien string.


samite (n.)

type of rich silk cloth, c.1300, from Old French samit, from Medieval Latin samitum, examitum, from
Medieval Greek hexamiton (source of Old Church Slavonic oksamitu, Russian aksamit velvet), noun use
of neuter of Greek adjective hexamitos six-threaded, from hex six (see six) + mitos warp thread (see
mitre (n.)). The reason it was called this is variously explained. Obsolete c.1600; revived by
Tennyson. German Sammet velvet is from French.


samizdat (n.)

illegal and clandestine copying and sharing of literature, 1967, from Russian samizdat, literally
self-publishing, from sam self (see same) + izdatel'stvo publishing (from iz from, out of, from PIE
*eghs; see ex-; + dat' to give, from PIE *do-; see date (n.1)). Said to be a word-play on Gosizdat,
the former state publishing house of the U.S.S.R. One who took part in it was a samizdatchik (plural
samizdatchiki). Later and less common was tamizdat writings published abroad and smuggled back into
the U.S.S.R., from tam there.


Sammy (n.)

British slang for U.S. soldier in World War I, 1918, a reference to Uncle Sam.A Sammie may be
defined as an American soldier as he appears in an English newspaper or a French cinema. It is a
name he did not invent, does not like, never uses and will not recognize. [Stars &amp; Stripes,
March 29, 1918]


Samnite (n.)

member of an ancient people who inhabited Samnium in Italy, late 14c., from Latin Samnites (plural),
from Samnium, probably related to Sabine (q.v.).


Samoa

an indigenous name, said to be from the name of a Polynesian chieftain, or else meaning place of the
moa. Related: Samoan (1846, noun and adjective).


Samos

Greek island in the Aegean, from Old Greek samos a height, dune, seaside hill. Many references to it
are as the birthplace of Pythagoras. Related: Samian.


Samothrace

Aegean island, from Samos + Thrace, representing the sources of two waves of settlers who came to
the island in ancient times.


samovar (n.)

1830, from Russian samovar, literally self-boiler, from sam self (see same) + varit to boil (from
Old Church Slavonic variti to cook, from PIE root *wer- to burn); but this is perhaps folk-etymology
if the word is from Tatar sanabar tea-urn.


Samoyed (n.)

Siberian Mongolian people, 1580s, from Russian samoyed (11c.), traditionally literally self-eaters,
i.e. cannibals (the first element cognate with same, the second with eat), but this might be Russian
folk etymology of a native name:    The common Russian etymology of the name Samoyed, meaning self-
eater, deepened the Russians' already exotic image of far-northerners. The most probable linguistic
origin of Samoyed, however, is from the Saami -- saam-edne, land of the people [Andrei V. Golovnev
and Gail Osherenko, Siberian Survival: The Nenets and Their Story, Cornell University, 1999]
Which would make the name a variant of Suomi Finn. The native name is Nenets. As the name of a type
of dog (once used as a working dog in the Arctic) it is attested from 1889.


sampan (n.)

light Chinese boat, 1610s, from Chinese san pan, literally three boards, from san three + pan plank.


sample (n.)

c.1300, something which confirms a proposition or statement, from Anglo-French saumple, a shortening
of Old French essample, from Latin exemplum a sample (see example). Meaning small quantity (of
something) from which the general quality (of the whole) may be inferred (usually in a commercial
sense) is recorded from early 15c.; sense of specimen for scientific sampling is from 1878. As an
adjective from 1820.


sample (v.)

to test by taking a sample, 1767, from sample (n.). Earlier to be a match for (1590s). Related:
Sampled; sampling.


sampler (n.)

embroidery specimen by a beginner to show skill, 1520s, from sample (n.); earlier pattern, model,
example to be imitated (early 14c.). The connecting notion is probably piece of embroidery serving
as a pattern to be copied, or to fix and retain the pattern. As a collection of samples from 1912.


samsara (n.)

endless cycle of death and rebirth, transmigration of souls, 1886, from Sanskrit samsara a wandering
through, from sam-, prefix denoting completeness (from the root of same), + sr- to run, glide, from
PIE root *ser- (2) to flow (see serum).


Samson

masc. proper name, Biblical strong-man (Judges xiii-xvi), from Late Latin, from Greek Sampson, from
Hebrew Shimshon, probably from shemesh sun. As a generic name for a man of great strength, attested
from 1565. Samsonite, proprietary name for a make of luggage, is 1939, by Shwayder Bros. Inc.,
Denver, U.S.


Samuel

masc. proper name, Biblical judge and prophet, from Late Latin, from Greek Samouel, from Hebrew
Shemiel, literally the name of God, from shem name + El God.


samurai (n.)

1727, from Japanese samurai warrior, knight, originally the military retainer of the daimio, variant
of saburai, nominal form of sabura(h)u to be in attendance, to serve.


san

Japanese honorific title, 1878, short form of more formal sama.


San Francisco

city in California, U.S., named in Spanish for St. Francis of Assisi; the name first recorded in
reference to this region 1590s, reinforced by long association of the area with the Franciscan
order.


sanatorium (n.)

1839, Modern Latin, noun use of neuter of Late Latin adjective sanitorius health-giving, from Latin
sanat-, past participle stem of sanare to heal, from sanus well, healthy, sane (see sane). Latin
sanare is the source of Italian sanare, Spanish sanar.


sanctification (n.)

1520s, from Church Latin sanctificationem, noun of action from past participle stem of sanctificare
(see sanctify).


sanctify (v.)

late 14c., seintefie to consecrate, from Old French saintefier sanctify (12c.,   Modern French
sanctifier), from Late Latin sanctificare to make holy, from sanctus holy (see saint (n.)) + root of
facere to make (see factitious). Form altered in English c.1400 to conform with Latin. Meaning to
render holy or legitimate by religious sanction is from c.1400; transferred sense of to render
worthy of respect is from c.1600. Related: Sanctified; sanctifying.


sanctimonious (adj.)

c.1600 (in Measure for Measure, with the disparaging sense making a show of sanctity, affecting an
appearance of holiness), from sanctimony + -ous. The un-ironic, literal sense was used occasionally
in English from c.1600 to c.1800. Related: Sanctimoniously; sanctimoniousness.


sanctimony (n.)

1530s, from Middle French sanctimonie, from Latin sanctimonia sacredness, holiness, virtuousness,
from sanctus holy (see saint (n.)).


sanction (n.)

early 15c., confirmation or enactment of a law, from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) act of
decreeing or ordaining, also decree, ordinance, noun of action from past participle stem of sancire
to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecclesiastical
decrees.


sanction (v.)

1778, confirm by sanction, make valid or binding; 1797 as to permit authoritatively; from sanction
(n.). Seemingly contradictory meaning impose a penalty on is from 1956 but is rooted in an old
legalistic sense of the noun. Related: Sanctioned; sanctioning.


sanctions (n.)

in international diplomacy, 1919, plural of sanction (n.) in the sense of part or clause of a law
which spells out the penalty for breaking it (1650s).


sanctitude (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin sanctitudinem (nominative sanctitudo) sacredness, from sanctus holy (see saint
(n.)).


sanctity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French sanctete (Modern French saintet&eacute;), from Latin sanctitatem
(nominative sanctitas) holiness, sacredness, from sanctus holy (see saint (n.)).


sanctuary (n.)

early 14c., building set apart for holy worship, from Anglo-French sentuarie, Old French saintuaire
sacred relic, holy thing; reliquary, sanctuary, from Late Latin sanctuarium a sacred place, shrine
(especially the Hebrew Holy of Holies; see sanctum), also a private room, from Latin sanctus holy
(see saint (n.)).    Since the time of Constantine and by medieval Church law, fugitives or debtors
enjoyed immunity from arrest in certain churches, hence transferred sense of immunity from
punishment (late 14c.). Exceptions were made in England in cases of treason and sacrilege. General
(non-ecclesiastical) sense of place of refuge or protection is attested from 1560s; as land set
aside for wild plants or animals to breed and live it is recorded from 1879.


sanctum (n.)

1570s, holy place of the Jewish tabernacle, from Latin sanctum a holy place, as in Late Latin
sanctum sanctorum holy of holies (translating Greek to hagion ton hagiou, translating Hebrew qodesh
haqqodashim), from neuter of sanctus holy (see saint (n.)). In English, sanctum sanctorum attested
from c.1400; in sense of a person's private retreat from 1706.


Sanctus (n.)

late 14c., Latin, initial word of the angelic hymn (Isa. vi:3), concluding the preface of the
Eucharist, literally holy (see saint (n.)). It renders Hebrew qadhosh in the hymn.


sand (n.)

Old English sand, from Proto-Germanic *sandam (cognates: Old Norse sandr, Old Frisian sond, Middle
Dutch sant, Dutch zand, German Sand), from PIE *bhs-amadho- (cognates: Greek psammos sand; Latin
sabulum coarse sand, source of Italian sabbia, French sable), suffixed form of root *bhes- to rub.
Historically, the line between sand and gravel cannot be distinctly drawn. Used figuratively in Old
English in reference to innumerability and instability. General Germanic, but not attested in
Gothic, which used in this sense malma, related to Old High German melm dust, the first element of
the Swedish city name Malm&#246; (the second element meaning island), and to Latin molere to grind.
Metaphoric for innumerability since Old English. Sand dollar, type of flat sea-urchin, so called
from 1884, so called for its shape; sand dune attested from 1830.


sand (v.)

late 14c., to sprinkle with sand, from sand (n.); from 1620s as to bury or fill in with sand.
Meaning to grind or polish with sand is from 1858. Related: Sanded; sanding.


sand-blast (v.)

1878 (implied in sand-blasted), from sand (n.) + blast (v.). Related: Sand-blasting.


sand-blind (adj.)

also sandblind, half-blind, c.1400, probably altered (by influence of sand) from Old English
*samblind, the first element from West Germanic *sami-, from PIE *semi- (see semi-); compare Old
English saml&aelig;red half-taught, badly instructed, samstorfen half-dead.


sand-castle (n.)

1838, from sand (n.) + castle (n.).


sand-fly (n.)

1748, from sand (n.) + fly (n.).


sand-lot (n.)

also sandlot, plot of empty land in a town or suburb, 1878, from sand (n.) + lot. In reference to
the kind of sports or games played on them by amateurs, it is recorded from 1890, American English.


sand-trap (n.)

1838, device for filtering out impurities, from sand (n.) + trap (n.). As a golf bunker from 1906.


sandal (n.)

type of shoe, late 14c., from Old French sandale, from Latin sandalium a slipper, sandal, from Greek
sandalion, diminutive of sandalon sandal, of unknown origin, perhaps from Persian. Related: Sandals.


sandalwood (n.)

1510s, earlier sandell (c.1400), saundres (early 14c.), from Old French sandale, from Medieval Latin
sandalum, from Late Greek santalon, ultimately from Sanskrit &#269;andana-m the sandalwood tree,
perhaps literally wood for burning incense, related to candrah shining, glowing, and cognate with
Latin candere to shine, glow (see candle).


sandbag (n.)

1580s, from sand (n.) + bag (n.).


sandbag (v.)

1860, furnish with sandbags, from sandbag (n.). Meaning pretend weakness, 1970s perhaps is extended
from poker-playing sense of refrain from raising at the first opportunity in hopes of raising more
steeply later (1940), which perhaps is from sandbagger in the sense of bully or ruffian who uses a
sandbag as a weapon to knock his intended victim unconscious (1882). Hence to fell or stun with a
blow from a sandbag (1887). Related: Sandbagged; sandbagging.


sandbar (n.)

1755, from sand (n.) + bar (n.1).


sandbox (n.)

also sand-box, 1570s as an instrument to sprinkle sand, from sand (n.) + box (n.1). From 1680s as a
box holding sand; 1891 as a low-sided sand pit for children's play.


sanderling (n.)

wading bird (Crocethia alba), c.1600, probably from sand (n.) + a diminutive suffix, but OED
suggests possible derivation from Old English *sand-yr&eth;ling, with second element yr&eth;ling
plowman (literally earthling).


sandiness (n.)

1640s, from sandy + -ness.


Sandinista (n.)

member of a Nicaraguan revolutionary group, 1928, from Spanish, from name of Augusto C&eacute;sar
Sandino (1893-1934), Nicaraguan nationalist leader; the modern organization of this name was founded
in 1963. Related: Sandanistas.


sandman (n.)

bringer of sleep in nursery lore, 1861, from sand (n.) in reference to hard grains found in the
eyelashes on waking; first attested in a translation from the Norwegian of Andersen (his Ole Lukoie
Ole Shut-eye, about a being who makes children sleepy, came out 1842), and perhaps partly from
German Sandmann. More common in U.S.; dustman with the same sense is attested from 1821.


sandpaper (v.)

1835, from sandpaper (n.).   Related: Sandpapered; sandpapering.


sandpaper (n.)

also sand-paper, 1788, from sand (n.) + paper (n.).


sandpiper (n.)

1670s, from sand (n.) + piper.


Sandra

fem. proper name, originally short for Alexandra. Little used before c.1920; a top-20 name for girls
born in the U.S. 1938-1967.


sandspit (n.)

1854, from sand (n.) + spit (n.).


sandstone (n.)

1660s, from sand (n.) + stone (n.). So called from its composition.


sandwich (n.)

1762, said to be a reference to John Montagu (1718-1792), Fourth Earl Sandwich, who was said to be
an inveterate gambler who ate slices of cold meat between bread at the gaming table during marathon
sessions rather than get up for a proper meal (this account dates to 1770). It was in his honor that
Cook named the Hawaiian islands (1778) when Montagu was first lord of the Admiralty. The family name
is from the place in Kent, Old English Sandwic&aelig;, literally sandy harbor (or trading center).
For pronunciation, see cabbage. Sandwich board, one carried before and one behind, is from 1864.


sandwich (v.)

1841, from sandwich (n.), on the image of the stuff between the identical pieces of bread. Related:
Sandwiched; sandwiching.


sandy (adj.)

Old English sandig of the nature of sand; see sand (n.) + -y (2). Meaning of yellowish-red hue (in
reference to hair) is from 1520s.


Sandy (n.)

late 15c. as a nickname for Alexander; as the typical name for a Scotsman from 1785, also drawing on
the hair-color sense of sandy (adj.). Also Sawney, and with diminutive form Saunder preserved in
surnames.


sane (adj.)

1721, back-formation from sanity or else from Latin sanus sound, healthy, in figurative or
transferred use, of sound mind, rational, sane, also, of style, correct; of uncertain origin. Used
earlier, of the body, with the sense of healthy (1620s). Related: Sanely.


sang

past tense of sing.


sang-froid (n.)

presence of mind, composure, 1712, from French sang froid, literally cool blood, from sang blood
(from Latin sanguis; see sanguinary) + froid cold (from Latin frigidus; see frigid).


sangha

1858, from Hindi sangha, Sanskrit samgha, from sam together + han to come in contact.


sangrail (n.)

the Holy Grail, mid-15c., from Old French Saint Graal, literally Holy Grail (see saint (n.) +
grail).


sangria (n.)

cold drink made from sweetened and diluted red wine, 1954, from Spanish, literally bleeding, from
sangre blood, from Vulgar Latin sanguem, from Latin sanguis (see sanguinary). The drink so named for
its color. Earlier as sangre (1736).


sanguinary (adj.)

characterized by slaughter, 1620s, possibly from French sanguinaire, or directly from Latin
sanguinarius pertaining to blood, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood, of unknown origin. Latin
distinguished sanguis, the generic word, from cruor blood from a wound. The latter word is related
to Greek kreas meat, Sanskrit kravis- raw flesh, Old English hreaw- raw (see raw).


sanguine (adj.)

blood-red, late 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sanguin (fem. sanguine), from Latin
sanguineus of blood, also bloody, bloodthirsty, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood (see
sanguinary). Meaning cheerful, hopeful, confident first attested c.1500, because these qualities
were thought in medieval physiology to spring from an excess of blood as one of the four humors.
Also in Middle English as a noun, type of red cloth (early 14c.).


sanguineous (adj.)

pertaining to blood, 1510s, from Latin sanguineus, from sanguin-, stem of sanguis (see sanguinary).


sanguinity (n.)

late 15c., consanguinity; see sanguine + -ity. Meaning quality of being sanguine is from 1737.


sanguinivorous (adj.)

blood-drinking, 1821, from Latin sanguis blood (see sanguinary) + -vorous.


sanguinous (adj.)

late 15c., bloodshot, from Middle French sanguineux, from Late Latin sanguinosus full of blood, from
Latin sanguis blood (see sanguinary). Meaning pertaining to blood is from 1813.


sanhedrim (n.)

1580s, from Late Hebrew sanhedrin (gedola) (great) council, from Greek synedrion assembly, council,
literally sitting together, from syn- together (see syn-) + hedra seat (see cathedral). Abolished at
the destruction of Jerusalem, C.E. 70. The proper form is sanhedrin; the error began as a false
correction when the Greek word was taken into Mishanic Hebrew, where -in is a form of the plural
suffix of which -im is the more exact form.


sanhedrin (n.)

see sanhedrim.


sanitarium (n.)

1829, literally place dedicated to health, from neuter of Modern Latin *sanitarius, from Latin
sanitas health, from sanus healthy; sane (see sane). Compare sanatarium.


sanitary (adj.)

1823, pertaining to health, from French sanitaire (1812), from Latin sanitas health, from sanus
healthy; sane (see sane). In reference to menstrual pads, first attested 1881 (in sanitary towel).


sanitation (n.)

1848, irregularly formed from sanitary. Figurative use from 1934. As a euphemism for garbage (as in
sanitation engineer) first recorded 1939.


sanitize (v.)

1836, from stem of sanitary + -ize.  Metaphoric sense is from 1934. Related: Sanitized; sanitizing.


sanitizer (n.)

1950, agent noun from sanitize.


sanity (n.)

early 15c., healthy condition, from Middle French sanit&eacute; health, from Latin sanitatem
(nominative sanitas) health, sanity, from sanus healthy; sane (see sane). Meaning soundness of mind
first attested c.1600.


sank

past tense of sink (q.v.).


Sanka (n.)

brand of decaffeinated coffee, by 1913, abstracted from French sans caffeine (see sans + caffeine).


sans (adv.)

early 14c., from French sans, Old French sen, sens (with adverbial genitive) without, except, apart,
not counting, cognate with Proven&ccedil;al senes, Old Catalan senes, Old Spanish sen (Spanish sin),
Old Italian sen, from Vulgar Latin *sene, from Latin sine without, enlarged form of sed, se without,
from PIE root *sen(e)- apart, separated (see sunder). In reference to fonts, 1927, short for sans-
serif.


sans souci (adv.)

without care or concern, French. Name of Frederick the Great's royal palace at Potsdam.


sans-culotte (n.)

also sansculotte, lower-class republican of the French Revolution, 1790, from French, literally
without breeches; see sans + cullotes. Usually explained as referring to the class whose distinctive
costume was pantalons (long trousers) as opposed to the upper classes, which wore culottes (knee-
breeches), but this is not certain. Related: Sans-culottes; sans-culotterie.


sans-serif

also sanserif, 1830, from French sans without (see sans) + English serif, from earlier ceref,
perhaps from Dutch schreef a line, a stroke, related to schrijven to write, from Latin scribere (see
script (n.)).


sansei (n.)

American born of nisei parents; third-generation Japanese-American, 1945, from Japanese san three,
third + sei generation.


Sanskrit (n.)

1610s, from Sanskrit samskrtam put together, well-formed, perfected, neuter of samskrta, from sam
together  (see same) + krta- to make, do, perform, from PIE *kwer- to make, form (see terato-). so
called as being the cultivated or literary language, distinguished from the vulgar dialects, or,
some say, because regarded as a perfect language, the speech of the gods, formed by infallible rules
[Century Dictionary].


Santa (n.)

1893 as a shortened form of Santa Claus.


Santa Claus (n.)

1773 (as St. A Claus, in New York Gazette), American English, from dialectal Dutch Sante Klaas, from
Middle Dutch Sinter Niklaas Saint Nicholas, bishop of Asia Minor who became a patron saint for
children. Now a worldwide phenomenon (Japanese santakurosu).


santeria (n.)

Afro-Cuban religion, 1950, from Spanish, literally holiness, sanctity.


sap (n.1)

liquid in a plant, Old English s&aelig;pm from Proto-Germanic *sapam (cognates: Middle Low German,
Middle Dutch, Dutch sap, Old High German saf, German Saft juice), from PIE root *sab- juice, fluid
(cognates: Sanskrit sabar- sap, milk, nectar, Latin sapere to taste, Irish sug, Russian soku sap,
Lithuanian sakas tree-gum). As a verb meaning To drain the sap from, 1725.


sap (n.2)

simpleton, 1815, originally especially in Scottish and English schoolboy slang, probably from
earlier sapskull (1735), saphead (1798), from sap as a shortened form of sapwood soft wood between
the inner bark and the heartwood (late 14c.), from sap (n.1) + wood (n.); so called because it
conducts the sap; compare sappy.


sap (v.1)

dig a trench toward the enemy's position, 1590s, from Middle French saper, from sappe spade, from
Late Latin sappa spade (source also of Italian zappa, Spanish zapa spade). Extended sense weaken or
destroy insidiously is from 1755, probably influenced by the verb form of sap (n.1), on the notion
of draining the vital sap from. Related: Sapped; sapping.


sap (v.2)

hit with a sap, 1926, from sap (n.3). Related: Sapped; sapping.


sap (n.3)

club, stick for hitting, 1899, from shortening of sapwood (see sap (n.2)) or sapling.


sapid (adj.)

1630s, from Latin sapidus savory, having a taste, from sapere (see sapient). Its opposite is
insipid.


sapience (n.)

late 14c., wisdom, understanding, from Old French sapience, from Latin sapientia good taste, good
sense, discernment; intelligence, wisdom, from sapiens (see sapient).


sapient (adj.)

wise, late 15c. (early 15c. as a surname), from Old French sapient, from Latin sapientem (nominative
sapiens), present participle of sapere to taste, have taste, be wise, from PIE root *sep- (1) to
taste, perceive (cognates: Old Saxon an-sebban to perceive, remark, Old High German antseffen, Old
English sefa mind, understanding, insight).


sapling (n.)

early 14c., from sap (n.1) + diminutive suffix -ling. This probably is the source of American
English slang sap (n.3) club, short staff (1899) and the verb sap (v.2) to hit (someone) with a sap
(1926).


saponification (n.)

1801, from French saponification, from saponifier, from Modern Latin saponificare, from sapon- soap
(see soap (n.)) + -ficare, from Latin facere to make, do (see factitious).


saponify (v.)

1821, from French saponifier (see saponification). Related: Saponified; saponifying.


sapper (n.)

1620s, in a military context, soldier employed in building fortifications, agent noun from sap
(v.1).


Sapphic (adj.)

c.1500, of or pertaining to Sappho, from French saphique, from Latin Sapphicus, from Greek Sapphikos
of Sappho, in reference to Sappho, poetess of the isle of Lesbos c.600 B.C.E. Especially in
reference to her characteristic meter; sense of pertaining to sexual relations between women is from
1890s (compare lesbian).


sapphire (n.)

precious stone next in hardness to a diamond, mid-13c., from Old French saphir (12c.) and directly
from Latin sapphirus (source also of Spanish zafir, Italian zaffiro), from Greek sappheiros blue
stone (the gem meant apparently was not the one that now has the name, but perhaps rather lapis
lazuli, the modern sapphire being perhaps signified by Greek hyakinthos), from a Semitic source
(compare Hebrew sappir sapphire), but probably not ultimately from Semitic. Some linguists propose
an origin in Sanskrit sanipriya, a dark precious stone (perhaps sapphire or emerald), literally
sacred to Saturn, from Sani Saturn + priyah precious. In Renaissance lapidaries, it was said to cure
anger and stupidity. As an adjective from early 15c. Related: Sapphiric; sapphirine.


Sapphism (n.)

homosexual relations between women, 1890; see Sapphic + -ism.


sappy (adj.)

full of sap, Late Old English s&aelig;pig, from s&aelig;p (see sap (n.1)). Figurative sense of
foolishly sentimental (1660s) may have developed from an intermediate sense of wet, sodden (late
15c.). Earlier, now obsolete, figurative senses were full of vitality (1550s) and immature (1620s).


saprophyte (n.)

bacteria or fungus that grows on decaying organic matter, 1867, from French, from Greek sapros
putrid + phyton plant (see phyto-). Related: Saprophytism.


saprophytic (adj.)

1872; see saprophyte + -ic.


Sara

fem. proper name, alternative spelling of Sarah.


Saracen (n.)

Old English, an Arab (in Greek and Roman translations), also, mid-13c., generally, non-Christian,
heathen, pagan, from Old French saracin, from Late Latin saracenus, from Greek sarakenos, usually
said to be from Arabic sharquiyin, accusative plural of sharqiy eastern, from sharq east, sunrise,
but this is not certain. In medieval times the name was associated with that of Biblical Sarah
(q.v.).Peple &thorn;at cleped hem self Saracenys, as &thorn;ogh &thorn;ey were i-come of Sarra [John
of Trevisa, translation of Higdon's Polychronicon, 1387]The name Greeks and Romans gave to the
nomads of the Syrian and Arabian deserts. Specific sense of Middle Eastern Muslim is from the
Crusades. From c.1300 as an adjective. Related: Saracenic; and compare sarsen.


Sarah

fem. proper name, Biblical wife of Abraham and mother of Isaac, from Hebrew, literally princess,
from sarah, fem. of sar prince, from sarar he ruled, related to Akkad. sharratu queen. Popular as a
name for girls born in U.S. in 1870s and 1978-2000.


Sarajevo

capital of Bosnia, founded 15c. and named in Turkish as Bosna-Saray, Palace on the (River) Bosna,
from saray (see caravanserai); the modern name is a Slavic adjectival form of saray.


Saran

U.S. trademark name for PVC used as a cling-film, 1940, by Dow Chemical Company.


Saratoga

in reference to a kind of large trunk, 1858, so called because it was much used by ladies traveling
to the summer resort of Saratoga, N.Y. The name, early recorded as saraghtogo, apparently is from an
Iroquoian language, but it is of unknown origin.


sarcasm (n.)

1570s, sarcasmus, from Late Latin sarcasmus, from late Greek sarkasmos a sneer, jest, taunt,
mockery, from sarkazein to speak bitterly, sneer, literally to strip off the flesh, from sarx
(genitive sarkos) flesh, properly piece of meat, from PIE root *twerk- to cut (cognates: Avestan
thwares to cut). Current form of the English word is from 1610s. For nuances of usage, see humor.


sarcastic (adj.)

1690s, from sarcasm, perhaps on the model of enthusiastic. Related: Sarcastical (1640s);
sarcastically.


sarco-

before vowels sarc-, word-forming element meaning flesh, fleshy, of the flesh, from Latinized form
of Greek sark-, comb. form of sarx flesh (see sarcasm).


sarcoid (adj.)

1841, from sarco- + -oid. As a noun from 1875.


sarcoidosis (n.)

1936, from sarcoid + -osis.


sarcoma (n.)

1650s, fleshy excrescence, Medical Latin, from Greek sarkoma fleshy substance (Galen), from sarkoun
to produce flesh, grow fleshy, from sarx (genitive sarkos) flesh (see sarcasm) + -oma. Meaning
harmful tumor of the connective tissue first recorded 1804.


sarcophagi (n.)

plural of sarcophagus (q.v.).


sarcophagus (n.)

c.1600, type of stone used for coffins, from Latin sarcophagus, from Greek sarkophagos limestone
used for coffins, literally flesh-eating, in reference to the supposed action of this type of
limestone (quarried near Assos in Troas, hence the Latin lapis Assius) in quickly decomposing the
body, from sarx (genitive sarkos) flesh (see sarcasm) + phagein to eat (see -phagous). Related:
Sarcophagal.    The stone sense was the earliest in English; meaning stone coffin, often with
inscriptions or decorative carvings is recorded from 1705. The Latin word, shortened in Vulgar Latin
to *sarcus, is the source of French cercueil, German Sarg coffin, Dutch zerk tombstone.


sardine (n.)

early 15c., from Latin sardina, from Greek sardine, sardinos, often said to be from Sardo Sardinia
(see Sardinia), the Mediterranean island, near which the fish probably were caught and from which
they were exported. But Klein writes, It is hardly probable that the Greeks would have obtained fish
from so far as Sardinia at a time relatively so early as that of Aristotle, from whom Athenaios
quotes a passage in which the fish sardinos is mentioned. Colloquial phrase packed like sardines (in
a tin) is recorded from 1911.


Sardinia

large island west of Italy, Latin, from Greek Sardo; perhaps named for the local Iberian people who
settled there; the original form and meaning of the name is lost. A Punic (Phoenician) stelle from
7c. B.C.E. refers to it as Shardan. The oblique cases are sometimes Sardonos, etc., as if from
*Sardon. Related: Sardinian.


sardonic (adj.)

apparently but not really proceeding from gaiety, 1630s, from French sardonique (16c.), from Latin
sardonius (but as if from Latin *sardonicus) in Sardonius risus, loan-translation of Greek sardonios
(gelos) of bitter or scornful (laughter), altered from Homeric sardanios (of uncertain origin) by
influence of Sardonios Sardinian, because the Greeks believed that eating a certain plant they
called sardonion (literally plant from Sardinia, see Sardinia) caused facial convulsions resembling
those of sardonic laughter, usually followed by death. For nuances of usage, see humor. Earlier in
same sense sardonian (1580s), from Latin sardonius. Related: Sardonically.


sargasso (n.)

seaweed, 1590s, from Portuguese sargasso seaweed, perhaps from sarga, a type of grape (on this
theory, the sea plant was so called from its berry-like air sacs), or from Latin sargus, a kind of
fish found in the Mediterranean and eastern Atlantic, from Greek sargos. Sargasso Sea attested from
1819.


sarge (n.)

representing the pronunciation of the familiar shortening of sergeant, by 1867.


sari (n.)

also saree, long, wrapping garment of silk or cotton worn by Hindu women, 1785, from Hindi sari,
from Prakrit sadi, from Sanskrit sati garment, petticoat.


sarin (n.)

type of odorless nerve gas, 1945, from German, but the name is of unknown origin. Other phosphorous
compounds known in Germany by the end of World War II were called Tabun, soman, Diglykol.


sark (n.)

shirt, body garment of linen or cotton for either sex, late Old English serc shirt, corselet, coat
of mail, surviving as a Scottish and northern dialect word, from Old Norse serkr, cognate with Old
English serk (see berserk). But Gordon lists it as a loan-word from Latin sarcia; other sources are
silent on the point. Lithuanian sarkas shirt, Old Church Slavonic sraka tunic, Russian soro&#269;ka,
Finnish sarkki shirt perhaps are all from Germanic.


Sarmatia

Latin Sarmatia, from Greek Sarmates, name of an ancient tribe which wandered the plains of eastern
Europe west of the Volga; later poetically identified with Poland. Related: Sarmatian.


sarong (n.)

skirt-like garment, the Malay national garment, 1834, from Malay sarung sheath, covering. OED traces
it to some mod. form of Skr. saranga variegated.


SARS (n.)

by 2003, acronym from severe acute respiratory syndrome.


sarsaparilla (n.)

tropical American plant, 1570s, from Spanish zarzaparrilla, from zarza bramble (from Arabic sharas
thorny plant or Basque sartzia bramble) + parrilla, diminutive of parra vine, which is of unknown
origin. Hence, also, a medicinal preparation of sarsaparilla (1570s). In 16c.-17c. the dried roots
were held to be efficient in treatment of syphilis.


sarsen (n.)

large sandstone boulder, 1640s, properly sarsen stone, i.e. Saracen stone, from Saracen in the old
sense of pagan, heathen. The same word was applied to the ancient leavings outside Cornish tin
mines, also known as Jews' pits, those being the terms that came to mind once to describe any
ancient features, based on the Bible.


sarsenet (n.)

also sarcenet, type of fine soft silk fabric, late 14c., from Anglo-French sarzinett (Old French
sarrasinet), probably a diminutive (with -et) of Sarasin, Sarazin Saracen, meaning Turkish or Arab
(see Saracen). Compare Old French drap sarrasinois, Medieval Latin pannus saracenius.


sartorial (adj.)

pertaining to a tailor, 1807, from Modern Latin sartorius, from Late Latin sartor tailor (source
also of French sartre tailor), literally patcher, mender, from Latin sart-, past participle stem of
sarcire to patch, mend, from PIE root *serk- to make whole. Earlier in English in same sense was
Related: sartorian (1660s). Sartorius as the name of the long leg muscle is because it is used in
crossing the legs to bring them into the position needed to sit like a tailor. Related: Sartorially.


sash (n.1)

strip of cloth, 1590s, originally in reference to Oriental dress, strip of cloth twisted into a
turban, from Arabic shash muslin cloth. Meaning strip of cloth worn about the waist or over the
shoulder first recorded 1680s.


sash (n.2)

framed part of a window, 1680s, sashes, mangled Englishing of French ch&acirc;ssis frame of a window
or door (see chassis). French word taken as a plural and -s trimmed off by 1704. Sash-weight
attested from 1737.


sashay (v.)

1836, mangled Englishing of French chass&eacute; gliding step (in square dancing), literally chased,
past participle of chasser to chase, from Old French chacier to hunt, from Vulgar Latin *captiare
(see capable, and compare chase, catch). Related: Sashayed; sashaying. The noun is attested from
1900.


sashimi (n.)

thin slices of raw fish, 1880, from Japanese, from sashi pierce + mi flesh.


Saskatchewan

Canadian province, named for the river running through it, from Cree kis-si-ska-tches-wani-sipi
rapid flowing river.


sasquatch (n.)

1929, from Halkomelem (Salishan), a native language of the Pacific Northwest, s&aelig;sq'ec, one of
a race of huge, hairy man-monsters supposed to inhabit the Pacific northwest woods in American
Indian lore and also known as bigfoot.


sass (n.)

impudence, 1835, back-formation from sassy. The verb is first recorded 1856, from the noun. Related:
Sassed; sassing. Sass (n.) as a variant of sauce is attested from 1775.


sassafras (n.)

small flowering tree of North America, 1570s, from Spanish sasafras, perhaps an adaptation of
saxifraga saxifrage, from Late Latin saxifragia, variant of saxifraga (see saxifrage). But the
connection of the plants is difficult to explain, and the word perhaps represents a lost Native
American name that sounded like Spanish saxifraga and was altered to conform to it. The tree
supposedly was discovered by the Spanish in 1528.


Sassanid

dynasty that ruled the Persian Empire 211-651 C.E., 1776, from Medieval Latin Sassanid&aelig;
(plural), from Sasan, grandfather of Ardashir I, who founded the dynasty.


Sassenach (n.)

Gaelic for English person, 1771, Sassenaugh, literally Saxon, from Gaelic Sasunnach, from Latin
Saxones, from a Germanic source (such as Old English Seaxe the Saxons; see Saxon). The modern form
of the word was established c.1814 by Sir Walter Scott, from Scottish Sasunnoch, Irish Sasanach,
Welsh Seisnig.


sassy (adj.)

1833, American English, alteration of saucy. Related: Sassily; sassiness.


SAT (n.)

1961, initialism (acronym) for Scholastic Aptitude Test.


Satan (n.)

proper name of the supreme evil spirit in Christianity, Old English Satan, from Late Latin Satan (in
Vulgate in Old Testament only), from Greek Satanas, from Hebrew satan adversary, one who plots
against another, from satan to show enmity to, oppose, plot against, from root s-t-n one who
opposes, obstructs, or acts as an adversary.    In Septuagint (Greek) usually translated as diabolos
slanderer, literally one who throws (something) across the path of another (see devil (n.)), though
epiboulos plotter is used once.    In biblical sources the Hebrew term the satan describes an
adversarial role. It is not the name of a particular character. Although Hebrew storytellers as
early as the sixth century B.C.E. occasionally introduced a supernatural character whom they called
the satan, what they meant was any one of the angels sent by God for the specific purpose of
blocking or obstructing human activity. [Elaine Pagels, The Origin of Satan, 1995]


satanic (adj.)

1667 (in Paradise Lost), pertaining to Satan, from Satan + -ic. Meaning diabolical is from 1793.
Related: Satanical (1540s).


Satanism (n.)

1560s, satanic disposition, from Satan + -ism. Applied 1820s-30s to the poetry of Byron, etc.
Meaning worship of Satan dates from 1895, with reference to France, where it was said to be active
at that time.


Satanist (n.)

1550s, from Satan + -ist. Ppplied by their enemies to Protestant sects. Meaning Satan-worshipper is
from 1896.


Satanophobia (n.)

morbid dread of Satan, 1860, from Satan + -phobia, with connective -o-.


satay (n.)

1934, from Malay or Javanese satai.


satchel (n.)

small bag, mid-14c., from Old French sachel, from Late Latin saccellum money bag, purse, diminutive
of Latin sacculus, diminutive of saccus bag (see sack (n.1)).


sate (v.)

to satisfy, surfeit, c.1600, alteration (by influence of Latin satiare satiate) of Middle English
saden become satiated; satiate, from Old English sadian to satiate, fill; be sated, get wearied,
from Proto-Germanic *sadon to satisfy, sate, from root *sa- to satisfy (see sad (adj.)). Related:
Sated; sating.


sateen (n.)

glossy cloth resembling satin, 1835, variant of satin (q.v.), perhaps influenced by velveteen, where
the ending is a variant of -ine (1).


satellite (n.)

1540s, follower or attendant of a superior person, from Middle French satellite (14c.), from Latin
satellitem (nominative satelles) attendant, companion, courtier, accomplice, assistant, perhaps from
Etruscan satnal (Klein), or a compound of roots *satro- full, enough + *leit- to go (Tucker);
compare English follow, which is constructed of similar roots.    Meaning planet that revolves about
a larger one first attested 1660s, in reference to the moons of Jupiter, from Latin satellites,
which was used in this sense 1610s by German astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571-1630). Galileo, who
had discovered them, called them Sidera Medic&aelig;a in honor of the Medici family. Meaning man-
made machinery orbiting the Earth first recorded 1936 as theory, 1957 as fact. Meaning country
dependent and subservient to another is recorded from 1800.


satiable (adj.)

1560s; see satiate + -able.


satiate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin satiatus, past participle of satiare fill full, satisfy, from satis enough,
from PIE root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, Old English s&aelig;d
satisfied; see sad). Related: Satiated; satiating.


satiation (n.)

1630s, noun of action from satiate (v.).


satiety (n.)

1530s, from Middle French sati&eacute;t&eacute;, from Latin satietatem (nominative satietas)
abundance, sufficiency, fullness, from satis enough, from PIE root *sa- to satisfy (see sad).


satin (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French satin (14c.), perhaps from Arabic (atlas) zaytuni, literally (satin) from
Zaitun, a Chinese city, perhaps modern Quanzhou in Fukien province, southern China, a major port in
the Middle Ages, with a resident community of European traders. The form of the word perhaps
influenced in French by Latin seta silk. OED finds the Arabic connection etymologically untenable
and takes the French word straight from Latin. As an adjective from mid-15c.


satinette (n.)

also satinet, 1703, from French satinet, diminutive of satin (see satin). So called because it was
thought to resemble satin.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


satire (v.)

1905, from satire (n.). Related: Satired; satiring.


satiric (adj.)

c.1500, from French satirique, from Late Latin satiricus, from satira (see satire (n.)). Earlier
(late 14c.) as a noun meaning a writer of satires.


satirical (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin satiricus, from Latin satira satire, poetic medley (see satire (n.)) + -al
(1). Related: Satirically.


satirist (n.)

1580s; see satire (n.) + -ist.


satirize (v.)

c.1600, from French satiriser (see satire (n.)). Related: Satirized; satirizing.


satisfaction (n.)

early 14c., performance of an act set forth by a priest or other Church authority to atone for sin,
from Old French satisfaction (12c.), from Latin satisfactionem (nominative satisfactio) a satisfying
of a creditor, noun of action from past participle stem of satisfacere (see satisfy). Senses of
contentment, appeasement and action of gratifying first recorded late 14c.; the former not common
before 16c.


satisfactory (adj.)

mid-15c., capable of atoning for sin, from Middle French satisfactoire (14c.) and directly from Late
Latin satisfactorius, from Latin satisfactus, past participle of satisfacere (see satisfy). Meaning
adequate is from 1630s. Related: Satisfactorily; satisfactoriness.


satisfice (v.)

1560s, to satisfy (implied in satisficed), altered of satisfy by influence of its Latin root
satisfacere. A Northern English colloquial word; modern use from c.1956 may be an independent
formation. Related: Satisficing.


satisfied (adj.)

1816, gratified, past participle adjective from satisfy.


satisfy (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French satisfier, from Old French satisfaire pay, repay, make reparation
(14c., Modern French satisfaire), from Latin satisfacere discharge fully, comply with, make amends,
literally do enough, from satis enough (from PIE root *sa- to satisfy; see sad) + facere perform
(see factitious). Related: Satisfied; satisfying.


satisfying (adj.)

c.1600, present participle adjective from satisfy. Related: Satisfyingly.


satori (n.)

1727, from Japanese, said to mean literally spiritual awakening.


satrap (n.)

late 14c., governor of a province of ancient Persia, from Latin satrapes, from Greek satrapes, from
Old Persian x&#353;athrapavan-, literally guardian of the realm, from x&#353;athra- realm, province
(related to x&#353;ayathiya king, cognate with Sanskrit kshatra; see shah) + pavan- guardian, from
PIE *pa- to protect, feed (see food). Related: Satrapy.


sattva (n.)

truth (in Hindu philosophy), from Sanskrit sattvah truth, literally being, cognate with Gothic
sunjis, Old English so&eth; true (see sooth).


saturate (v.)

1530s, to satisfy, satiate, from Latin saturatus, past participle of saturare to fill full, sate,
drench, from satur sated, full, from PIE root *sa- to satisfy (see sad). Meaning soak thoroughly
first recorded 1756. Marketing sense first recorded 1958. Related: Saturated; saturating.


saturation (n.)

1550s, formed in English from saturate, or else from Late Latin saturationem (nominative saturatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of saturare. Saturation bombing is from 1942, first in
reference to Allied air raid on Cologne, Germany.


Saturday (n.)

seventh day of the week, Old English s&aelig;terd&aelig;g, s&aelig;ternesd&aelig;g, literally day of
the planet Saturn, from S&aelig;ternes (genitive of S&aelig;tern; see Saturn) + Old English
d&aelig;g (see day). Partial loan-translation of Latin Saturni dies Saturn's day (compare Dutch
Zaterdag, Old Frisian Saterdi, Middle Low German Satersdach; Irish dia Sathuirn, Welsh dydd Sadwrn).
The Latin word itself is a loan-translation of Greek kronou hemera, literally the day of Cronus.
Unlike other day names, no god substitution seems to have been attempted, perhaps because the
northern European pantheon lacks a clear corresponding figure to Roman Saturn. A homely ancient
Nordic custom, however, seems to be preserved in Old Norse laugardagr, Danish l&oslash;rdag, Swedish
l&ouml;rdag Saturday, literally bath day (Old Norse laug bath).    German Samstag (Old High German
sambaztag) appears to be from a Greek *sambaton, a nasalized colloquial form of sabbaton sabbath,
also attested in Old Church Slavonic sabota, Polish sobota, Russian subbota, Hungarian szombat,
French samedi.   Saturday night has been used figuratively to suggest drunkenness and looseness in
relations between the young men and young women since at least mid-19c. Saturday-night special
cheap, low-caliber handgun is American English, attested from 1976 (earlier Saturday-night pistol,
1929).


Saturn

Old English S&aelig;tern, a Roman god, also most remote planet (then known), from Latin Saturnus,
originally a name of an Italic god of agriculture, possibly from Etruscan. Derivation from Latin
serere (past participle satus) to sow is said to be folk-etymology.    An ancient Italic deity,
popularly believed to have appeared in Italy in the reign of Janus, and to have instructed the
people in agriculture, gardening, etc., thus elevating them from barbarism to social order and
civilization. His reign was sung by the poets as the golden age. [Century Dictionary]    Identified
with Greek Kronos, father of Zeus. Also the alchemical name for lead (late 14c.). In Akkadian, the
planet was kaiamanu, literally constant, enduring, hence Hebrew kiyyun, Arabic and Persian kaiwan
Saturn. Related: Saturnian.


saturnalia (n.)

time of merrymaking, 1590s, from Latin Saturnalia, ancient Roman festivals of Saturn (held in
December), a time of merrymaking for all, from neuter plural of adjective Saturnalis pertaining to
Saturn, from Saturnus (see Saturn). They correspond to the Greek Kronia. The extended sense of
period of unrestrained revelry is first attested 1782. Related: Saturnalian.


saturnine (adj.)

gloomy, morose, sluggish, grave, mid-15c., literally born under the influence of the planet Saturn,
from Middle English Saturne (see Saturn) + -ine (1). Medieval physiology believed these
characteristics to be caused by the astrological influence of the planet Saturn, which was the most
remote from the Sun (in the limited knowledge of the times) and thus coldest and slowest in its
revolution.


satyagraha (n.)

Indian form of passive resistance, 1920, in writings of M.K. Gandhi, from Sanskrit satyagraha
insistence on truth, from satya truth, truthfulness (from sat- existing, true, virtuous, from PIE
*es- to be; see essence) + agraha pertinacity, from PIE *ghrebh- (1) to seize, reach (see grab
(v.)).


satyr (n.)

woodland deity, companion of Bacchus, late 14c., from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, of unknown
origin. In pre-Roman Greek art, a man-like being with the tail and ears of a horse; the modern
conception of a being part man, part goat is from Roman sculptors, who seem to have assimilated them
to the fauns of native mythology. In some English bibles used curiously to translate Hebrew se'irim,
a type of hairy monster superstitiously believed to inhabit deserts.


satyriasis (n.)

excessively great venereal desire in the male, 1650s, medical Latin, from Greek satyriasis, from
satyros (see satyr). Also in same sense satyromania (1889).


satyric (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin satyricus, from Greek satyrikos pertaining to a satyr or satyrs, from satyros
(see satyr).


sauce (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French sauce, sausse, from Latin salsa things salted, salt food, noun use of fem.
singular or neuter plural of adjective salsus salted, from past participle of Old Latin sallere to
salt, from sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt (n.)).    Meaning something which adds piquancy to
words or actions is recorded from c.1500; sense of impertinence first recorded 1835 (see saucy, and
compare sass). Slang meaning liquor first attested 1940.


sauce (v.)

mid-15c., to season, from sauce (n.). From 1862 as to speak impertinently. Related: Sauced; saucing.


saucebox (n.)

one addicted to making saucy remarks, 1580s, from sauce (n.) + box (n.1).


saucepan (n.)

1680s, from sauce (n.) + pan (n.). Originally a pan for cooking sauces.


saucer (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-Latin saucerium and Old French saussier (Modern French sauci&#232;re) sauce
dish, from Late Latin salsarium, neuter of salsarius of or for salted things, from Latin salsus (see
sauce (n.)). Originally a small dish or pan in which sauce is set on a table. Meaning small, round,
shallow vessel for supporting a cup and retaining any liquid which might be spilled is attested from
c.1702.


saucily (adv.)

1540s; see saucy + -ly (2).


sauciness (n.)

1540s, from saucy + -ness.


saucy (adj.)

c.1500, resembling sauce, later impertinent, flippantly bold, cheeky (1520s), from sauce (n.) + -y
(2). The connecting notion is the figurative sense of piquancy in words or actions. Compare sauce
malapert impertinence (1520s), and slang phrase to have eaten sauce be abusive (1520s). Also compare
salty in same senses.


Saudi (adj.)

1933, from Sa'ud, family name of the rulers of Nejd from 18c. and of the kingdom of Saudi Arabia
since 1932. The name is from Arabic sa'd good fortune, happiness.


sauerkraut (n.)

1630s, from German Sauerkraut, literally sour cabbage, from sauer sour (from Proto-Germanic *sura-;
see sour (adj.)) + Kraut vegetable, cabbage, from Old High German krut, from Proto-Germanic
*kruthan.They pickle it [cabbage] up in all high Germany, with salt and barberies, and so keepe it
all the yeere, being commonly the first dish you have served in at table, which they call their
sawerkrant. [James Hart, Klinike, or the diet of the diseased, 1633]In U.S. slang, figurative use
for a German dates from 1858 (compare kraut). The effort to substitute liberty-cabbage for
sauerkraut, made by professional patriots in 1918, was a complete failure. [Mencken]. French
choucroute (19c.) is from Alsatian German surkrut (corresponding to German Sauerkraut), with folk
etymology alteration based on chou cabbage + cro&#251;te crust (n.).


Sauk (1)

midwestern U.S. Indian tribe, 1722, alternative writing of Sac.


Sauk (2)

southern Coastal Salishan group of Native Americans, from a native Lushootseed name, probably folk-
etymologized by influence of Sauk (1).


Saul

masc. proper name, Biblical first king of Israel, from Latin Saul, from Hebrew Shaul, literally
asked for, passive participle of sha'al he asked for.


sault (n.)

waterfall or rapid, c.1600, from colonial French sault, 17c. alternative spelling of saut to leap,
from Latin saltus, from salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).


sauna (n.)

1881, from Finnish sauna.


saunter (v.)

late 15c., santren to muse, be in reverie, of uncertain origin despite many absurd speculations.
Meaning walk with a leisurely gait is from 1660s, and may be a different word. Klein suggests this
sense of the word derives via Anglo-French sauntrer (mid-14c.) from French s'aventurer to take
risks, but OED finds this unlikely. Related: Sauntered; sauntering.


saunter (n.)

a leisurely stroll, 1828, from saunter (v.). Earlier it meant idle occupation, diversion (1728).


saurian (n.)

reptile of the order Sauria, 1819, from Modern Latin sauria the order of reptiles, from Greek sauros
lizard (see -saurus). Sauropod is 1891, from Modern Latin sauropoda (O.C. Marsh, 1884), second
element from Greek pous foot (see foot (n.)).


sausage (n.)

mid-15c., sawsyge, from Old North French saussiche (Modern French saucisse), from Vulgar Latin
*salsica sausage, from salsicus seasoned with salt, from Latin salsus salted (see sauce).


saute (n.)

1813, from French saut&eacute;, literally jumped, bounced (in reference to tossing continually while
cooking), past participle of sauter to jump, from Latin saltare to hop, dance, frequentative of
salire to leap (see salient (adj.)). As an adjective, fried quickly, from 1869. As a verb from 1859.
Related: Sauteed.


Sauterne (n.)

also Sauternes, name for certain white wines, 1711, from Sauterne, district near Bordeaux where it
is made.


savage (adj.)

mid-13c., fierce, ferocious; c.1300, wild, undomesticated, untamed (of animals and places), from Old
French sauvage, salvage wild, savage, untamed, strange, pagan, from Late Latin salvaticus,
alteration of silvaticus wild, literally of the woods, from silva forest, grove (see sylvan). Of
persons, the meaning reckless, ungovernable is attested from c.1400, earlier in sense indomitable,
valiant (c.1300).


savage (n.)

wild person, c.1400, from savage (adj.).


savage (v.)

to tear with the teeth, maul, 1880, from savage (adj.). Earlier to act the savage (1560s). Related:
Savaged; savaging.


savagely (adv.)

c.1400; see savage (adj.) + -ly (2).


savagery (n.)

1590s; see savage (adj.) + -ry.


savannah (n.)

also savanna, treeless plain, 1550s, from Spanish sabana, earlier zavana treeless plain, from Taino
(Arawakan) zabana. In U.S. use, especially in Florida, a tract of low-lying marshy ground (1670s).


Savannah

port city in U.S. state of Georgia, from savana, name applied to the Native Americans in the area by
early European explorers, perhaps from a self-designation of the Shawnee Indians, or from the
European topographical term (see savannah).


savant (n.)

one eminent for learning, 1719, from French savant a learned man, noun use of adjective savant
learned, knowing, former present participle of savoir to know, from Vulgar Latin *sapere, from Latin
sapere be wise (see sapient).


savate (n.)

French method of fighting with the feet, 1862, from French savate, literally a kind of shoe (see
sabotage).


save (v.)

c.1200, to deliver from some danger; rescue from peril, bring to safety, also prevent the death of;
also theological, to deliver from sin or its consequences; admit to eternal life; gain salvation,
from Old French sauver keep (safe), protect, redeem, from Late Latin salvare make safe, secure, from
Latin salvus safe (see safe (adj.)). From c.1300 as reserve for future use, hold back, store up
instead of spending; hence keep possession of (late 14c.).   Save face (1898) first was used among
the British community in China and is said to be from Chinese; it has not been found in Chinese, but
tiu lien to lose face does occur. To not (do something) to save one's life is recorded from 1848. To
save (one's) breath cease talking or arguing is from 1926.


save (n.)

in the sports sense of act of preventing opponent from scoring, 1890, from save (v.).


save (prep.)

except, early 14c., from adjective save, which also was an early variant of safe (adj.), paralleling
evolution in Old French sauf safe, prepositional use of the adjective, in phrases such as saulve
l'honneur save (our) honor; also a use in Latin (salva lege, etc.).


saved (adj.)

delivered from damnation, c.1300, past participle adjective from save (v.). Saved by the bell is
from 1914 in reference to prize fighting; 1912 in reference to the classroom; figurative use from
1915, probably at first from the fighting sense.


saveloy (n.)

1837, corruption of French cervelas, from Italian cervellata, from cervello brain, from Latin
cerebrum (see cerebral). So called because it originally was made of pigs' brains.


saver (n.)

c.1300, savior, agent noun from save (v.). Meaning one who economizes is 1540s; meaning means of
saving is from 1660s.


saving (prep.)

late 14c., from safe (adj.); see save (prep.).


savings (n.)

money saved, 1737, plural of saving, vwerbal noun from save (v.). Related: Savings account attested
by 1882; savings bank, 1817. S &amp; L for savings and loan attested from 1951.


savior (n.)

c.1300, one who delivers or rescues from peril, also a title of Jesus Christ, from Old French
sauveour, from Late Latin salvatorem (nominative salvator) a saver, preserver (source also of
Spanish salvador, Italian salvatore), from salvatus, past participle of salvare to save (see save
(v.)). In Christian sense, a translation of Greek soter savior. Replaced Old English h&aelig;lend,
literally healing, noun use of present participle of h&aelig;lan (see heal).


saviour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of savior (q.v.); for suffix, see -or.


savoir-faire (n.)

instinctive knowledge of the right course of action in any circumstance, 1815, from French,
literally to know (how) to do, from savoir to know (from Latin sapere; see sapient) + faire (from
Latin facere; see factitious). French also has savoir-vivre ability in good society; knowledge of
customs in the world.


Savonarola

Girolamo Savonarola (1452-1498), Dominican monk famous for his fierce opposition to moral license
and Church corruption.


savor (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French savor flavor, taste; sauce, seasoning; delight, pleasure, from Latin
saporem (nominative sapor) taste, flavor, related to sapere to have a flavor (see sapient).


savor (v.)

c.1300, from Old French savorer taste, breathe in; appreciate, care for, from Late Latin saporare,
from Latin sapor (see savor (n.)). Related: Savored; savoring.


savory (adj.)

pleasing in taste or smell, c.1200, from Old French savore tasty, flavorsome (Modern French
savour&eacute;),  past participle of savourer to taste (see savor (n.)).


savory (n.)

aromatic mint, late 14c., perhaps an alteration of Old English s&aelig;&thorn;erie, which is
ultimately from Latin satureia savory (n.), a foreign word in Latin. But early history of the word
suggests transmission via Old French savereie. In either case, the form of the word probably was
altered by influence of the Middle English or Old French form of savory (adj.).


savour

chiefly British English spelling of savor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or. Related: Savoured;
savouring.


savoury

chiefly British English spelling of savory; also see -or.


Savoy

region in southeastern France (before 1800 part of the Kingdom of Sardinia), French Savoie, from
Roman Sapaudia, of unknown origin. Related: Savoyard.


savvy (n.)

1785, practical sense, intelligence; also a verb, to know, to understand; West Indies pidgin
borrowing of French savez(-vous)? do you know? or Spanish sabe (usted) you know, both from Vulgar
Latin *sapere, from Latin sapere be wise, be knowing (see sapient). The adjective is first recorded
1905, from the noun. Related: Savvily; savviness.


saw (n.1)

toothed cutting tool, Old English sagu, from Proto-Germanic *sago a cutting tool (cognates: Old
English seax knife, Old Norse s&#246;g, Norwegian sag, Danish sav, Swedish s&#229;g, Middle Dutch
saghe, Dutch zaag, Old High German saga, German S&auml;ge saw), from PIE root *sek- to cut
(cognates: Latin secare to cut, Russian sech' to cut; see section (n.)).


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


saw (v.)

cut with a saw, c.1200, sauen, saghen, from saw (n.1). Strong conjugation began by c.1400 on model
of draw, etc. Related: Sawed; sawing. Sawed-off short, cut short is attested 1887 of persons, 1898
of shotguns.


saw (v.)

past tense of see; from Old English plural sawon.


sawbones (n.)

surgeon, 1837, slang, from verbal phrase; see saw (v.) + bone (n.).


sawbuck (n.)

ten-dollar bill, American English slang, 1850, from resemblance of X (Roman numeral 10) to the ends
of a sawhorse. Sawbuck in the sense of sawhorse is attested only from 1862 but presumably is older
(see saw (n.1)).


sawdust (n.)

1520s, from saw (n.1) + dust (n.).


sawfish (n.)

also saw-fish, 1660s; see saw (n.1.) + fish (n.).


sawhorse (n.)

support or rack for holding wood while it is cut by a saw, 1778, from saw (n.1) + horse (n.) in the
mechanical sense.


sawmill (n.)

1550s; see saw (n.1) + mill (n.1).


sawn

strong past participle of saw (v.), attested from c.1400.


sawtooth (n.)

c.1600, from saw (n.1) + tooth.


sawyer (n.)

mid-13c. one whose occupation is sawing timber into planks, boards, etc. (as a surname from c.1200),
alteration of sawer, agent noun from saw (v.), influenced by French-derived words in -ier (such as
lawyer, bowyer, clothier).


sax (n.)

1923, colloquial shortening of saxophone.


saxifrage (n.)

type of plant typically found in cold regions, late 14c., from Old French saxifrage (13c.), from
Late Latin saxifraga, name of a kind of herb, from Latin saxifraga herba, literally a rock-breaking
herb, from saxifragus stonebreaking, from saxum stone, rock + frag-, root of frangere to break (see
fraction). Pliny says the plant was so called because it was given to dissolve gallstones, but a
more likely explanation is that it was so called because it grows in crevices in rocks. (Latin used
different words for stone and gallstone -- saxum and calculus). Related: Saxifragaceous.


Saxon (n.)

c.1200, from Late Latin Saxonem (nominative Saxo; also source of French Saxon, Spanish Sajon,
Italian Sassone), usually found in plural Saxones, from a Germanic source (Old English Seaxe, Old
High German Sahsun, German Sachse Saxon), with a possible literal sense of swordsmen (compare Old
English seax, Old Frisian, Old Norse sax knife, short sword, dagger, Old High German Saxnot, name of
a war-god), from Proto-Germanic *sahsam knife, from PIE *sek- to cut (see section (n.)).    The word
figures in the well-known story, related by Geoffrey of Monmouth, who got it from Nennius, of the
treacherous slaughter by the Anglo-Saxons of their British hosts:Accordingly they all met at the
time and place appointed, and began to treat of peace; and when a fit opportunity offered for
executing his villany, Hengist cried out, Nemet oure Saxas, and the same instant seized Vortigern,
and held him by his cloak. The Saxons, upon the signal given, drew their daggers, and falling upon
the princes, who little suspected any such design, assassinated them to the number of four hundred
and sixty barons and consuls ....The OED editors helpfully point out that the correct Old English
(with an uninflected plural) would be nima&eth; eowre seax. For other Germanic national names that
may have derived from characteristic tribal weapons, see Frank, Lombard. As an adjective from 1560s.
Still in 20c. used by Celtic speakers to mean an Englishman (Welsh Sais, plural Seison an
Englishman; Seisoneg English).    In reference to the modern German state of Saxony (German Sachsen,
French Saxe) it is attested from 1630s. Saxon is the source of the -sex in Essex, Sussex, etc.
(compare Middlesex, from Old English Middel-Seaxe Middle Saxons). Bede distinguished the Anglo-
Saxons, who conquered much of southern Britain, from the Ealdesaxe Old Saxons, who stayed in
Germany.


saxophone (n.)

1851, from French saxophone, named for Antoine Joseph Adolphe Sax (1814-1894), Belgian instrument
maker who devised it c.1840, + Greek -phonos voiced, sounding. His father, Charles Joseph
(1791-1865) invented the less popular saxhorn (1845). The surname is a spelling variant of Sachs,
Sacks, literally Saxon. Related: Saxophonist.


say (v.)

Old English secgan to utter, inform, speak, tell, relate, from Proto-Germanic *sagjanan (cognates:
Old Saxon seggian, Old Norse segja, Danish sige, Old Frisian sedsa, Middle Dutch segghen, Dutch
zeggen, Old High German sagen, German sagen to say), from PIE *sokwyo-, from root *sekw- (3) to say,
utter (cognates: Hittite shakiya- to declare, Lithuanian sakyti to say, Old Church Slavonic sociti
to vindicate, show, Old Irish insce speech, Old Latin inseque to tell say).    Past tense said
developed from Old English segde. Not attested in use with inanimate objects (clocks, signs, etc.)
as subjects before 1930. You said it you're right first recorded 1919; you can say that again as a
phrase expressing agreement is recorded from 1942, American English. You don't say (so) as an
expression of astonishment (often ironic) is first recorded 1779, American English.


say (n.)

what someone says, 1570s, from say (v.). Meaning right or authority to influence a decision is from
1610s. Extended form say-so is first recorded 1630s. Compare Old English secge speech.


saying (n.)

utterance, recitation, action of the verb 'say,'  c.1300, verbal noun from say (v.); meaning
something that has been said (usually by someone thought important) is from c.1300; sense of a
proverb is first attested mid-15c.   <b>&#199;a va sans dire</b>, a familiar French locution, whose
English equivalent might be that is a matter of course, or that may be taken for granted. But
recently it has become the tendency to translate it literally, that goes without saying, and these
words, though originally uncouth and almost unmeaning to the unpractised ear, are gradually
acquiring the exact meaning of the French. [Walsh, 1892]


sayonara

farewell, good-bye 1875, from Japanese, literally if it is to be that way, from sayo that way, +
nara if.


says

third person singular of say (v.), c.1300, eventually replacing saith.


sayyid

also sayid, Islamic title of honor, applied to descendants of Hussein, Muhammad's grandson, 1788,
from Arabic sayyid lord, chief, perhaps literally speaker, spokesman.


sbirro (n.)

Italian policeman, 1660s, from Italian, police officer (plural sbirri), from Late Latin birrus red,
from Greek pyrros red, literally fire-colored, from pyr fire (see fire (n.)). With unoriginal prefix
(compare Spanish esbirro). Probably so called from the original color of the uniform.


scab (n.)

mid-13c., skin disease, developed from Old English sceabb scab, itch (related to scafan to shave,
scrape, scratch) and from Old Norse skabb scab, itch, both from Proto-Germanic *skab- scratch,
shave, from PIE *(s)kep- to cut, scrape, hack (see scabies). Sense reinforced by cognate Latin
scabies scab, itch, mange (from scabere to scratch).    Meaning crust which forms over a wound or
sore is first attested c.1400. Meaning strikebreaker first recorded 1806, from earlier sense of
person who refuses to join a trade union (1777), probably from meaning despicable person (1580s),
possibly borrowed in this sense from Middle Dutch.


scabbard (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French *escauberc sheath, vagina (13c.), from Frankish or another Germanic
source, from Proto-Germanic *sker-berg-, literally sword-protector, from *skar blade (source also of
Old High German scar scissors, blade, sword, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut; see shear (v.)) + *berg-
protect (source also of Old High German bergan to protect; see bury).


scabies (n.)

skin disease, the itch, c.1400, from Latin scabies mange, itch, roughness, from scabere to scratch,
scrape, from PIE root *(s)kep-, a base forming words meaning to cut, scrape, hack (cognates: Gothic
scaban, Old English sceafan to scrape, shave; Greek skaptein to dig; Old Church Slavonic skobli
scraper; Lithuanian skabus sharp, skabeti to cut; Lettish skabrs splintery, sharp). Related:
Scabious.


scabrous (adj.)

1570s, harsh, unmusical (implied in scabrously), from Late Latin scabrosus rough, from Latin scaber
rough, scaly, related to scabere to scratch, scrape (see scabies). Sense in English evolved to
vulgar (1881), squalid (1939), and nasty, repulsive (c.1951). Classical literal sense of rough,
rugged attested in English from 1650s. Related: Scabrously; scabrousness.


scad (n.)

c.1600, Cornish name for a type of fish (also known as horse mackerel) abundant on the British
coast; of uncertain origin, perhaps a variant of shad. OED compares Welsh ysgaden herrings,
Norwegian dialectal skad, Swedish sk&#228;dde flounder.


scads (n.)

large amounts, 1869, American English, earlier dollar (1855, usually in plural), of uncertain
origin. Unknown connection to scad, the fish, which were often very abundant and occasionally seen
in enormous shoals:    In July, 1834, as Mr. Yarrell informs us, most extraordinary shoals passed up
the channel along the coast of Glamorganshire; their passage occupied a week, and they were
evidently in pursuit of the fry of the herring. The water appeared one dark mass of fish, and they
were caught by cart-loads, and might even be baled out of the water by the hands alone. [British
Fish and Fisheries, 1849]


scaffold (n.)

mid-14c., wooden framework used in building, etc., temporary structure for workmen to make walls, a
shortening of an Old North French variant of Old French eschafaut scaffold (Modern French
&#233;chafaud), probably altered (by influence of eschace a prop, support) from chaffaut, from
Vulgar Latin *catafalicum (see catafalque). Meaning platform for a hanging is from 1550s. Dutch
schavot, German Schafott, Danish skafot are from French. As a verb from 1540s.


scaffolding (n.)

temporary support, mid-14c.; see scaffold.


scag (n.)

see skag.


scalable (adj.)

1570s, able to be climbed; see scale (v.1) + -able. From 1936 as able to be graded by scale.
Related: Scalably; scalability.


scalar (adj.)

resembling a ladder, 1650s, from Latin scalaris of or pertaining to a ladder, from scalae (plural)
ladder, steps, flight of steps (see scale (n.2)). Mathematical sense first recorded 1846.


scalawag (n.)

also scallawag, disreputable fellow, 1848, American English, originally in trade union jargon, of
uncertain origin; perhaps an alteration (by influence of wag habitual joker) of Scottish scallag
farm servant, rustic, itself an alteration of Scalloway, one of the Shetland Islands, wit the
reference being to little Shetland ponies (An early recorded sense of scalawag was undersized or
worthless animal, 1854). In U.S. history, used from 1862 as a derogatory term for anti-Confederate
native white Southerners.


scald (v.)

c.1200, to be very hot; to afflict painfully with hot liquid or steam, from Old North French
escalder to scald, to scorch (Old French eschalder heat, boil up, bubble, Modern French
&eacute;chauder), from Late Latin excaldare bathe in hot water (source also of Spanish escaldar,
Italian scaldare heat with hot water), from Latin ex- off (see ex-) + calidus hot (see calorie).
Related: Scalded; scalding. The noun is c.1600, from the verb.


scalding (adj.)

early 13c., present participle adjective from scald (v.)). Scalding hot recorded from late 14c.


scale (n.1)

skin plates on fish or snakes, c.1300, from Old French escale cup, scale, shell pod, husk (12c.,
Modern French &eacute;cale) scale, husk, from Frankish *skala or some other Germanic source, from
Proto-Germanic *sk&aelig;lo split, divide (cognates: Dutch schaal a scale, husk, Old High German
scala shell, Gothic skalja tile, Old English scealu shell, husk), from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut,
cleave, split (cognates: Latin culter knife, scalpere to cut, scrape; Old Church Slavonic skolika
mussel, shell, Russian skala rind, bark, Lithuanian skelti split, Old English scell shell, scalu
drinking cup, bowl, scale of a balance).    In reference to humans, as a condition of certain skin
diseases, it is attested from c.1400. As what falls from one's eye when blindness ends (usually
figurative), it echoes Acts ix:18 (Latin tanquam squam&aelig;, Greek hosei lepides).


scale (n.2)

weighing instrument, early 15c.; earlier pan of a balance (late 14c.); earlier still drinking cup
(c.1200), from Old Norse skal bowl, drinking cup, in plural, weighing scale from a noun derivative
of Proto-Germanic *sk&aelig;la split, divide (cognates: Old Norse skel shell, Old English scealu,
Old Saxon skala a bowl (to drink from), Old High German scala, German Schale a bowl, dish, cup,
Middle Dutch scale, Dutch schaal drinking cup, bowl, shell, scale of a balance), from PIE root
*skel- (1) to cut (see scale (n.1)).    The connecting sense seems to be of half of a bivalve
(split) shell used as a drinking cup or a pan for weighing. But according to Paulus Diaconus the
drinking cup sense originated from a supposed custom of making goblets from skulls (see skull).
Related: Scales. This, as a name for the zodiac constellation Libra, is attested in English from
1630s.


scale (v.1)

to climb by or as by a ladder, late 14c., from scale (n.) a ladder, from Latin scala ladder, flight
of stairs, from *scansla, from stem of scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Related: Scaled; scaling.


scale (n.3)

series of registering marks to measure by; marks laid down to determine distance along a line, late
14c., from Latin scala ladder, staircase (see scale (v.1)). Meaning succession or series of steps is
from c.1600; that of standard for estimation (large scale, small scale, etc.) is from 1620s. Musical
sense (1590s), and the meaning proportion of a representation to the actual object (1660s) are via
Italian scala, from Latin scala.


scale (v.3)

weigh in scales, 1690s, from scale (n.2). Earlier to compare, estimate (c.1600). Meaning measure or
regulate by a scale is from 1798, from scale (n.3); that of weigh out in proper quantities is from
1841. Scale down reduce proportionately is attested from 1887. Scale factor is from 1948. Related:
Scaled; scaling.


scale (v.2)

remove the scales of (a fish, etc.), c.1400, from scale (n.1). Intransitive sense to come off in
scales is from 1520s. Related: Scaled; scaling.


scale-pan (n.)

1830, from scale (n.2) + pan (n.).


scalene (adj.)

having unequal sides, 1680s, from Late Latin scalenus, from Greek skalenos uneven, unequal, odd
(numbered), as a noun, triangle with unequal sides, from skallein chop, hoe, from PIE *(s)kel- (1)
to cut (see scale (n.1)).


scallion (n.)

late 14c., scalun kind of onion, also thing of little value, from Anglo-French escalone, Old North
French escalogne, or Old French eschaloigne, all from Vulgar Latin *escalonia, from Latin
(c&aelig;pa) Ascalonia (onion) from Ascalon, seaport in southwestern Levant (modern Ashkelon in
Israel). Cognate with shallot.


scallop (n.)

bivalve mollusk, c.1400, from Old French escalope shell (of a nut), carpace, variant of eschalope,
probably from a Germanic source (compare Old Norse skalpr sheath, Middle Dutch schelpe shell); see
scale (n.1). The shells of the larger species have been used as domestic utensils. Extended 17c. to
objects shaped like scallop shells, especially in design and dress. The verb in the cookery sense,
to bake with sauce in a scallop shell-shaped pan, is attested from 1737. Related: Scalloped;
scalloping.


scalp (n.)

mid-14c., top of the head (including hair), presumably from a Scandinavian source (though exact
cognates are wanting) related to Old Norse skalli a bald head, skalpr sheath, scabbard,from the
source of scale (n.1). French scalpe, German, Danish, Swedish skalp are from English. Meaning head
skin and hair as proof of death or a victory trophy is from c.1600.


scalp (v.)

to cut off (someone's) scalp, 1670s, from scalp (n.), originally in reference to North American
Indians. For ticket re-selling sense, see scalper. Related: Scalped; scalping. Compare German
skalpern, Danish skalpere, Swedish skalpera. French scalper is from Germanic. Similarity to Latin
scalpere to cut, carve is accidental.


scalpel (n.)

1742, from Latin scalpellum a surgical knife, diminutive of scalprum knife, chisel, tool for
scraping or cutting, from scalpere to carve, cut, related to sculpere to carve, from PIE root
*(s)kel- to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).


scalper (n.)

1650s as a type of surgical instrument; 1760 as one who removes scalps, agent noun from scalp (v.).
Meaning person who re-sells tickets at unauthorized prices for a profit, 1869, American English;
earliest reference is to theater tickets, but often used late 19c. of brokers who sold unused
portions of railway tickets. [Railways charged less per mile for longer-distance tickets; therefore
someone travelling from New York to Chicago could buy a ticket all the way to San Francisco, get out
at Chicago and sell it to a scalper, and come away with more money than if he had simply bought a
ticket to Chicago; the Chicago scalper would hold the ticket till he found someone looking for a
ticket to San Francisco, then sell it to him at a slight advance, but for less than the official
price.] Perhaps from scalp (v.); scalper was a generic term for con man, cheater in late 19c. Or
perhaps the connecting sense is the bounty offered for scalps of certain destructive animals
(attested in New England from 1703) and sometimes Indians (i.e., having only part of something, but
still getting paid). Some, though, see a connection rather to scalpel, the surgical instrument.


scaly (adj.)

also scaley, late 14c., from scale (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Scaliness.


scam

1963, noun and verb, U.S. slang, a carnival term, of unknown origin. Perhaps related to 19c. British
slang scamp cheater, swindler (see scamp (n.)).


scamp (n.)

1782, highway robber, probably from dialectal verb scamp to roam (1753, perhaps from 16c.),
shortened from scamper. Used affectionately in sense rascal since 1808.


scamp (v.)

do in a hasty manner, 1837, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse skemma to shorten,
make shorter, from skammr short; brief; lately), or a blend of scant and skimp [Klein], or a back-
formation from scamper. Related: Scamped; scamping.


scamper (v.)

to run quickly, 1680s, probably from Flemish schampeeren, frequentative of schampen run away, from
Old North French escamper (Old French eschamper) to run away, flee, quit the battlefield, escape,
from Vulgar Latin *excampare decamp, literally leave the field, from Latin ex campo, from ex out of
(see ex-) + campo, ablative of campus field (see campus). A vogue word late 17c. Related: Scampered;
scampering. The noun is 1680s, from the verb.


scampi (n.)

1930, plural of Italian scampo prawn, ultimately from Greek kampe a bending, a winding, from PIE
root *kamp- to bend (see campus).


scan (v.)

late 14c., mark off verse in metric feet, from Late Latin scandere to scan verse, originally, in
classical Latin, to climb, rise, mount (the connecting notion is of the rising and falling rhythm of
poetry), from PIE *skand- to spring, leap, climb (cognates: Sanskrit skandati hastens, leaps, jumps;
Greek skandalon stumbling block; Middle Irish sescaind he sprang, jumped, sceinm a bound, jump).
Missing -d in English is probably from confusion with suffix -ed (see lawn (n.1)). Sense of look at
closely, examine minutely (as one does when counting metrical feet in poetry) first recorded 1540s.
The (opposite) sense of look over quickly, skim is first attested 1926. Related: Scanned; scanning.


scan (n.)

1706, close investigation, from scan (v.). Meaning act of scanning is from 1937; sense of image
obtained by scanning is from 1953.


scandal (n.)

1580s, discredit caused by irreligious conduct, from Middle French scandale (12c.), from Late Latin
scandalum cause for offense, stumbling block, temptation, from Greek skandalon a trap or snare laid
for an enemy, in New Testament, metaphorically as a stumbling block, offense; originally trap with a
springing device, from PIE *skand- to leap, climb (see scan (v.); also see slander (n.), which is
another form of the same word).    Attested from early 13c., but the modern word likely is a
reborrowing. Meaning malicious gossip, also shameful action or event is from 1590s; sense of person
whose conduct is a disgrace is from 1630s. Scandal sheet sensational newspaper is from 1939.
Scandal-monger is from 1702.


scandalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of scandalize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Scandalised;
scandalising.


scandalize (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French scandaliser (12c.), from Church Latin scandalizare, from late Greek
skandalizein to make to stumble; tempt; give offense to (someone), from skandalon (see scandal).
Originally make a public scandal of; sense of shock by doing something improper first recorded
1640s. Dryden and Shakespeare use simple scandal as a verb. Related: Scandalized; scandalizing;
scandalization.


scandalous (adj.)

late 15c., from French scandaleux, from Medieval Latin scandalosus scandalous, from Church Latin
scandalum (see scandal). Related: Scandalously.


Scandinavia

1765, from Late Latin Scandinavia, Skandinovia, a mistake for Scadinavia, from a Germanic source
(compare Old English Scedenig, Old Norse Skaney south end of Sweden), from Proto-Germanic
*skadinaujo Scadia island, first element of uncertain origin, second element from *aujo thing on the
water, from PIE *akwa- water (see aqua-). It might truly have been an island when the word was
formed; the coastlines of the Baltic Sea has changed dramatically since the end of the Ice Ages.


Scandinavian (adj.)

1784; see Scandinavia + -ian. From 1830 as a noun; 1959 in reference to furniture and decor. In U.S.
colloquial use sometimes Scandahoovian (1929), Scandiwegian. Alternative adjective Scandian (1660s)
is from Latin Scandia.


scandium (n.)

1879, from Modern Latin Scandia (see Scandinavia) + chemical ending -ium.


scanner (n.)

1550s, person who examines critically, agent noun from scan (v.). From 1927 as a type of mechanical
device, in mid-20c. use especially of radar and medical devices; later of computer accessories.


scansion (n.)

1670s, action of marking off of verse in metric feet, from Late Latin scansionem (nominative
scansio), in classical Latin, act of climbing, noun of action from past participle stem of scandere
to climb (see scan (v.)). From 1650s in English in literal sense of action of climbing up.


scant (adj.)

mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skamt, neuter of skammr short, brief, from
Proto-Germanic *skamma- (cognates: Old English scamm short, Old High German skemmen to shorten),
perhaps ultimately hornless, from PIE *kem- (see hind (n.)). Also in Middle English as a noun, scant
supply, scarcity, from Old Norse. As a verb and adverb from mid-15c.


scantily (adv.)

1774; see scanty + -ly (2).


scantling (adj.)

1520s, measured or prescribed size, altered from scantlon, scantiloun dimension (c.1400), earlier a
type of mason's tool for measuring thickness (c.1300), a shortening of Old French escantillon
(Modern French &#233;chantillon sample pattern), of uncertain origin; perhaps ultimately from Latin
scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Sense influenced by scant. Meaning small wooden beam is 1660s.
Related: Scantlings.


scantly (adv.)

late 14c., from scant + -ly (2). OED reports it exceedingly common from the 15th to the middle of
the 17th c.; in the 18th c. it had app. become obsolere; revived in literary use by Scott.


scantness (n.)

late 14c., from scant (adj.) + -ness. Chaucer uses scantity.


scanty (adj.)

1650s, meager, barely sufficient for use; 1701, too small, limited in scope, from scant + -y (2).
Related: Scantiness (1560s). Scanties (n.) underwear (especially for women) attested from 1928.


scape (n.1)

scenery view, 1773, abstracted from landscape (n.); as a comb. element, first attested use is 1796,
in prisonscape.


scape (v.)

late 13c., shortened form of escape; frequent in prose till late 17c. Related: Scaped (sometimes
15c.-16c. with strong past tense scope); scaping. As a noun from c.1300.


scape (n.2)

shaft, stem, c.1600, from Latin scapus a stalk, shaft, cognate with Greek skapos staff, skeptron
staff, scepter (see scepter).


scapegoat (n.)

1530, goat sent into the wilderness on the Day of Atonement, symbolic bearer of the sins of the
people, coined by Tyndale from scape (n.1) + goat to translate Latin caper emissarius, itself a
translation in Vulgate of Hebrew 'azazel (Lev. xvi:8,10,26), which was read as 'ez ozel goat that
departs, but which others hold to be the proper name of a devil or demon in Jewish mythology
(sometimes identified with Canaanite deity Aziz).    Jerome's reading also was followed by Martin
Luther (der ledige Bock), Symmachus (tragos aperkhomenos), and others (compare French bouc
&eacute;missaire), but the question of who, or what (or even where) is meant by 'azazel is a vexed
one. The Revised Version (1884) simply restores Azazel. But the old translation has its modern
defenders:   Azazel is an active participle or participial noun, derived ultimately from azal
(connected with the Arabic word azala, and meaning removed), but immediately from the reduplicate
form of that verb, azazal. The reduplication of the consonants of the root in Hebrew and Arabic
gives the force of repetition, so that while azal means removed, azalzal means removed by a
repetition of acts. Azalzel or azazel, therefore, means one who removes by a series of acts. ... The
interpretation is founded on sound etymological grounds, it suits the context wherever the word
occurs, it is consistent with the remaining ceremonial of the Day of Atonement, and it accords with
the otherwise known religious beliefs and symbolical practices of the Israelites. [Rev. F. Meyrick,
Leviticus, London, 1882]    Meaning one who is blamed or punished for the mistakes or sins of others
first recorded 1824; the verb is attested from 1943. Related: Scapegoated; scapegoating.   For the
formation, compare scapegrace, also scape-gallows one who deserves hanging.


scapegrace (n.)

1767, from scape (v.) + grace (n.); as if one who escapes the grace of God. Possibly influenced by
scapegoat.


scaphoid (adj.)

1741, from Modern Latin scaphoides boat-shaped, from Greek skaphoeides, with -oeides (see -oid) +
skaphe light boat, skiff; also basin, trough, a bowl; literally thing dug or cut out, from PIE
*skabh-, from root *(s)kep- to cut (see scabies). Related: Scaphoidal (1680s).


scapula (n.)

shoulder blade, 1570s, Modern Latin, from Late Latin scapula shoulder, from Latin scapulae (plural)
shoulders, shoulder blades, perhaps originally spades, shovels, on notion of similar shape, but
animal shoulder blades might have been used as scraping tools in primitive times, from PIE *skap-,
variant of *skep- to cut, scrape (see scabies).


scapular (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to the scapula, from Modern Latin scapularis, from Latin scapula shoulder (see
scapula). The noun (late 15c., also in Old English) in reference to a short cloak for the shoulders
prescribed for certain monks, is from Medieval Latin scapulare, from scapula. Related: Scapulary.


scapulimancy (n.)

divination by means of the cracks in a shoulder-blade put into a fire, 1871, from comb. form of
scapula + -mancy.


scar (n.)

late 14c., from Old French escare scab (Modern French escarre), from Late Latin eschara, from Greek
eskhara scab formed after a burn, literally hearth, fireplace, of unknown origin. English sense
probably influenced by Middle English skar (late 14c.) crack, cut, incision, from Old Norse
skar&eth;, related to score (n.). Figurative sense attested from 1580s.


scar (v.)

1550s, from scar (n.1). Figurative use from 1590s. Related: Scarred; scarring.


scar (n.2)

bare and broken rocky face of a cliff or mountain, 1670s, earlier rock, crag (14c.), perhaps from
Old Norse sker isolated rock or low reef in the sea, from Proto-Germanic *sker- to cut (see shear
(v.)).


scarab (n.)

black dung beetle, held sacred by the ancient Egyptians, 1570s, from Middle French scarabe&eacute;,
from Latin scarabaeus, name of a type of beetle, from Greek karabos beetle, crayfish, a foreign
word, according to Klein probably Macedonian (the suffix -bos is non-Greek). Related: Scarabaean. In
ancient use, also a gem cut in a shape like a scarab beetle and with an inscription on the
underside.


scaramouche (n.)

1660s, name of a cowardly braggart (supposed by some to represent a Spanish don) in traditional
Italian comedy, from Italian Scaramuccia, literally skirmish, from schermire to fence, from a
Germanic source (such as Old High German skirmen defend); see skirmish (n.). According to OED, a
vogue word in late 17c. London due to the popularity of Italian actor Tiberio Fiurelli (1608-1694)
in the part.


Scarborough

place in Yorkshire, earlier Scar&#240;abork, etc., apparently a viking name, from Old Norse and
meaning fortified place of a man called Skarthi, identified in old chronicles as Thorgils Skarthi,
literally Thorgils Harelip, from Old Norse skart&#240; notch, hack (in the edge of a thing);
mountain pass. It has been noted that a literal reading of the name as gap-hill suits the location.
Scarborough warning short notice or none is from 1540s.


scarce (adj.)

c.1300, restricted in quantity, from Old North French scars scanty, scarce (Old French eschars,
Modern French &#233;chars) from Vulgar Latin *scarsus, from *escarpsus, from *excarpere pluck out,
from classical Latin excerpere pluck out (see excerpt). As an adverb early 14c. from the adjective.
Phrase to make oneself scarce go away first attested 1771, noted as a current cant phrase. Related:
Scarcely.


scarcity (n.)

c.1300, from Old North French escarcete (Old French escharsete), from eschars (see scarce).


scare (v.)

1590s, alteration of Middle English skerren (c.1200), from Old Norse skirra to frighten; to shrink
from, shun; to prevent, avert, related to skjarr timid, shy, afraid of, of unknown origin. In
Scottish also skair, skar, and in dialectal English skeer, skear, which seems to preserve the older
pronunciation. To scare up procure, obtain is first recorded 1846, American English, from notion of
rousing game from cover. Related: Scared; scaring.


scare (n.)

something that frightens; sudden panic, sudden terror inspired by a trifling cause, false alarm,
1520s, alteration of Middle English sker fear, dread (c.1400), from scare (v.). Scare tactic
attested from 1948.


scarecrow (n.)

1550s, from scare (v.) + crow (n.). Earliest reference is to a person employed to scare birds.
Meaning device of straw and cloth in grotesque resemblance of a man, set up in a grain field or
garden to frighten crows, is implied by 1580s; hence gaunt, ridiculous person (1590s). The older
name for such a thing was shewel. Shoy-hoy apparently is another old word for a straw-stuffed
scarecrow (Cobbett began using it as a political insult in 1819 and others picked it up; OED defines
it as one who scares away birds from a sown field, and says it is imitative of their cry).


scared (adj.)

past participle adjective from scare (v.). Scared stiff first recorded 1900; scared shitless is from
1936. Scaredy-cat timid person first attested 1906.


scaremonger (n.)

also scare-monger, 1888, from scare (n.) + monger (n.).


scarf (v.)

eat hastily, 1960, U.S. teen slang, originally a noun meaning food, meal (1932), perhaps imitative,
or from scoff (attested in a similar sense from 1846). Or perhaps from a dialectal survival of Old
English sceorfan to gnaw, bite (see scarf (n.2)); a similar word is found in a South African context
in the 1600s. Related: Scarfed; scarfing.


scarf (n.1)

band of silk, strip of cloth, 1550s, a band worn across the body or over the shoulders, probably
from Old North French escarpe sash, sling, which probably is identical with Old French escherpe
pilgrim's purse suspended from the neck, perhaps from Frankish *skirpja or some other Germanic
source (compare Old Norse skreppa small bag, wallet, satchel), or from Medieval Latin scirpa little
bag woven of rushes, from Latin scirpus rush, bulrush, of unknown origin [Klein]. As a cold-weather
covering for the neck, first recorded 1844. Plural scarfs began to yield to scarves early 18c., on
model of half/halves, etc.


scarf (n.2)

connecting joint, late 13c., probably from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse skarfr nail for
fastening a joint, Swedish skarf, Norwegian skarv). A general North Sea Germanic ship-building word
(compare Dutch scherf), the exact relationship of all these is unclear. Also borrowed into Romanic
(French &eacute;cart, Spanish escarba); perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *skarfaz (cognates:
Old English sceorfan to gnaw, bite), from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). Also used as a
verb.


scarification (n.)

c.1400, act of covering with scratches or slight cuts, from Old French scarification (14c.), from
Late Latin scarificationem (nominative scarificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
scarificare, from Latin scarifare scratch open, from Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline,
sketch, from skariphos pencil, stylus, from PIE root *skribh- to cut, separate, sift (see script
(n.)).


scarify (v.)

mid-15c., make incisions in the bark of a tree, from Middle French scarifier score, scrape (leather
or hide), 14c., from Late Latin scarificare (see scarification). The sense cover with scars (1680s)
is a sense-shift from influence of scar (v.). Related: Scarified; scarifier; scarifying.


scarily (adv.)

1845, timidly; 1967, unnervingly, in a positive sense; see scary + -ly (2).


scarlatina (n.)

1803, from Modern Latin scarlatina (Sydenham, 1676), from Italian scarlattina (Lancelotti, 1527),
fem. of scarlattino (adj.), diminutive of scarlatto scarlet (see scarlet). It is a synonym for
scarlet fever, not a milder form of it. Related: Scarlattinal.


scarlet (n.)

mid-13c., rich cloth (often, but not necessarily, bright red), from a shortened form of Old French
escarlate scarlet (color), top-quality fabric (12c., Modern French &eacute;carlate), from Medieval
Latin scarlatum scarlet, cloth of scarlet (also source of Italian scarlatto, Spanish escarlate),
probably via a Middle Eastern source (compare Arabic siqillat fine cloth), from Medieval Greek and
ultimately from Late Latin sigillatus clothes and cloth decorated with small symbols or figures,
literally sealed, past participle of sigillare, from the root of sign (n.).    In English as the
name of a color, attested from late 14c. As an adjective from c.1300. Scarlet lady, etc. (Isa. i:18,
Rev. xvii:1-5) is from notion of red with shame or indignation. Scarlet fever is from 1670s, so
called for its characteristic rash. Scarlet oak, a New World tree, attested from 1590s. Scarlet
letter traces to Hawthorne's story (1850). German Scharlach, Dutch scharlaken show influence of
words cognate with English lake (n.2).


scarp (n.)

steep slope, 1580s, from Italian scarpa slope, probably from a Germanic source, perhaps Gothic
skarpo pointed object, from Proto-Germanic *skarpa- cutting, sharp (cognates: Middle High German
schroffe sharp rock, crag, Old English scr&aelig;f cave, grave), from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear (v.)).


scarred (adj.)

mid-15c., past participle adjective from scar (v.). Transferred use by c.1600.


scary (adj.)

also scarey, terrifying, 1580s, from scare (n.) + -y (2). Meaning easily frightened, subject to
scares is from 1800. Related: Scarier; scariest.


scat (interj.)

go away! 1838, from expression quicker than s'cat in a great hurry, probably representing a hiss
followed by the word cat.


scat (n.1)

nonsense patter sung to jazz, 1926, probably of imitative origin, from one of the syllables used. As
a verb, 1935, from the noun. Related: Scatting.


scat (n.2)

filth, dung, 1950, from Greek stem skat- dung (see scatology).


scathe (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse ska&eth;a to hurt, harm, damage, injure, from Proto-Germanic *skath-
(cognates: Old English scea&thorn;ian to hurt, injure, Old Saxon skathon, Old Frisian skethia,
Middle Dutch scaden, Dutch schaden, Old High German scadon, German schaden, Gothic sca&thorn;jan to
injure, damage), from PIE root *sket- to injure. Only cognate outside Germanic seems to be in Greek
a-skethes unharmed, unscathed.    It survives mostly in its negative form, unscathed, and in
figurative meaning sear with invective or satire (1852, usually as scathing) which developed from
the sense of scar, scorch used by Milton in Paradise Lost i.613 (1667).


scathing (adj.)

1794 in literal sense, present participle adjective from scathe (v.). Of words, speech, etc., from
1852. Related: Scathingly.


scatology (n.)

obscene literature, 1876, with -logy treatise, study + Greek skat-, stem of skor (genitive skatos)
excrement, from PIE *sker- excrement, dung (cognates: Latin stercus dung), literally to cut off; see
shear (v.), and compare shit (v.). Related: Scatological (1886).


scatter (v.)

mid-12c. (transitive), possibly a northern English variant of Middle English schateren (see
shatter), reflecting Norse influence. Intransitive sense from early 15c. Related: Scattered;
scattering. As a noun from 1640s.


scatterbrain (n.)

also scatter-brain, thoughtless, giddy person, one incapable of serious, connected thought, 1764
(scatter-brained), from scatter (v.) + brain (n.). Related: Scatterbrained. Compare scatter-good
spendthrift.


scattering (n.)

mid-14c., that which has been strewn about; late 14c., act of dispersing, verbal noun from scatter
(v.).


scattershot (adj.)

1959, figurative use of term for a kind of gun charge meant to broadcast the pellets when fired
(1940), from scatter (v.) + shot (n.).


scavenge (v.)

1640s, back-formation from scavenger. Related: Scavenged; scavenging.


scavenger (n.)

1540s, originally person hired to remove refuse from streets, from Middle English scawageour (late
14c.), London official in charge of collecting tax on goods sold by foreign merchants, from Anglo-
French scawager, from scawage toll or duty on goods offered for sale in one's precinct (c.1400),
from Old North French escauwage inspection, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German scouwon,
Old English sceawian to look at, inspect; see show (v.)).    It has come to be regarded as an agent
noun in -er, but the verb is a late back-formation from the noun. With intrusive -n- (c.1500) as in
harbinger, passenger, messenger. Extended to animals 1590s. Scavenger hunt is attested from 1937.


scenario (n.)

1868, sketch of the plot of a play, from Italian scenario, from Late Latin scenarius of stage
scenes, from Latin scena scene (see scene). Meaning imagined situation is first recorded 1960, in
reference to hypothetical nuclear wars.


scenary (n.)

1690s, obsolete nativized form of Italian scenario (see scenario).


scene (n.)

1530s, subdivision of an act of a play, also stage-setting, from Middle French sc&egrave;ne (14c.),
from Latin scaena, scena scene, stage of a theater, from Greek skene wooden stage for actors, also
that which is represented on stage, originally tent or booth, related to skia shadow, shade, via
notion of something that gives shade, from PIE root *skai- to shine, flicker, glimmer (see shine
(v.)).    Meaning material apparatus of a theatrical stage is from 1540s. Meaning place in which the
action of a literary work occurs is attested from 1590s; general (non-literary) sense of place where
anything is done or takes place is recorded from 1590s. Hence U.S. slang sense of setting or milieu
for a specific group or activity, attested from 1951 in Beat jargon. Meaning stormy encounter
between two or more persons is attested from 1761. Behind the scenes having knowledge of affairs not
apparent to the public (1660s) is an image from the theater, amid actors and stage machinery (out of
sight of the audience). Scene of the crime (1923) first attested in Agatha Christie.


scenery (n.)

decoration of a theater stage, 1770, earlier scenary; see scene + -ery. Meaning a landscape or view,
a pictorial scene is from 1777.


scenic (adj.)

1620s, of or belonging to the stage or drama, theatrical, from French sc&eacute;nique (14c.) and
directly from Latin scaenicus dramatic, theatrical, from Greek skenikos, from skene (see scene).
Meaning of or belonging to natural scenery is recorded from 1842. Of roads, etc., offering fine
views, recorded since 1885. Scenic railway is recorded from 1886. Related: Scenically.


scent (v.)

late 14c., sent to find the scent of, from Old French sentir to feel, smell, touch, taste; realize,
perceive; make love to, from Latin sentire  to feel, perceive, sense, discern, hear, see (see sense
(n.)).    Originally a hunting term. The -c- appeared 17c., perhaps by influence of ascent, descent,
etc., or by influence of science. This was a tendency in early Modern English, also in scythe and
for a time threatening to make scite and scituate. Figurative use from 1550s. Transitive sense
impregnate with an odor, perfume is from 1690s. Related: Scented; scenting.


scent (n.)

late 14c., scent, smell, what can be smelled (as a means of pursuit by a hound), from scent (v.).
Almost always applied to agreeable odors.


scented (adj.)

1570s, endowed with the power of smell; 1740, perfumed, past participle adjective from scent (v.).


scepter (n.)

c.1300, ceptre, from Old French sceptre (12c.), from Latin sceptrum royal staff, from Greek skeptron
staff to lean on; royal scepter; in transferred use, royalty, from root of skeptein to prop or stay,
lean on. Apparently a cognate with Old English sceaft (see shaft (n.1)). The verb meaning to furnish
with a scepter is from 1520s. Related: sceptred.


sceptic (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of skeptic (q.v.). Related: Sceptical; sceptically; scepticism.


sceptre

chiefly British English spelling of scepter (q.v.); for spelling, see -re. Related: Sceptred.


sch-

this letter group can represent five distinct sounds in English; it first was used by Middle English
writers to render Old English sc-, a sound now generally pronounced (and spelled) -sh-. Sometimes it
was miswritten for -ch-. It also was taken in from German (schnapps) and Yiddish (schlemiel). In
words derived from classical languages, it represents Latin sch-, Greek skh-, but in some of these
words the spelling is a restoration and the pronunciation does not follow it (as in schism).


schadenfreude (n.)

malicious joy in the misfortunes of others, 1922, German Schadenfreude, literally damage-joy, from
schaden damage, harm, injury (see scathe) + freude, from Old High German frewida joy, from fro
happy, literally hopping for joy, from Proto-Germanic *frawa- (see frolic).What a fearful thing is
it that any language should have a word expressive of the pleasure which men feel at the calamities
of others; for the existence of the word bears testimony to the existence of the thing. And yet in
more than one such a word is found. ... In the Greek epikhairekakia, in the German, 'Schadenfreude.'
[Richard C. Trench, On the Study of Words, 1852]


schatzi (n.)

German girlfriend, from German Schatzi, diminutive of Schatz, a term of endearment for a woman,
literally treasure, from Proto-Germanic *skatta- (cognates: Dutch schat treasure, Gothic skatts
piece of money, money), originally cattle.


schedule (n.)

late 14c., sedule, cedule ticket, label, slip of paper with writing on it, from Old French cedule
(Modern French c&#233;dule), from Late Latin schedula strip of paper (in Medieval Latin also a note,
schedule), diminutive of Latin scheda, scida one of the strips forming a papyrus sheet, from Greek
skhida splinter, from stem of skhizein to cleave, split (see shed (v.)). Also from the Latin word
are Spanish c&#233;dula, German Zettel.    The notion is of slips of paper attached to a document as
an appendix (a sense maintained in U.S. tax forms). The specific meaning printed timetable is first
recorded 1863 in railway use. Modern spelling is a 15c. imitation of Latin, but pronunciation
remained sed-yul for centuries afterward; the modern British pronunciation (shed-yul) is from French
influence, while the U.S. pronunciation (sked-yul) is from the practice of Webster, based on the
Greek original.


schedule (v.)

make a schedule of, 1855; include in a schedule, 1862; from schedule (n.). Related: Scheduled;
scheduling.


Scheherezade

also Scheherazade, female narrator of the Arabian Nights; the name used by 1807 in reference to
(young, attractive, female) teller of long tales.


schema (n.)

plural schemata, 1796, in Kantian philosophy (a product of the imagination intermediary between an
image and a concept), from Greek skhema (see scheme (n.)). Meaning diagrammatic representation is
from 1890; general sense of hypothetical outline is by 1939.


schematic (adj.)

pertaining to schemes, 1701, from Latin stem of scheme (n.) + -ic. Noun meaning diagram is first
attested 1929. Related: Schematical (1670s).


scheme (n.)

1550s, figure of speech, from Medieval Latin schema shape, figure, form, appearance; figure of
speech; posture in dancing, from Greek skhema (genitive skhematos) figure, appearance, the nature of
a thing, related to skhein to get, and ekhein to have, from PIE root *segh- to hold, to hold in
one's power, to have (cognates: Sanskrit sahate he masters, overcomes, sahah power, victory; Avestan
hazah power, victory; Greek ekhein to have, hold; Gothic sigis, Old High German sigu, Old Norse
sigr, Old English sige victory).    The sense program of action first is attested 1640s. Unfavorable
overtones (selfish, devious) began to creep in early 18c. Meaning complex unity of coordinated
component elements is from 1736. Color scheme is attested from 1884.


scheme (v.)

devise a scheme, 1767 (earlier reduce to a scheme, 1716), from scheme (n.). Related: Schemed;
scheming.


schemer (n.)

1724, a contriver, plotter, agent noun from scheme (v.).


Schenectady

place in New York state, from Mohawk (Iroquoian) skah-nehtati the other side of the pines,
containing -hneht- pine tree.


scherzo (n.)

1852, from Italian scherzo, literally sport, joke, from scherzare to jest or joke, from a Germanic
source (compare Middle High German scherzen to jump merrily, enjoy oneself, German scherz sport),
from PIE *(s)ker- (2) leap, jump about. The lively second or third movement in a multi-movement
work. Scherzando is the Italian gerund of scherzare.


schism (n.)

late 14c., scisme, dissention within the church, from Old French scisme, cisme a cleft, split
(12c.), from Church Latin schisma, from Greek skhisma (genitive skhismatos) division, cleft, in New
Testament applied metaphorically to divisions in the Church (I Cor. xii.25), from stem of skhizein
to split (see shed (v.)). Spelling restored 16c., but pronunciation unchanged. Often in reference to
the Great Schism (1378-1417) in the Western Church.


schismatic

late 14c. (n.); mid-15c. (adj.), from Old French scismatique (Modern French schismatique), from
Church Latin schismaticus, from Greek skhismatikos, from schisma (see schism). Used also as a noun
in Old French and Late Latin. Related: Schismatical; schismatically.


schist (n.)

type of layered metamorphic rock, 1795 (earlier schistus, c.1600), from French schiste (16c.), from
Latin schistos lapis stone that splits easily (Pliny), from Greek skhistos divided, separated, from
skhizein to split (see shed (v.)). The rock splits easily in layers. Liddell &amp; Scott say Greek
skhistos lithos was probably talc.


schistosomiasis (n.)

1906, from schistosome (1905), from Modern Latin Schistosoma, from Greek skhistos divided, cloven
(see schist) + soma body (see somato-).


schizo (n.)

1945 (n.), slang shortening of schizophrenic. Schiz in same sense is from 1955 as a noun, 1960 as an
adjective.


schizo-

word-forming element meaning division; split, cleavage, from Latinized form of Greek skhizo-, comb.
form of skhizein to split, cleave, part, separate, from PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide,
part, split (see shed (v.)).


schizoid (adj.)

resembling schizophrenia, 1925, from German schizoid (1921), from front part of schizophrenia +
Greek -oeides like, from eidos form, shape (see -oid).


schizophrenia (n.)

1912, from Modern Latin, literally a splitting of the mind, from German Schizophrenie, coined in
1910 by Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler (1857-1939), from Greek skhizein to split (see schizo-) +
phren (genitive phrenos) diaphragm, heart, mind, of unknown origin.


schizophrenic (adj.)

1912; see schizophrenia + -ic. Also from 1912 as a noun, schizophrenic person. Transferred
adjectival sense of contradictory, inconsistent is by 1955.


schlemazel (n.)

also schlimazel, born loser, 1948, from Yiddish shlim mazel rotten luck, from Middle High German
slim crooked + Hebrew mazzal luck. British slang shemozzle an unhappy plight (1889) is probably from
the same source.    A shlemiel is the fellow who climbs to the top of a ladder with a bucket of
paint and then drops it. A shimazl is the fellow on whose head the bucket falls. [Rep. Stephen J.
Solarz (D.-N.Y.), 1986]


schlemiel (n.)

awkward, clumsy person, 1868, from Yiddish shlemiel bungler, from main character in A. von
Chamisso's German fable The Wonderful History of Peter Schlemihl (1813), probably from Biblical name
Shelumiel (Num. i:6), chief of the tribe of Simeon, identified with the Simeonite prince Zimri ben
Salu, who was killed while committing adultery. Compare schlemazel.


schlep (v.)

to carry or drag, 1922 (in Joyce's Ulysses), from Yiddish shlepen to drag, from Middle High German
sleppen, related to Old High German sleifen to drag, and slifan to slide, slip (cognate with Middle
English slippen; see slip (v.)). Related: Schlepped; schlepping.


schlep (n.)

stupid person, loser, 1939, short for schlepper person of little worth (1934), in Yiddish, fool,
beggar, scrounger, from schlep (v.) to carry or drag (for sense evolution, compare drag (n.)
annoying dull person).


schlock (n.)

trash, 1915, from American Yiddish shlak, from German Schlacke dregs, scum, dross (see slag (n.)).
Alternative etymology [OED] is from Yiddish shlogn to strike (cognate with German schlagen; see
slay). Derived form schlockmeister purveyor of cheap merchandise is from 1965. Adjectival form
schlocky is attested from 1968; schlock was used as an adjective from 1916.


schlong (n.)

penis, 1969, from Yiddish shlang, literally snake.


schlub (n.)

worthless oaf, 1964, from Yiddish, perhaps from Polish &#380;&#322;&oacute;b in a sense blockhead.


schm-

substituted for the initial sound of a word and reduplicated with it to convey derision (as in
Oedipus schmoedipus in the punchline of the old joke about the Jewish mother and the psychiatrist),
1929, from the numerous Yiddish words that begin with this sound.


schmaltz (n.)

banal or excessive sentimentalism, 1935, from Yiddish shmalts, literally melted fat, from Middle
High German smalz, from Old High German smalz animal fat, related to smelzan to melt (see smelt
(v.)). Modern German Schmalz fat, grease has the same figurative meaning. First mentioned in English
as a derogatory term used to describe straight jazz [Vanity Fair, Nov. 1935].


schmaltzy (adj.)

1935, from schmaltz + -y (2). Related: Schmaltziness.


schmear (n.)

1961, bribery, from Yiddish shmir spread, from shmirn to grease, smear, from Middle High German
smiren, from Old High German smirwen to smear (see smear (v.); compare slang to grease (someone's)
palm to bribe). Phrase the whole schmear the entire affair is attested from 1969, originally show
business jargon,


schmendrick (n.)

stupid person, 1944, from Yiddish shmendrik, from the name of a character in an 1877 operetta
(Shmendrik, oder Di komishe Chaseneh) by Avrom Goldfaden (1840-1908), Father of Yiddish Theater.


Schmidt (n.)

type of astronomical telescope lens used for photography, 1939, from Estonian-born German optician
Bernhard Voldemar Schmidt (1879-1935), who invented it.


schmoe (n.)

also schmo, idiot, fool, 1948, euphemized form of schmuck.


schmoo (n.)

fabulous animal, ready to fulfill man's wants, 1948, invented by U.S. cartoonist Al Capp (Alfred
Caplin, 1909-1979); the name perhaps based on schmoe.


schmooze (v.)

also shmooze, to chat intimately, 1897, from Yiddish shmuesn to chat, from shmues idle talk, chat,
from Hebrew shemu'oth news, rumors. As a noun from 1939. Related: Schmoozed; schmoozing. Schmoozer
is from 1909.


schmuck (n.)

also shmuck, contemptible person, 1892, from East Yiddish shmok, literally penis, probably from Old
Polish smok grass snake, dragon, and likely not the same word as German Schmuck jewelry, adornments,
which is related to Low German smuck supple, tidy, trim, elegant, and to Old Norse smjuga slip, step
through (see smock).    In Jewish homes, the word was regarded as so vulgar as to be taboo [Leo
Rosten, The Joys of Yiddish, 1968] and Lenny Bruce wrote that saying it on stage got him arrested on
the West Coast by a Yiddish undercover agent who had been placed in the club several nights running
to determine if my use of Yiddish terms was a cover for profanity. Euphemized as schmoe, which was
the source of Al Capp's cartoon strip creature the shmoo.    [A]dditional associative effects from
German schmuck 'jewels, decoration' cannot be excluded (cross-linguistically commonplace slang: cf.
Eng. 'family jewels') [Mark R.V. Southern, Contagious Couplings: Transmission of Expressives in
Yiddish Echo Phrases, 2005]. But the English phrase refers to the testicles and is a play on words,
the family element being the essential ones. Words for decoration seem not to be among the
productive sources of European penis slang terms.


schnapps (n.)

1818, kind of Holland gin, from German Schnaps, literally a mouthful, gulp, from Low German snaps,
from snappen to snap (see snap (v.)). For sense, compare nip for alcoholic drink quickly taken.


schnauzer (n.)

breed of terrier, 1923, from German Schnauzer, literally growler, from schnauzen to snarl, growl,
from Schnauze snout, muzzle, which is related to Middle English snute, snoute snout (see snout).


schnitzel (n.)

veal cutlet, 1854, from German Schnitzel cutlet, literally a slice, with -el, diminutive suffix +
Schnitz a cut, slice (+ -el, diminutive suffix), from schnitzen to carve, frequentative of schneiden
to cut, from Old High German snidan, cognate with Old English sni&thorn;an to cut, from Proto-
Germanic *snitt-ja-, from PIE root *sneit- to cut.


schnook (n.)

1948, probably from Yiddish shnuk elephant's trunk, or altered from schmuck (q.v.), or perhaps from
German schnucke a small sheep, used in U.S. Yiddish for a customer easily persuaded, a sucker.


schnorrer (n.)

1892, from Yiddish, beggar, from German slang schnurrer, from schnurren to go begging (slang),
perhaps ultimately imitative of the sound of pleading or whining (compare sneer, snorkel, snarl).


schnozz (n.)

nose, 1942, from Yiddish shnoitsl, from German Schnauze snout (see schnauzer).


scholar (n.)

Old English scolere student, from Medieval Latin scholaris, noun use of Late Latin scholaris of a
school, from Latin schola (see school (n.1)). Greek scholastes meant one who lives at ease. The
Medieval Latin word was widely borrowed (Old French escoler, French &eacute;colier, Old High German
scuolari, German Sch&uuml;ler). The modern English word might be a Middle English reborrowing from
French. Fowler points out that in British English it typically has been restricted to those who
attend a school on a scholarship.


scholarly (adj.)

1630s, from scholar + -ly (1). Related: Scholarliness.


scholarship (n.)

1530s, status of a scholar, from scholar + -ship. Meaning learning, erudition is from 1580s; sense
of source of funds for support or maintenance of a scholar is from 1580s.


scholastic (adj.)

1590s, of or pertaining to Scholastic theologians (Churchmen in the Middle Ages whose theology and
philosophy was based on Church Fathers and Aristotle), from Middle French scholastique (14c.), from
Latin scholasticus of a school, from Greek skholastikos enjoying leisure; devoting one's leisure to
learning, hence, as a noun, a scholar, also in a bad sense, a pedant; a simpleton, from skhola (see
school (n.1)). In English, meaning pertaining to schools or to school education is from 1640s. As a
noun from 1640s. Related: Scholastical (1530s in the relating to a school sense); scholastically.


Scholasticism (n.)

1732, from scholastic + -ism.


scholiast (n.)

one who writes explanatory notes upon a classical writer, 1580s, from Late Latin scholiasta, from
Late Greek skholiastes, from skholiazein, from skholion explanatory note or comment, from skhole
(see school (n.1)). Related: Scholiastic.


school (n.1)

place of instruction, Old English scol, from Latin schola intermission of work, leisure for
learning; learned conversation, debate; lecture; meeting place for teachers and students, place of
instruction; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect, from Greek skhole spare time, leisure,
rest ease; idleness; that in which leisure is employed; learned discussion; also a place for
lectures, school; originally a holding back, a keeping clear, from skhein to get (from PIE root
*segh- to hold, hold in one's power, to have; see scheme (n.)) + -ole by analogy with bole a throw,
stole outfit, etc.    The original notion is leisure, which passed to otiose discussion (in Athens
or Rome the favorite or proper use for free time), then place for such discussion. The Latin word
was widely borrowed (Old French escole, French &eacute;cole, Spanish escuela, Italian scuola, Old
High German scuola, German Schule, Swedish skola, Gaelic sgiol, Welsh ysgol, Russian shkola).
Translated in Old English as larhus, literally lore house, but this seems to have been a glossary
word only.    Meaning students attending a school in English is attested from c.1300; sense of
school building is first recorded 1590s. Sense of people united by a general similarity of
principles and methods is from 1610s; hence school of thought (1864). School of hard knocks rough
experience in life is recorded from 1912 (in George Ade); to tell tales out of school betray
damaging secrets is from 1540s. School bus is from 1908. School days is from 1590s. School board
from 1870.


school (n.2)

group of fish, c.1400, from Middle Dutch schole (Dutch school) group of fish or other animals,
cognate with Old English scolu band, troop, crowd of fish, from West Germanic *skulo- (cognates: Old
Saxon scola troop, multitude, West Frisian skoal), perhaps with a literal sense of division, from
PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, divide (see scale (n.1)). Compare shoal (n.2)). For possible sense
development, see section from Latin secare to cut.


school (v.1)

to educate; to reprimand, to discipline, mid-15c., from school (n.1). Related: Schooled; schooling.


school (v.2)

collect or swim in schools, 1590s, from school (n.2). Related: Schooled; schooling.


school-book (n.)

also schoolbook, 1745, from school (n.1) + book (n.).


schoolboy (n.)

1580s, from school (n.1) + boy. As an adjective from 1874. Related: Schoolboyish.


schooled (adj.)

taught, trained, disciplined, 1821, past participle adjective from school (v.1).


schoolgirl (n.)

1777, from school (n.1) + girl. As an adjective from 1922.


schooling (n.)

mid-15c. act of teaching; fact of being taught, verbal noun from school (v.1).


schoolmarm (n.)

also school-marm, female school teacher, 1834, American English colloquial, in countrified humor
writing of Major Jack Downing of Maine (Seba Smith); variant of school-ma'am (1828), American
English, from school (n.1) + ma'am. See R. Used figuratively from 1887 in reference to patronizing
and priggish instruction.


schoolroom (n.)

1773, from school (n.1) + room (n.).


schooner (n.)

fore-and-aft rigged vessel, originally with only two masts, 1716, perhaps from a New England verb
related to Scottish scon to send over water, to skip stones. Skeat relates this dialectal verb to
shunt. Spelling probably influenced by Dutch, but Dutch schoener is a loan-word from English, as are
German Schoner, French schooner, Swedish skonert. Said to have originated in Gloucester, Mass.,
shipyard.The rig characteristic of a schooner has been defined as consisting essentially of two gaff
sails, the after sail not being smaller than the fore, and a head sail set on a bowsprit.
[OED]Meaning tall beer glass is from 1879, of unknown origin or connection.


schottische (n.)

round dance resembling a polka, 1849, from German Schottische, from schottische (tanz) Scottish
(dance), from Schotte a native of Scotland, from Old High German Scotto, from Late Latin Scottus
(see Scot). The pronunciation is French.


schuhplattler (n.)

lively Alpine folk dance, 1874, from German Schuhplattler, from schuh shoe (see shoe (n.)) + south
German dialectal plattler, from platteln to dance.


Schutzstaffel

internal security force of Nazi Germany, 1930, German, literally defense squadron. Better known by
its initials, S.S.


schvartze (n.)

also schvartzer, black person (somewhat derogatory), 1961, Yiddish, from schvarts black (see
swarthy). Perhaps originally a code word to refer to black servants when they were within earshot,
as German cognate Schwarze appears to have been used mid-19c.:    In Baltimore in the 80s of the
last century, the German-speaking householders, when they had occasion to speak of Negro servants in
their presence, called them die Blaue (blues). In the 70s die Schwartze (blacks) had been used, but
it was believed that the Negroes had fathomed it. [H.L. Mencken, The American Language, Supplement
I, 1945]


schwa (n.)

1895, from German Schwa, ultimately from Hebrew shewa a neutral vowel quality, literally emptiness.


Schwenkfeldian

1560s, from Casper Schwenkfeld (1490-1561), Silesian Protestant mystic who founded the sect.
Schwenkfelder is attested from 1882.


sciamachy (n.)

fighting with shadows, shadow-boxing 1620s, from Greek skiamakhia shadow-fighting, a sham fight but
perhaps literally fighting in the shade (i.e., in school; ancient teachers taught in shaded public
places such as porches and groves), from skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.)) + makhe battle (see
-machy).


sciatic (adj.)

pertaining to the hip, also in reference to the large nerve from the pelvis to the thigh, 1540s,
from Middle French sciatique (14c.), from Medieval Latin sciaticus (see sciatica).


sciatica (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin sciatica, in sciatica passio sciatic disease, fem. of sciaticus
sciatic, corruption of Latin ischiadicus of pain in the hip, from Greek iskhiadikos, from iskhias
(genitive iskhiados) pain in the hips, from iskhion hip joint.


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


science fiction (n.)

1929 (first attested in advertisements for Air Wonder Stories magazine), though there is an isolated
use from 1851; abbreviated form sci-fi is from 1955. Earlier in same sense was scientifiction
(1916).


scienter (adv.)

legalese Latin, literally knowingly, from sciens, present participle of scire to know (see science)
+ adverbial suffix -ter.


scientific (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French scientifique, from Medieval Latin scientificus pertaining to science, from
Latin scientia knowledge (see science) + -ficus making + facere to make (see factitious). Originally
used to translate Greek epistemonikos making knowledge in Aristotle's Ethics.   Sciential (mid-15c.,
based on knowledge, from Latin scientialis) is the classical purists' choice for an adjective based
on science. Scientic (1540s) and scient (late 15c.) also have been used. First record of scientific
revolution is from 1803; scientific method is from 1854; scientific notation is from 1961. Related:
Scientifical; scientifically.


scientist (n.)

1834, a hybrid coined from Latin scientia (see science) by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866),
English polymath, by analogy with artist, in the same paragraph in which he coined physicist (q.v.).


Scientology (n.)

1951, system of beliefs founded by L. Ron Hubbard. According to www.scientology.org:    The word
Scientology, conceived by L. Ron Hubbard, comes from the Latin scio which means knowing, in the
fullest meaning of the word and the Greek word logos which means study of. It means knowing how to
know. Scientology is further defined as the study and handling of the spirit in relationship to
itself, universes and other life.    There was a German scientologie (A. Nordenholz, 1937).


scilicet

late 14c., Latin, you may know, you may be sure, it is certain, used in sense that is to say,
namely, contraction of scire licit it is permitted to know, from scire to know (see science); for
second element see licit. Used as was Old English hit is to witanne, literally it is to wit (see wit
(v.)). Often abbreviated sc. or scil.    Its function is to introduce : (a) a more intelligible or
definite substitute, sometimes the English, for an expression already used ... (b) a word &amp;c.;
that was omitted in the original as unnecessary, but is thought to require specifying for the
present audience .... [Fowler]


Scilly

isles off Cornwall, of unknown origin. Pliny has Silumnus, Silimnis. Perhaps connected with the
Roman god Sulis (compare Aquae sulis Bath). The -y might be Old Norse ey island The -c- added
16c.-17c. [A]bout the only certain thing that can be said is that the c of the modern spelling is
not original but was added for distinction from ModE silly as this word developed in meaning from
'happy, blissful' to 'foolish.' [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names, 2004].


scimitar (n.)

1540s, cimiterie, from Middle French cimeterre (15c.) or Italian scimitarra, of uncertain origin.
Turkish would be the expected source, but no such word has been found there. Perhaps from Persian
shimshir (pronounced shamsher, compare Greek sampsera a barbarian sword, from this source), but OED
finds this unsatisfactory as to form. Many early variations; the modern spelling is from influence
of the Italian form of the word. Century Dictionary (1902) has simitar as preferred spelling.


scintilla (n.)

1690s, spark, glimmer, hence least particle, trace, from figurative use of Latin scintilla particle
of fire, spark, glittering speck, atom, probably from PIE *ski-nto-, from root *skai- to shine, to
gleam (cognates: Gothic skeinan, Old English scinan to shine; see shine (v.)).


scintillate (v.)

1620s, from Latin scintillatus, past participle of scintillare to sparkle, glitter, gleam, flash,
from scintilla spark (see scintilla). Related: Scintillated; scintillating.


scintillation (n.)

1620s, from Latin scintilationem (nominative scintillatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of scintillare (see scintillate).


sciolism (n.)

a show of knowledge, 1798; see sciolist + -ism.


sciolist (n.)

1610s, smatterer, pretender to knowledge, from Late Latin sciolus one who knows a little, diminutive
of scius knowing, from scire to know (see science) + -ist. Related: Sciolistic.


sciomancy (n.)

divination by ghostly communication, 1620s, from Modern Latin sciomantia, from scio-, Latinized
comb. form of Greek skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.)) + Latinized form of Greek manteia (see
-mancy).


scion (n.)

c.1300, a shoot or twig, especially one for grafting, from Old French sion, cion descendant; shoot,
twig; offspring (12c., Modern French scion, Picard chion), of uncertain origin. OED rejects
derivation from Old French scier to saw. Perhaps a diminutive from Frankish *kid-, from Proto-
Germanic *kidon-, from PIE *geie- to sprout, split, open (see chink (n.1)). Figurative use is
attested from 1580s in English; meaning an heir, a descendant is from 1814, from the family tree
image.


sciophobia (n.)

fear of shadows, 1977, from scio-, Latinized comb. form of Greek skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.))
+ -phobia. Related: sciophobe; sciophobic.


scirrhous (n.)

1560s, from Middle French scirrheux (16c., Modern French squirreux), from Modern Latin scirrhosus,
from Latin scirros a hard swelling, tumor, from Greek skirrhos hard tumor, from skiros (adj.) hard,
of unknown origin.


scission (n.)

act of cutting or dividing, mid-15c., from French scission (14c.), from Late Latin scissionem
(nominative scissio) a cleaving, dividing, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
scindere to cut (see shed (v.)).


scissor (v.)

1610s, to cut with scissors; 1961 with reference to leg motions (in the wrestling sense it is
attested from 1968); see scissors. Related: Scissored; scissoring.


scissors (n.)

late 14c., sisoures, from Old French cisoires (plural) shears, from Vulgar Latin *cisoria (plural)
cutting instrument, from *cisus (in compounds such as Latin excisus, past participle of excidere to
cut out), ultimately from Latin caedere to cut (see -cide). Spelling with sc- is 16c., from
influence of Medieval Latin scissor tailor, in classical Latin carver, cutter, from past participle
stem of scindere to split.    Usually with pair of (attested from c.1400) when indication of just
one is required, but a singular form without the -s occasionally was used (cysowre, mid-15c.). In
Scotland, shears answers for all sizes, according to OED; but in England generally that word is used
only for those too large to be worked by one hand. Sense in wrestling is from 1904. Oh scissors! was
a 19c. exclamation of impatience or disgust (1843). In reference to a type of swimming kick, from
1902 (the image itself is from 1880s).


SCLC (n.)

initialism (acronym) of Southern Christian Leadership Conference, founded 1957 by the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr., Bayard Rustin, and others.


sclera (n.)

1886, medical Latin, from Greek sklera (menix) the hard (membrane), fem. of skleros hard (see
sclerosis).


sclero-

before vowels scler-, word-forming element meaning hard, from Latinized form of Greek sklero-, comb.
form of skleros hard, related to skellein to dry up, parch, from PIE *skle-ro-, from root *skele- to
parch, wither.


scleroderma (n.)

1866, from Modern Latin, from Greek skleros hard (see sclerosis) + derma skin (see derma). Related:
Sclerodermatous; sclerodermatic.


sclerosis (n.)

morbid hardening of the tissue, late 14c., from Medieval Latin sclirosis a hardness, hard tumor,
from Greek sklerosis hardening, from skleros hard (see sclero-). Figurative use by 1954.


sclerotic (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to sclerosis, from medical Latin scleroticus, from Greek skleroun (see
sclerosis). Figurative meaning unchanging, rigid is from 1961.


scoff (v.)

mid-14c., jest, make light of something; mid-15c., make fun of, mock, from the noun meaning
contemptuous ridicule (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skaup, skop mockery,
ridicule, Middle Danish skof jest, mockery; perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub-, *skuf- (cognates:
Old English scop poet, Old High German scoph fiction, sport, jest, derision), from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)).


scoffer (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from scoff (v.).


scofflaw (n.)

1924, from scoff (v.) + law (n.). The winning entry in a national contest during Prohibition to coin
a word to characterize a person who drinks illegally, chosen from more than 25,000 entries; the $200
winning prize was split between two contestants who sent in the word separately: Henry Irving Dale
and Miss Kate L. Butler. Other similar attempts did not stick, such as pitilacker (1926), winning
entry in a contest by the Pennsylvania Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to establish
a scolding word for one who mistreats animals (submitted by Mrs. M. McIlvaine Bready of Mickleton,
N.J.).


scold (n.)

mid-12c., person of ribald speech, later person fond of abusive language (c.1300), especially a
shrewish woman [Johnson defines it as A clamourous, rude, mean, low, foul-mouthed woman], from Old
Norse skald poet (see skald). The sense evolution might reflect the fact that Germanic poets (like
their Celtic counterparts) were famously feared for their ability to lampoon and mock (as in
skaldskapr poetry, also, in Icelandic law books, libel in verse).


scold (v.)

late 14c., be abusive or quarrelsome, from scold (n.). Related: Scolded; scolding.


scolex (n.)

embryo stage of a tapeworm, 1852, from Modern Latin scolex (plural scoleces), from Greek skolex
worm, related to skolyptesthai to twist and turn, from PIE *skel- (3) crooked (see scoliosis).


scoliosis (n.)

lateral curvature of the spine, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek skoliosis crookedness, from skolios
bent, curved, from PIE root *skel- (3) crooked, curved, with derivatives referring to crooked parts
of the body (as in Greek skelos leg, limb). Related: Scoliotic.


sconce (n.)

late 14c., candlestick with a screen, a shortening of Old French esconse lantern, hiding place, from
Medieval Latin sconsa, from Latin absconsa, fem. past participle of abscondere to hide (see
abscond). Meaning metal bracket-candlestick fastened to a wall is recorded from mid-15c.


scone (n.)

thin, flat soft cake, 1510s, Scottish, probably shortened from Dutch schoon brood fine bread, from
Middle Dutch schoonbroot, from schoon, scone bright, beautiful (see sheen) + broot (see bread (n.)).


scooch (v.)

by 1987, informal. Related: Scooched; scooching.


scoop (v.)

mid-14c., to bail out, from scoop (n.) and from Low German scheppen to draw water, from Proto-
Germanic *skuppon (cognates: Old Saxon skeppian, Dutch scheppen, Old High German scaphan, German
sch&#246;pfen to scoop, ladle out), from PIE root *skeubh- (cognates: Old English sceofl shovel, Old
Saxon skufla; see shove (v.)). In the journalistic sense from 1884. Related: Scooped; scooping.


scoop (n.)

early 14c., utensil for bailing out, from Middle Dutch schope bucket for bailing water, from West
Germanic *skopo (cognates: Middle Low German schope ladle), from Proto-Germanic *skop-, from PIE
*(s)kep- to cut, to scrape, to hack (see scabies). Also from Middle Dutch schoepe a scoop, shovel
(Dutch schop a spade, related to German Sch&#252;ppe a shovel, also a spade at cards).    Meaning
action of scooping is from 1742; that of amount in a scoop is from 1832. Sense of a big haul, as if
in a scoop net is from 1893. The journalistic sense of news published before a rival is first
recorded 1874, American English, from earlier commercial slang verbal sense of appropriate so as to
exclude competitors (c.1850).


scooper (n.)

1660s, one who scoops; 1837 as a tool for scooping, agent noun from scoop (v.).


scoot (v.)

1758, run, fly, make off, perhaps originally nautical slang; 1805, flow or gush out with force
(Scottish), of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skjota to
shoot, related to shoot (v.). Related: Scooted; scooting. As a noun from 1864.


scooter (n.)

1825, one who goes quickly, agent noun from scoot (v.). Also in 19c. a type of plow and a syringe.
As a child's toy, from 1919 (but the reference indicates earlier use), as short for motor scooter
from 1917.


scop (n.)

poet, minstrel, Old English scop, cognate with Old High German scoph poetry, sport, jest, Old Norse
skop railing, mockery (see scoff (v.)).


scopa (n.)

tuft of hairs on a bee's leg, from Latin scopae (plural) twigs, shoots; a broom, brush, related to
scapus shaft (see scape (n.2)).


scope (n.1)

extent, 1530s, room to act, from Italian scopo aim, purpose, object, thing aimed at, mark, target,
from Latin scopus, from Greek skopos aim, target, object of attention; watcher, one who watches from
metathesized form of PIE *spek-yo-, from root *spek- to observe (cognates: Sanskrit spasati sees;
Avestan spasyeiti spies; Greek skopein behold, look, consider, skeptesthai to look at; Latin specere
to look at; Old High German spehhon to spy, German sp&auml;hen to spy). Sense of distance the mind
can reach, extent of view first recorded c.1600.


scope (n.2)

instrument for viewing, 1872, abstracted from telescope, microscope, etc., from Greek skopein to
look (see scope (n.1)). Earlier used as a shortening of horoscope (c.1600).


scope (v.)

to view, 1807, from the source of scope (n.2). Related: Scoped; scoping.


scopophilia (n.)

voyeurism, 1924 (in a translation of Freud), from Greek -skopia observation (see scope (n.1)) +
-philia. In early use often scoptophilia through a mistake by Freud's translators. Modern form by
1937. Related: Scopophiliac.


scoptic (adj.)

1660s, mocking, scoffing, from Greek skoptikos given to mockery, from skoptein to mock, jest.


scorbutic (adj.)

1650s, from Modern Latin scorbuticus pertaining to scurvy, from scorbutus scurvy, from French
scorbut, apparently of Dutch (scheurbuik) or Low German (Scharbock) origin; see scurvy. Scorbute
scurvy is attested from 1590s, from French.


scorch (v.)

to burn superficially or slightly, but so as to change the color or injure the texture, early 14c.,
perhaps an alteration of scorrcnenn make dry, parch (c.1200), of obscure origin, perhaps from Old
Norse skorpna to be shriveled, cognate with Old English scrimman to shrink, dry up. Or perhaps from
Old French escorchier to strip off the skin, from Vulgar Latin excorticare to flay, from ex- (see
ex-) + Latin cortex (genitive corticis) cork; but OED finds this not likely. Scorched earth military
strategy is 1937, translation of Chinese jiaotu, used against the Japanese in a bid to stem their
advance into China.


scorcher (n.)

very hot day, 1874, agent noun from scorch (v.). It also means or has meant stinging attack (1842),
pretty girl (1881), line drive in baseball (1900).


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


score (v.)

to cut with incisions or notches, c.1400; to record by means of notches (late 14c.); see score (n.).
Meanings to keep record of the scores in a game, etc. and to make or add a point for one's side in a
game, etc. both attested from 1742. The slang sense, in reference to men, achieve intercourse first
recorded 1960. Meaning to be scorekeeper, to keep the score in a game or contest is from 1846. In
the musical sense from 1839. Related: Scored; scoring.


scoreless (adj.)

in games, 1880, from score (n.) + -less.


scorn (n.)

c.1200, a shortening of Old French escarn mockery, derision, contempt, a common Romanic word
(Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *skarnjan mock, deride
(cognates: Old High German skern mockery, jest, sport, Middle High German scherzen to jump with
joy).    Probably influenced by Old French escorne affront, disgrace, which is a back-formation from
escorner, literally to break off (someone's) horns, from Vulgar Latin *excornare (source of Italian
scornare treat with contempt), from Latin ex- without (see ex-) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


scorn (v.)

c.1200, from Anglo-French, Old North French escarnir (Old French escharnir), from the source of
scorn (n.). Cognate with Old High German skernon, Middle Dutch schernen. Related: Scorned; scorning.
Forms in Romanic languages influenced by confusion with Old French escorner deprive of horns, hence
deprive of honor or ornament, disgrace.


scorner (n.)

c.1300, agent noun from scorn (v.).


scornful (adj.)

mid-14c.; see scorn (n.) + -ful. Scorny was 19c. U.S. colloquial. Related: Scornfully; scornfulness.


Scorpio (n.)

zodiacal constellation, late 14c., from Latin scorpio (poetic scorpius) scorpion, also the zodiac
constellation (see scorpion). The meaning person born under or ruled by the sign of Scorpio is
recorded from 1968.


scorpion (n.)

c.1200, from Old French scorpion (12c.), from Latin scorpionem (nominative scorpio), extended form
of scorpius, from Greek skorpios a scorpion, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). The
Spanish alacran scorpion is from Arabic al-'aqrab.


Scot (n.)

Old English Scottas (plural) inhabitants of Ireland, Irishmen, from Late Latin Scotti (c.400), of
uncertain origin, perhaps from Celtic (but answering to no known tribal name; Irish Scots appears to
be a Latin borrowing). The name followed the Irish tribe which invaded Scotland 6c. C.E. after the
Romans withdrew from Britain, and after the time of Alfred the Great the Old English word described
only the Irish who had settled in the northwest of Britain.


scot-free (adj.)

Old English scotfreo exempt from royal tax, from scot royal tax, from Old Norse skot contribution,
literally a shooting, shot; thing shot, missile, from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot
(v.); the Old Norse verb form, skjota, has a secondary sense of transfer to another; pay) + freo
(see free (adj.)). First element related to Old English sceotan to pay, contribute, Dutch schot,
German Scho&szlig; tax, contribution. French &eacute;cot share (Old French escot) is from Germanic.


scotch (v.)

stamp out, crush, 1825, earlier make harmless for a time (1798; a sense that derives from an
uncertain reading of Macbeth III.ii.13), from scocchen to cut, score, gash, make an incision (early
15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from Anglo-French escocher, Old French cocher to notch,
nick, from coche a notch, groove, perhaps from Latin coccum berry of the scarlet oak, which appears
notched, from Greek kokkos. Related: Scotched; scotching.


Scotch (adj.)

of Scotland, 1590s, contraction of Scottish. Disdained by the Scottish because of the many insulting
and pejorative formations made from it by the English (such as Scotch greys lice; Scotch attorney, a
Jamaica term from 1864 for strangler vines).   Scotch-Irish is from 1744 (adj.); 1789 (n.); more
properly Scots-Irish (1966), from Scots (mid-14c.), the older adjective, which is from Scottis, the
northern variant of Scottish. Scots (adj.) was used in Scottish until 18c., then Scotch became
vernacular, but in mid-19c. there was a reaction against it. Scotch Tape was said to be so called
because at first it had adhesive only on the edges (to make it easier to remove as a masking tape in
car paint jobs), which was interpreted as a sign of cheapness on the part of the manufacturers.


scotch (n.1)

1778, elliptical for Scotch whisky. See Scotch (adj.).


scotch (n.2)

incision, cut, score, gash, mid-15c., related to scotch (v.).


Scotland

named for the Scots, who settled there from Ireland 5c.-6c.; their name is of unknown origin (see
Scot). Latin Scotia began to appear 9c. as the name for the region, replacing older Caledonia, also
named for the inhabitants at the time, whose name likewise is of unknown origin.


Scotland Yard (n.)

used for London Metropolitan Police, 1864, from the name of short street off Whitehall, London;
where from 1829 to 1890 stood the headquarters of the Metropolitan Police Force, hence, the force
itself, especially the detective branch. After 1890, located in New Scotland Yard.


scotoma (n.)

(plural scotomata), 1540s, from Late Latin scotoma, from Greek skotoma dizziness, from skotoun to
darken, from skotos darkness (see shade).


Scots

see Scotch (adj.).


Scotsman (n.)

late 14c., from Scots + man (n.).


Scott

surname, by early 12c., from Old English Scott (see Scot); also a personal name in Old English


Scottie

type of dog, 1907, short for Scotch terrier (1810).


Scottish (adj.)

late Old English Scottisc; see Scot + -ish. Related: Scottishness.


scoundrel (n.)

1580s, skowndrell, of unknown origin. One suggestion is Anglo-French escoundre (Old French escondre)
to hide, hide oneself, from Vulgar Latin *excondere, from Latin condere to hide (see abscond). The
main objection to this theory is that hundreds of years lie between the two words.


scour (v.1)

cleanse by hard rubbing, c.1200, from Middle Dutch scuren, schuren to polish, to clean, and from Old
French escurer, both from Late Latin excurare clean off, literally take good care of, from Latin ex-
out (see ex-) + curare care for (see cure (v.)). Possibly originally a technical term among Flemish
workmen in England. Related: Scoured; scouring. As a noun, 1610s, from the verb.


scour (v.2)

move quickly in search of something, c.1300, probably from Old Norse skyra rush in, related to skur
storm, shower, shower of missiles (see shower (n.)). Perhaps influenced by or blended with Old
French escorre to run out, from Latin excurrere (see excursion). Sense probably influenced by scour
(v.1).


scourge (n.)

c.1200, a whip, lash, from Anglo-French escorge, back-formation from Old French escorgier to whip,
from Vulgar Latin *excorrigiare, from Latin ex- out, off (see ex-) + corrigia thong, shoelace, in
this case whip, probably from a Gaulish word related to Old Irish cuimrech fetter, from PIE root
*reig- to bind (see rig (v.)). Figurative use from late 14c. Scourge of God, title given by later
generations to Attila the Hun (406-453 C.E.), is attested from late 14c., from Latin flagellum Dei.


scourge (v.)

c.1300, to whip, from Old French escorgier and from scourge (n.). Figurative meaning to afflict
(often for the sake of punishment or purification) is from late 14c. Related: Scourged; scourging.


scouse (n.)

1840, short for lobscouse a sailor's stew made of meat, vegetables, and hardtack, of uncertain
origin (compare loblolly); transferred sense of native or inhabitant of Liverpool (where the stew is
a characteristic dish) is recorded from 1945. In reference to the regional dialect, from 1963.
Related: Scouser (1959).    Lobscouse. A dish much eaten at sea, composed of salt beef, biscuit and
onions, well peppered, and stewed together. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1788]


scout (v.1)

late 14c., observe or explore as a scout, travel in search of information, from Old French escouter
to listen, heed (Modern French &eacute;couter), from Latin auscultare to listen to, give heed to
(see auscultate).  Related: Scouted; scouting.


scout (v.2)

to reject with scorn, 1710, earlier to mock (c.1600), of Scandinavian origin (compare Old Norse
skuta, skute to taunt), probably from a source related to shout (v.). Related: Scouted; scouting;
scoutingly.


scout (n.)

person who scouts, one sent out to gain information, 1550s, from scout (v.1). Boy Scout is from
1908. Scout's honor attested from 1908.


scouting (n.)

1640s, verbal noun from scout (v.1). Boy Scout sense from 1908.


scoutmaster (n.)

also scout-master, 1570s, from scout (n.) + master (n.). Boy Scouting sense from 1908.


scow (n.)

large flat-bottomed boat, 1780, from Dutch schouw a ferry boat, punt, from Middle Dutch scouwe,
related to Old English scaldan, Old Saxon scaldan to push (a boat) from shore.


scowl (v.)

mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian skule look furtively, squint, look
embarrassed, Danish skule to scowl, cast down the eyes). Probably related to Old English sceolh wry,
oblique, Old High German scelah curved, German scheel squint-eyed; from PIE root *sqel- crooked,
curved, bent. Related: Scowled; scowling.


scowl (n.)

c.1500, from scowl (v.).


scrabble (v.)

1530s, to scrawl, scribble, from Dutch schrabbelen, frequentative of schrabben to scratch, from the
same root as scrape (v.). Meaning to struggle, scramble first recorded 1630s. Related: Scrabbled;
scrabbling.


Scrabble (n.)

board game, 1949, proprietary name (registered U.S.), probably from scribble-scrabble hasty writing
(1580s), a reduplication of scribble (n.).


scrag (n.)

1540s, lean person or animal, a raw-bones; perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian
skragg a lean person; dialectal Swedish skraka a great, dry tree; a long, lean man, skragge old and
torn thing, Danish skrog hull of a ship, carcass, Icelandic skr&#246;ggr, a nickname of the fox);
perhaps from root of shrink.


scraggly (adj.)

having a rough, irregular, or ragged appearance, 1831, from scrag + -ly (1); also compare scraggy.


scraggy (adj.)

early 13c., rough, jagged (figurative); 1570s, of landscape, rough, rugged, stumpy; 1610s, of
persons, gaunt and wasted, lean, thin, bony; see scrag + -y (2), and compare scroggy, scraggly. In
Scottish, scranky. Related: Scragginess.


scram (v.)

1928, U.S. slang, either a shortened form of scramble (v.) or from German schramm, imperative
singular of schrammen depart. Related: Scrammed; scramming.


scramble (v.)

1580s (intransitive), perhaps a nasalized variant of scrabble (v.), in its sense of to struggle, to
scrape quickly. Transitive sense to stir or toss together randomly is from 1822. Broadcasting sense
to make unintelligible is attested from 1927. Related: Scrambled; scrambling. Scrambled eggs first
recorded 1843.


scramble (n.)

1670s, an eager, rude contest or struggle, from scramble (v.). Meaning a walk or ramble involving
clambering and struggling with obstacles is from 1755. Meaning rapid take-off first recorded 1940,
R.A.F. slang.


scrannel (adj.)

thin, meager, 1630s; any modern use traces to Milton (Lycidas, 124), who may have invented it out of
dialectal scranny (see scrawny). Or it might be from a Scandinavian source akin to Norwegian skran
rubbish. Compare English dialectal and Scottish skran scraps, broken victuals; refuse, in military
slang food.


scrap (v.1)

to make into scrap, 1883 (of old locomotives), from scrap (n.1). Related: Scrapped; scrapping.


scrap (v.2)

to fight, brawl, box, 1867, colloquial, from scrap (n.2). Related: Scrapped; scrapping.


scrap (n.1)

small piece, late 14c., from Old Norse skrap scraps, trifles, from skrapa to scrape, scratch, cut
(see scrape (v.)). Meaning remains of metal produced after rolling or casting is from 1790. Scrap
iron first recorded 1794.


scrap (n.2)

fight, 1846, possibly a variant of scrape (n.1) on the notion of an abrasive encounter. Weekley and
OED suggest obsolete colloquial scrap scheme, villainy, vile intention (1670s).


scrap-heap (n.)

1803, from scrap (n.1) + heap (n.).


scrapbook (n.)

also scrap-book, 1821, from scrap (n.1) + book (n.). As a verb, by 1879. Related: Scrapbooked;
scrapbooking.


scrape (v.)

early 13c., probably from Old Norse skrapa to scrape, erase, from Proto-Germanic *skrapojan
(cognates: Old English scrapian to scrape, Dutch schrapen, German schrappen), from PIE *skerb-,
extension of root *(s)ker- to cut (see shear (v.)). Meaning gather by great effort, collect with
difficulty is from 1540s. Related: Scraped; scraping. To scrape the bottom of the barrel in
figurative sense is from 1942, in reference to U.S. employers facing worker shortages during the
war.


scrape (n.)

mid-15c., a scraping instrument; late 15c., act of scraping or scratching, from scrape (v.). Meaning
a shave is slang from 1859. Meaning embarrassing or awkward predicament is recorded from 1709, as
OED suggests, probably from the notion of being 'scraped' in going through a narrow passage.


scraper (n.)

instrument for scraping, 1550s, agent noun from scrape (v.). From 1560s as miser, money-grubber;
1610s as fiddler; 1792 as barber.


scrapper (n.)

pugilist, 1874, agent noun from scrap (v.2). Later used generally of anyone or anything that tends
to put up a fight.


scrapple (n.)

scraps of pork and cornmeal seasoned, boiled, and pressed into large cakes, 1850, probably a
diminutive form of scrap (n.1). Noted especially, and perhaps originally, as a regional favorite
dish in and around Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.


scrappy (adj.)

consisting of scraps, 1837, from scrap (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning inclined to fight (1895) is from
scrap (v.2). Related: Scrappily; scrappiness.


scrapyard (n.)

also scrap-yard, 1875, from scrap (n.1) + yard (n.1).


scratch (v.)

c.1400, probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning to scratch, both of
uncertain origin. Related: Scratched; scratching. Billiards sense of to hit the cue ball into a
pocket is first recorded 1909 (also, originally, itch), though earlier it meant a lucky shot (1850).
Meaning to withdraw (a horse) from a race is 1865, from notion of scratching name off list of
competitors; used in a non-sporting sense of cancel a plan, etc. from 1680s. To scratch the surface
make only slight progress in penetrating or understanding is from 1882. To scratch (one's) head as a
gesture of perplexity is recorded from 1712.


scratch (n.)

1580s, slight skin tear produced by a sharp thing, from scratch (v.). Meaning mark or slight furrow
in metal, etc. is from 1660s. American English slang sense of money is from 1914, of uncertain
signification. Many figurative senses (such as up to scratch, originally ready to meet one's
opponent) are from sporting use for line or mark drawn as a starting place, attested from 1778 (but
the earliest use is figurative); meaning nothing (as in from scratch) is 1918, generalized from
specific 19c. sporting sense of starting point of a competitor who receives no odds in a handicap
match. Sense in billiards is from 1850. Scratch-pad is attested from 1883.


Scratch (n.2)

in Old Scratch the Devil, 1740, from earlier Scrat, from Old Norse skratte goblin, wizard, a word
which was used in late Old English to gloss hermaphrodite; probably originally monster (compare Old
High German scraz, scrato satyr, wood demon, German Schratt, Old High German screz a goblin, imp,
dwarf; borrowed from Germanic into Slavic, as in Polish skrzat a goblin).


scratchy (adj.)

1710, affected with 'the scratch,' a skin disease, from scratch (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning composed of
scratches is from 1827; that of grating is from 1866. Of sounds (especially in reproduction) from
1889. Related: Scratchiness.


scrawl (v.)

1610s, write or draw untidily, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Middle English scrawlen spread out
the limbs, sprawl (early 15c.), which possibly is an alteration of sprawlen (see sprawl (v.)) or
crawl (v.). Related: Scrawled; scrawling. The noun is recorded from 1690s, from the verb. Meaning
bad handwriting is from 1710.


scrawny (adj.)

1824, apparently a dialectal variant of scranny lean, thin (1820), which is of uncertain origin but
probably from a Scandinavian source, perhaps Old Norse skr&aelig;lna to shrivel. Compare scrannel.


scream (v.)

late 12c., scr&aelig;men, of uncertain origin, similar to words in Scandinavian, Dutch, German, and
Flemish (such as Old Norse skr&aelig;ma to terrify, scare, Swedish scrana to scream, Dutch schreijen
cry aloud, shriek, Old High German scrian, German schreien to cry). Related: Screamed; screaming.
Screaming meemies is World War I army slang, originally a soldiers' name for a type of German
artillery shell that made a loud noise in flight (from French woman's name Mimi), extended to the
battle fatigue caused by long exposure to enemy fire.


scream (n.)

mid-15c., from scream (v.).  And (as they say) lamentings heard i' th' Ayre; Strange Schreemes of
Death. [Macbeth, II.iii.61]Shakespeare's spelling probably reflects sk- as spelled in words from
Latin (such as school); he also has schreene for screen. Slang meaning something that evokes a cry
of laughter is 1888; screamer in this sense is from 1831.


scree (n.)

pile of debris at the base of a cliff, 1781, back-formation from screes (plural) pebbles, small
stones, from Old Norse skri&eth;a landslide, from skri&eth;a to creep, crawl; of a ship, to sail,
glide, also to slide (on snow-shoes), from Proto-Germanic *skrithanan (cognates: Old English
scri&thorn;an to go, glide, Old Saxon skridan, Dutch schrijden, Old High German scritan, German
schreiten to stride).


screech (v.)

1570s, alteration of scritch (mid-13c., schrichen), possibly of imitative origin (compare shriek).
Related: Screeched; screeching. Screech-owl is attested from 1590s (scritch-owl is from 1520s).


screech (n.)

1550s, from screech (v.). Earlier scritch (1510s).


screed (n.)

early 14c., fragment, also strip of cloth, from northern England dialectal variant of Old English
screade (see shred (n.)). Meaning lengthy speech is first recorded 1789, from notion of reading from
a long list.


screen (n.)

mid-14c., upright piece of furniture providing protection from heat of a fire, drafts, etc.,
probably from a shortened (Anglo-French? compare Anglo-Latin screna) variant of Old North French
escren, Old French escran fire-screen (early 14c.), perhaps from Middle Dutch scherm screen, cover,
shield, or Frankish *skrank barrier, from Proto-Germanic *skerm- (cognates: Old High German skirm,
skerm protection, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    Meaning net-wire frame used in
windows and doors is recorded from 1859. Meaning flat vertical surface for reception of projected
images is from 1810, originally in reference to magic lantern shows; later of movies. Transferred
sense of cinema world collectively is attested from 1914; hence screen test (1918), etc. Screen
saver first attested 1990. Screen printing recorded from 1918.


screen (v.)

to shield from punishment, to conceal, late 15c., from screen (n.). Meaning examine systematically
for suitability is from 1943; sense of to release a movie is from 1915. Related: Screened;
screening.


screenplay (n.)

1916, from screen (n.) in the cinematic sense + play (n.).


screenshot (n.)

by 1991, from (computer) screen (n.) + shot (n.) in the photograph sense.


screenwriter (n.)

1921, from screen (n.) in the film sense + writer.


screw (n.)

cylinder of wood or metal with a spiral ridge round it; hole in which a screw turns, c.1400, from
Middle French escroue nut, cylindrical socket, screwhole, of uncertain etymology; not found in other
Romanic languages. Perhaps via Gallo-Roman *scroba or West Germanic *scruva from Vulgar Latin
scrobis screw-head groove, in classical Latin ditch, trench, also vagina (Diez, though OED finds
this phonologically impossible).    Kluge, Watkins and others trace it to Latin scrofa breeding sow,
perhaps based on the shape of a pig's penis (compare Portuguese porca, Spanish perca a female screw,
from Latin porca sow). Latin scrofa is literally digger, rooter, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut
(see shear (v.)). A group of apparently cognate Germanic words (Middle Low German, Middle Dutch
schruve, Dutch schroef, German Schraube, Swedish skrufva screw) are said to be French loan-words.
Sense of means of pressure or coercion is from 1640s, probably in reference to instruments of
torture (such as thumbscrews). Meaning prison guard, warden is 1812 in underworld slang, originally
in reference to the key they carried (screw as slang for key attested from 1795). Slang meaning an
act of copulation is recorded from 1929 (meaning a prostitute is attested from 1725). To have a
screw loose have a dangerous (usually mental) weakness is recorded from 1810.


screw (v.)

to twist (something) like a screw, 1590s, from screw (n.). From 1610s as to attach with a screw.
Slang meaning to copulate dates from at least 1725, originally usually of the action of the male, on
the notion of driving a screw into something. Meaning defraud, cheat is from 1900. First recorded
1949 in exclamations as a euphemism. Related: Screwed; screwing. To screw up blunder is recorded
from 1942. Screwed up originally was figurative for tuned to a high or precise pitch (1907), an
image from the pegs of stringed instruments. Meaning confused, muddled attested from 1943.
Expression to have (one's) head screwed on the right (or wrong) way is from 1821.


screwball (n.)

eccentric person, 1933, U.S. slang, earlier as a type of erratic baseball pitch (1928), from a still
earlier name for a type of delivery in cricket (1866), from screw (n.) + ball (n.1). Screwball
comedy is attested from 1938, in reference to Carole Lombard.


screwdriver (n.)

also screw-driver, tool for driving screws, 1779, from screw (n.) + driver. Meaning cocktail made
from vodka and orange juice is recorded from 1956. (Screwed/screwy have had a sense of drunk since
19c.; compare slang tight drunk).


screwy (adj.)

1820, tipsy, slightly drunk, from screw (n.) + -y (2.). Sense of crazy, ridiculous first recorded
1887. Related: Screwily; screwiness.


scribble (v.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin scribillare, diminutive of Latin scribere to write (see script (n.)).
Related: Scribbled; scribbling. The noun, hurried or careless writing, is 1570s, from the verb.


scribbler (n.)

petty author, 1550s, agent noun from scribble (v.).


scribe (v.)

to write, mid-15c., from Latin scribere to write (see script (n.)).


scribe (n.)

c.1200, professional interpreter of the Jewish Law (late 11c. as a surname), from Church Latin
scriba teacher of Jewish law, used in Vulgate to render Greek grammateus (corresponding to Hebrew
sopher writer, scholar), special use of Latin scriba keeper of accounts, secretary, writer, from
past participle stem of scribere to write; see script (n.). Sense one who writes, official or public
writer in English is from late 14c.


scrim (n.)

upholstery lining, 1792, of unknown origin.


scrimmage (n.)

sometimes also scrummage, late 15c., alteration of skirmish (n.). Meaning in rugby and U.S. football
dates from 1857, originally a confused struggle between players.


scrimmage (v.)

1825, quarrel, argue, from scrimmage (n.). Team sports sense is from 1881. Related: Scrimmaged;
scrimmaging.


scrimp (v.)

to make too small, 1774, originally in English an adjective, scant, meager (1718), possibly from a
Scandinavian source (compare Swedish skrumpna to shrink, shrivel up, Danish skrumpen shrunken,
shriveled), or from a continental Germanic source akin to Middle High German schrimpfen, German
schrumpfen to shrivel, from Proto-Germanic *skrimp-, from PIE root *(s)kerb- to turn, bend. Related:
Scrimped; scrimping.


scrimpy (adj.)

1855, from scrimp (v.) + -y (2). Related: Scrimpily; scrimpiness.


scrimshaw (n.)

1864, A nautical word of unstable orthography [Century Dictionary], back-formation from scrimshander
(Moby Dick, 1851), scrimshonting (1825), American English, of unknown origin. Scrimshaw is an
English surname, attested from mid-12c., from Old French escremisseor fencing-master.


scrip (n.)

certificate of a right to receive something (especially a stock share), 1762, probably shortened
from (sub)scrip(tion) receipt. Originally receipt for a portion of a loan subscribed, meaning
certificate issued as currency first recorded 1790.


script (n.)

late 14c., something written, earlier scrite (c.1300), from Old French escrit piece of writing,
written paper; credit note, IOU; deed, bond (Modern French &eacute;crit) from Latin scriptum a
writing, book; law; line, mark, noun use of neuter past participle of scribere to write, from PIE
*skribh- to cut, separate, sift (cognates: Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline, sketch,
Lettish skripat scratch, write, Old Norse hrifa scratch), from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)) on the notion of carving marks in stone, wood, etc.    Meaning handwriting is recorded from
1860. Theatrical use, short for manuscript, is attested from 1884. The importance of Rome to the
spread of civilization in Europe is attested by the fact that the word for write in Celtic and
Germanic (as well as Romanic) languages derives from scribere (French &eacute;crire, Irish
scriobhaim, Welsh ysgrifennu, German schreiben). The cognate Old English scrifan means to allot,
assign, decree (see shrive; also compare Old Norse skript penance) and Modern English uses write
(v.) to express this action.


script (v.)

adapt (a work) for broadcasting or film, 1935, from script (n.). Related: Scripted; scripting.


scriptorium (n.)

writing room, 1774, from Late Latin scriptorium place for writing, noun use of neuter of Latin
scriptorius pertaining to writing, from Latin scriptus, past participle of scribere to write (see
script (n.)).


scriptural (adj.)

1640s, from Modern Latin scripturalis, from Latin scriptura (see scripture). Related: Scripturally.


scripture (n.)

early 14c., the sacred writings of the Bible; mid-14c., a writing, an act of writing, written
characters, from Late Latin scriptura the writings contained in the Bible, a passage from the Bible,
in classical Latin a writing, character, inscription, from scriptus, past participle of scribere
write (see script (n.)).


scritch

see screech.


scrivener (n.)

professional penman, copyist, late 14c. (early 13c. as a surname), with superfluous -er + scrivein
scribe (c.1300), from Old French escrivain a writer, notary, clerk (Modern French &#233;crivain),
from Vulgar Latin *scribanem accusative of scriba a scribe, from scribere (see script (n.)).


scrod (n.)

1841, young cod, split and fried or boiled, possibly from Dutch schrood piece cut off, from Middle
Dutch scrode shred (cognate with Old English screade piece cut off; see shred (n.)). If this is the
origin, the notion is probably of fish cut into pieces for drying or cooking.A Boston brahmin is on
a business trip to Philadelphia. In search of dinner, and hungry for that Boston favorite, broiled
scrod, he hops into a cab and asks the driver, My good man, take me someplace where I can get scrod.
The cabbie replies, Pal, that's the first time I've ever been asked that in the passive pluperfect
subjunctive. [an old joke in Philadelphia, this version of it from Vex, Hex, Smash, Smooch,
Constance Hale, 2012]


scrofula (n.)

c.1400, scrophulas (plural) from Late Latin scroful&aelig; (plural) swelling of the glands of the
neck, literally little pigs, from Latin scrofa breeding sow (see screw (n.)). The connection may be
because the glands associated with the disease resemble the body of a sow or some part of it, or
because pigs were thought to be prone to it. Compare Greek khoirades (plural) scrofula, related to
khoiros young pig.


scrofulous (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin scrophulosus; see scrofula + -ous. Related: Scrofulously;
scrofulousness.


scroggy (adj.)

overgrown with bushes, Scottish and northern English, mid-15c., from scrog (n.) a stunted bush, a
shrub-like plant (c.1400), probably related to scrag a lean person or thing (1570s); compare
scraggly.


scroll (n.)

c.1400, roll of parchment or paper, altered (by association with rolle roll) from scrowe (c.1200),
from Anglo-French escrowe, Old French escroe scrap, roll of parchment, from Frankish *skroda shred
or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Old English screada piece cut
off, cutting, scrap; see shred (n.)). As an ornament on furniture or in architecture, from 1610s.


scroll (v.)

to write down in a scroll, c.1600, from scroll (n.). Sense of show a few lines at a time (on a
computer or TV screen) first recorded 1981. Related: Scrolled; scrolling.


scrollwork (n.)

1822, from scroll (n.) + work (n.).


Scrooge (n.)

generic for miser, 1940, from curmudgeonly character in Dickens' 1843 story A Christmas Carol. It
does not appear to be a genuine English surname. Compare scrounge.


scrotum (n.)

purse-like tegumentary investment of the testes and part of the spermatic cord; the cod [Century
Dictionary], 1590s, from Latin scrotum, probably transposed from scortum a skin, hide (see corium),
perhaps by influence of scrautum leather quiver for arrows.  Isn't the sea what Algy calls it: a
grey sweet mother? The snotgreen sea. The scrotum-tightening sea. Epi oinopa ponton. [Joyce,
Ulysses]  Related: Scrotal.


scrounge (v.)

to acquire by irregular means, 1915, alteration of dialectal scrunge to search stealthily, rummage,
pilfer (1909), of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal scringe to pry about; or perhaps related
to scrouge, scrooge push, jostle (1755, also Cockney slang for a crowd), probably suggestive of
screw, squeeze. Popularized by the military in World War I. Related: Scrounged; scrounging.


scrub (v.)

rub hard, early 15c., earlier shrubben (c.1300), perhaps from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German
schrubben to scrub, or from an unrecorded Old English cognate, or from a Scandinavian source (such
as Danish skrubbe to scrub), probably ultimately from the Proto-Germanic root of shrub, used as a
cleaning tool (compare the evolution of broom, brush (n.1)).    Meaning to cancel is attested from
1828 (popularized during World War II with reference to flights), probably from notion of to rub
out, erase an entry on a listing. Related: Scrubbed; scrubbing.


scrub (n.1)

late 14c., low, stunted tree, variant of shrobbe (see shrub), perhaps influenced by a Scandinavian
word (such as Danish dialectal skrub a stunted tree, brushwood). Collective sense brush, shrubs is
attested from 1805. As an adjective from 1710. Scrub oak recorded from 1766.    Transferred sense of
mean, insignificant fellow is from 1580s; U.S. sports meaning athlete not on the varsity team is
recorded from 1892, probably from this, but compare scrub hard-working servant, drudge (1709),
perhaps from influence of scrub (v.).


scrub (n.2)

act of scrubbing, 1620s, from scrub (v.). Meaning thing that is used in scrubbing is from 1680s.


scrubby (adj.)

stunted, inferior, shabby, 1590s; see scrub (n.) + -y (2). Meaning covered with scrub is from 1670s.
Related: Scrubbiness.


scruff (n.)

nape of the neck, 1790, altered (by influence of scruff crust) from scuft (1787), probably related
to North Frisian skuft back of the neck of a horse and Dutch schoft withers of a horse, from a
common Germanic source (compare Old Norse skopt hair of the head, Gothic skuft, Middle High German
schopf, German Schopf). Another theory holds it to be a variant of scurf.


scruffy (adj.)

1650s, covered with scurf, from scruff dandruff, scurf (late Old English variant of scurf) + -y (2).
Generalized sense of rough and dirty is from 1871. Related: Scruffily; scruffiness.


scrum (n.)

1888, abbreviation of scrummage, a variant form of scrimmage (n.). Transferred sense of noisy throng
is from 1950.


scrumptious (adj.)

1833, in countrified humor writing of Major Jack Downing of Maine (Seba Smith); probably a
colloquial alteration of sumptuous. Originally stylish, splendid; sense of delicious is by 1881.
Related: Scrumptiously; scrumptiousness.


scrunch (v.)

1825, to bite, intensive form of crunch (v.); ultimately imitative. Meaning to squeeze is recorded
from 1835 (implied in scrunched). Related: Scrunching.


scruple (v.)

to have or make scruples, 1620s, from scruple (n.). Related: Scrupled; scrupling.


scruple (n.)

moral misgiving, pang of conscience, late 14c., from Old French scrupule (14c.), from Latin
scrupulus uneasiness, anxiety, pricking of conscience, literally small sharp stone, diminutive of
scrupus sharp stone or pebble, used figuratively by Cicero for a cause of uneasiness or anxiety,
probably from the notion of having a pebble in one's shoe. The word in the more literal Latin sense
of small unit of weight or measurement is attested in English from late 14c.


scrupulous (adj.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French scrupulus, Middle French scrupuleux, or directly from Latin scrupulosus,
from scrupulus (see scruple). Related: Scrupulously; scrupulousness.


scrutable (adj.)

c.1600, probably a back-formation from inscrutable.


scrutinise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of scrutinize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related: Scrutinised;
scrutinising; scrutinisation.


scrutinization (n.)

1772, noun of action from scrutinize.


scrutinize (v.)

1670s, from scrutiny + -ize. Related: Scrutinized; scrutinizing. Earlier verb was scrutine (1590s),
from French.


scrutiny (n.)

early 15c., a vote to choose someone to decide a question, from Late Latin scrutinium a search,
inquiry (in Medieval Latin, a mode of election by ballot), from Latin scrutari to examine,
investigate, search, from PIE root *skreu- to cut; cutting tool (see shred (n.)). Meaning close
examination first recorded c.1600. Perhaps the original notion of the Latin word is to search
through trash, via scruta (plural) trash, rags (shreds); or the original sense might be to cut into,
scratch.


scry (v.)

to see images in a crystal, water, etc., which reveal the past or forebode the future, 1520s, a
shortening of descry (v.1). Related: Scried; scrying; scryer.


scuba

1952, acronym for self-contained underwater breathing apparatus.


scud (v.)

to move quickly, 1530s, of uncertain origin, perhaps a variant of Middle English scut rabbit,
rabbit's tail, in reference to its movements (see scut (n.1)), but there are phonetic difficulties.
Perhaps rather from a North Sea Germanic source akin to Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schudden to
shake (see quash). Related: Scudded; scudding. As a noun from c.1600, from the verb. It also was the
NATO reporting name for a type of Soviet missile introduced in the 1960s.


scudo (n.)

old Italian silver coin, Italian, literally shield (in reference to the device it bore), from Latin
scutum (see hide (n.1)).


scuff (v.)

1768, to walk (through or over something) without raising the feet, from Scottish, probably from a
Scandinavian source related to Old Norse skufa, skyfa to shove, push aside, from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)). Meaning injure the surface of is from 1897. Related: Scuffed; scuffing. As a
noun from 1824.


scuffle (v.)

to push or fight in a disorderly manner, 1570s, probably a frequentative form of scuff, of
Scandinavian origin. Related: Scuffled; scuffling. As a noun c.1600, from the verb.


scull (n.)

kind of short, light, spoon-bladed oar, mid-14c., of unknown origin. The verb is from 1620s, from
the noun. Related: Sculled; sculling.


scullery (n.)

mid-15c. (early 14c. as a surname), household department concerned with the care of kitchen
utensils, from Old French escuelerie office of the servant in charge of plates, etc., from escuelier
keeper of the dishes, from escuele dish (12c., Modern French &#233;cuelle), from Latin scutella
serving platter, silver (see scuttle (n.)).


scullion (n.)

low-ranking domestic servant who performs menial kitchen tasks, late 15c., perhaps from Middle
French escouillon a swab, cloth, diminutive of escouve broom, twig, from Latin scopa (plural
scop&aelig;) broom, related to scapus shaft, stem (see scape (n.2)). Or an alteration of Old French
souillon scullion, by influence of scullery.


sculpt (v.)

1826 (implied in sculpted), from French sculpter, from Latin sculpt-, past participle stem of
sculpere to carve (see sculpture). Related: Sculpting. The older verb form was sculpture (1640s),
also sculp (1530s).


sculptor (n.)

1630s, from Latin sculptor one who cuts or carves, agent noun from sculpt-, past participle stem of
sculpere to carve (see sculpture). Fem. form sculptress attested from 1660s.


sculpture (n.)

late 14c., from Latin sculptura sculpture, from past participle stem of sculpere to carve, engrave,
back-formation from compounds such as exculpere, from scalpere to carve, cut, from PIE root *(s)kel-
(1) to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).


scum (n.)

early 14c. (implied in scummer shallow ladle for removing scum), from Middle Dutch schume foam,
froth, from Proto-Germanic *skuma- (cognates: Old Norse skum, Old High German scum, German Schaum
foam, froth), perhaps from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)).    Sense
deteriorated from thin layer atop liquid to film of dirt, then just dirt.  Meaning lowest class of
humanity is 1580s; scum of the Earth is from 1712. Adopted in Romanic (Old French escume, Modern
French &eacute;cume, Spanish escuma, Italian schiuma).


scumbag (n.)

condom, by 1939, slang, from scum + bag (n.). Earlier (by 1817) it was used in sugar refining as the
name of a frame covered in coarse cloth used in straining. Meaning despicable person is attested by
1971.


scummy (adj.)

1570s, from scum + -y (2). Transferred sense of filthy, disreputable is recorded from 1932. Related:
Scumminess.


scupper (n.)

opening in a ship's side at deck level to let the water flow out, early 15c., perhaps from Old
French escopir to spit out, or related to Dutch schop shovel, or from Middle English scope scoop
(see scoop (n.)).


scuppernong (n.)

cultivated muscadine grape vine, 1811, from name of a river in North Carolina, U.S., recorded 18c.
as Cascoponung, Cuscopang, from an unidentified American Indian word.


scurf (n.)

late Old English sceorf, from Proto-Germanic *skurf- (cognates: Danish skurv, Middle Dutch scorf,
Dutch schurft, Old High German scorf, German Schorf scurf), probably related to Old English sceorfan
to gnaw, scearfian to cut into shreds, from PIE *skerp-, from root *(s)ker- to cut (see shear (v.)).


scurfy (adj.)

late 15c., from scurf + -y (2). Compare scurvy. Related: Scurfiness.


scurrility (n.)

c.1500, from Latin scurrilitas buffoonery, from scurrilis (see scurrilous).


scurrilous (adj.)

using such language as only the licence of a buffoon can warrant [Johnson], 1570s, from scurrile
coarsely joking (c.1500, implied in scurrility), from Latin scurrilis buffoonlike, from scurra
fashionable city idler, man-about-town, later buffoon. According to Klein, an Etruscan loan-word.
Related: Scurrilously; scurrilousness.


scurry (v.)

1810, perhaps from hurry-scurry (1732), a reduplication of hurry (v.). As a noun, 1823, from the
verb.


scurvy (n.)

1560s, noun use of adjective scurvy covered with scabs, diseased, scorbutic (early 15c.), variant of
scurfy. It took on the narrower meaning of Dutch scheurbuik, French scorbut scurvy, in reference to
the disease characterized by swollen and bleeding gums, prostration, etc., perhaps from Old Norse
skyrbjugr, which is perhaps literally a swelling (bjugr) from drinking sour milk (skyr) on long sea
voyages; but OED has alternative etymology of Middle Dutch or Middle Low German origin, as disease
that lacerates the belly, from schoren to lacerate + Middle Low German buk, Dutch buik belly.


scuse (v.)

shortened form of excuse (v.), attested from late 15c.


scut (n.2)

term of contempt for a person, 1873, of unknown origin.


scut (n.1)

short, erect tail (of a rabbit, hare, deer, etc.), 1520s; earlier a hare (mid-15c.), perhaps from
Old Norse skjota to shoot (with a weapon), launch, push, shove quickly (compare Norwegian skudda to
shove, push), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).


scutcheon (n.)

mid-14c., short for escutcheon.


scuttle (n.)

bucket, late Old English scutel dish, platter, from Latin scutella serving platter (source also of
French &#233;cuelle, Spanish escudilla, Italian scudella a plate, bowl), diminutive of scutra flat
tray, dish, perhaps related to scutum shield (see hide (n.1)).    A common Germanic borrowing from
Latin (Old Norse skutill, Middle Dutch schotel, Old High German scuzzila, German Sch&uuml;ssel a
dish). Meaning basket for sifting grain is attested from mid-14c.; sense of bucket for holding coal
first recorded 1849.


scuttle (v.1)

scamper, scurry, mid-15c., probably related to scud (v.). Related: Scuttled; scuttling.    I should
have been a pair of ragged claws         Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.  [T.S. Eliot,
The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock]


scuttle (v.2)

cut a hole in a ship to sink it, 1640s, from skottell (n.) opening in a ship's deck (late 15c.),
from Middle French escoutille (Modern French &eacute;coutille) or directly from Spanish escotilla
hatchway, diminutive of escota opening in a garment, from escotar cut out, perhaps from e- out (see
ex-) + Germanic *skaut-. Figurative use is recorded from 1888. Related: Scuttled; scuttling.


scuttlebutt (n.)

1805, cask of drinking water kept on a ship's deck, having a hole (scuttle) cut in it for a cup or
dipper, from scuttle opening in a ship's deck (see scuttle (v.2)) + butt (n.2) barrel. Earlier
scuttle cask (1777). Meaning rumor, gossip first recorded 1901, originally nautical slang,
traditionally said to be from the sailors' custom of gathering around the scuttlebutt to gossip.
Compare water-cooler, figurative for workplace gossip mid-20c.


scuzzy (adj.)

1968, North American colloquial, perhaps a blend of scummy and fuzzy [Barnhart]. First attested use
is in reference to Ratso Rizzo in Midnight Cowboy.


Scylla (n.)

sea-monster in the Strait of Messina, from Latinized form of Greek Skylla, of unknown origin,
perhaps related to skyllein to tear.


scythe (n.)

Old English si&eth;e, sig&eth;i, from Proto-Germanic *segithoz (cognates: Middle Low German segede,
Middle Dutch sichte, Old High German segensa, German Sense), from PIE root *sek- to cut (see section
(n.)). The sc- spelling crept in early 15c., from influence of Latin scissor carver, cutter and
scindere to cut. Compare French scier saw, a false spelling from sier.


scythe (v.)

1570s, use a scythe; 1590s to mow; from scythe (n.). From 1897 as move with the sweeping motion of a
scythe. Related: Scythed; scything.


Scythian (n.)

1540s, from Latin Scythia, from Greek Skythia, name anciently given to the region along the north
coast of the Black Sea, from Skythes a Scythian, said to be from an Indo-European root meaning
shepherd [Room]. As an adjective from 1560s. Herodotus is responsible for Scythian disease or
Scythian insanity.


se-

word-forming element, from Latin se-, collateral form of sed- without, apart, aside, on one's own,
related to sed, Latin reflexive pronoun (accusative and ablative), from PIE *sed-, extended form of
root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive (source also of German sich; see idiom).


sea (n.)

Old English s&aelig; sheet of water, sea, lake, pool, from Proto-Germanic *saiwaz (cognates: Old
Saxon seo, Old Frisian se, Middle Dutch see, Swedish sj&#246;), of unknown origin, outside
connections wholly doubtful [Buck]. Meaning large quantity (of anything) is from c.1200.  Meaning
dark area of the moon's surface is attested from 1660s (see mare (n.2)).    Germanic languages also
use the general Indo-European word (represented by English mere (n.)), but have no firm distinction
between sea and lake, either by size, by inland or open, or by salt vs. fresh. This may reflect the
Baltic geography where the languages are thought to have originated. The two words are used more or
less interchangeably in Germanic, and exist in opposite senses (such as Gothic saiws lake, marei
sea; but Dutch zee sea, meer lake). Compare also Old Norse s&aelig;r sea, but Danish s&oslash;,
usually lake but sea in phrases. German See is sea (fem.) or lake (masc.). The single Old English
word s&aelig; glosses Latin mare, aequor, pontus, pelagus, and marmor.    Phrase sea change
transformation is attested from 1610, first in Shakespeare (The Tempest, I.ii). Sea anemone is from
1742; sea legs is from 1712; sea level from 1806; sea urchin from 1590s. At sea in the figurative
sense of perplexed is attested from 1768, from literal sense of out of sight of land (c.1300).


sea monkey (n.)

1909 as a heraldic animal, 1964 as a U.S. proprietary name for brine shrimp (Artemia salina), which
had been used as food for aquarium fish till they began to be marketed as pets by U.S. inventor
Harold von Braunhut (d.2003), who also invented X-Ray Specs and popularized pet hermit crabs. He
began marketing them in comic book advertisements in 1960 as Instant Life, and changed the name to
Sea Monkeys in 1964, so called for their long tails.


sea-breeze (n.)

one blowing from the sea to the shore, 1690s, from sea + breeze (n.).


sea-dog (n.)

1590s, harbor seal, from sea + dog (n.). Also pirate (1650s). Meaning old seaman, sailor who has
been long afloat is attested from 1840.


sea-floor (n.)

1832, from sea + floor (n.).


sea-green (n.)

as a color, 1590s, from sea + green (adj.). As an adjective from c.1600.


sea-horse (n.)

late 15c., walrus, from sea + horse (n.); also see walrus. Also in heraldry as a fabulous animal
withy the foreparts of a horse and the tail of a fish. Main modern sense in zoology is attested from
1580s.


sea-lion (n.)

c.1600, kind of lobster, from sea + lion. Later the name of a fabulous animal (in heraldry, etc.),
1660s. Applied from 1690s to various species of large eared seals. As code name for the planned
German invasion of Britain, it translates German Seel&ouml;we, announced by Hitler July 1940,
scrubbed October 1940.


sea-monster (n.)

1580s, from sea + monster. Sea serpent is attested from 1640s. In Old English a sea-monster might be
called s&aelig;draca sea dragon, or s&aelig;deor.


sea-salt (n.)

c.1600, from sea + salt (n.).


Seabee (n.)

1942, from pronunciation of C.B., abbreviation of Construction Battalion, formed as a volunteer
branch of the Civil Engineer Corps of the U.S. Navy.


seaboard (n.)

seaward side of a ship, late 15c., from sea + board (n.2).


seacoal (n.)

also sea-coal, old name for mineral coal (as opposed to charcoal), mid-13c.; earlier, in Old
English, it meant jet, which chiefly was found washed ashore by the sea. The coal perhaps so called
from resemblance to jet, or because it was first dug from beds exposed by wave erosion. From sea +
coal. As it became the predominant type used, the prefix was dropped.


seafarer (n.)

1510s, from sea + agent noun from fare (n.). The Anglo-Saxon poem known by this name since at least
1842 was untitled in original MS.


seafaring (adj.)

c.1200, from sea + faring (see fare (v.)).


seafood (n.)

food obtained from the sea, 1836, American English, from sea + food.


seagull (n.)

1540s, from sea + gull (n.).


seal (n.1)

design stamped on wax, especially one attached to a document as evidence of authenticity, c.1200,
from Old French seel seal on a letter (Modern French sceau), from Vulgar Latin *sigellum (source of
Italian suggello, Spanish sello; also Old Frisian and Middle High German sigel, German Siegel), from
Latin sigillum small picture, engraved figure, seal, diminutive of signum mark, token (see sign
(n.)). An earlier borrowing directly from Latin is represented by Old English insigel. Technical
use, what prevents the escape of a gas or liquid is from 1853.


seal (n.2)

fish-eating mammal with flippers, Old English seolh seal, from Proto-Germanic *selkhaz (compare Old
Norse selr, Swedish sj&ouml;l, Danish s&#230;l, Middle Low German sel, Middle Dutch seel, Old High
German selah), of unknown origin, perhaps a borrowing from Finnic. Seal point dark brown marking on
a Siamese cat is recorded from 1934, from the dark brown color of seal fur; compare seal brown rich,
dark brown color, by 1875. Old English seolhb&#230;&#240;, literally seal's bath, was an Anglo-Saxon
kenning for the sea.


seal (v.)

to fasten with (or as with) a seal, c.1200, from seal (n.1). Meaning to place a seal on (a document)
is recorded from mid-14c.; hence to conclude, ratify, render official (late 15c.). Sense of to close
up with wax, lead, cement, etc. is attested from 1660s, from the notion of wax seals on envelopes.
In reference to the actions of wood-coatings, 1940. Related: Sealed; sealing. Sealing-wax is
attested from c.1300. To seal (one's) fate (1799) probably reflects the notion of a seal on an
execution warrant.


sealant (n.)

1945, from seal (v.) + -ant.


sealskin (n.)

early 14c., from seal (n.2) + skin (n.).


seam (n.)

Old English seam seam, suture, junction, from Proto-Germanic *saumaz (cognates: Old Frisian sam hem,
seam, Old Norse saumr, Middle Dutch som, Dutch zoom, Old High German soum, German Saum hem), from
PIE root *syu- to sew, to bind (cognates: Old English siwian, Latin suere, Sanskrit syuman; see
sew).Chidynge and reproche ... vnsowen the semes of freendshipe in mannes herte. [Chaucer, Parson's
Tale, c.1386]Meaning raised band of stitching on a ball is recorded from 1888. Geological use is
from 1590s.


seam (v.)

1580s, from seam (n.). Related: Seamed; seaming.


seaman (n.)

a sailor, Old English s&aelig;manna (plural); see sea + man (n.). Similar formation in Dutch zeeman,
German Seemann, Old Norse sjoma&eth;r.


seamanship (n.)

1766, acquaintance with the skill of a good seaman, from seaman + -ship.


seamless (adj.)

late 15c., from seam + -less. Figurative sense of whole, integrated is attested from 1862. Related:
Seamlessly; seamlessness.


seamount (n.)

by 1908, from sea + mount (n.).


seamstress (n.)

1640s, with -ess + seamster (also sempster), from Old English seamestre sewer, tailor, person whose
work is sewing, from seam. Originally indicating a woman, but after a while the fem. ending -estre
no longer was felt as such and a new one added.


seamy (adj.)

c.1600, least pleasant, worst, in figurative phrase seamy side, from seam + -y (2); the seamy side
of a sewn garment being the less attractive, and thus typically turned in. The popularity of the
figurative sense likely is due to its use by Shakespeare in Othello IV.ii.146: Some such Squire he
was That turn'd your wits the seamy-side without, And made you to suspect me with the Moore.


Sean

masc. proper name, also Shaun Shawn; Irish form of John.


seance (n.)

1789, sitting, session, as of a learned society, from French s&eacute;ance a sitting, from seoir to
sit, from Latin sedere (see sedentary). Meaning spiritualistic session first recorded 1845.


seaplane (n.)

1913, from sea + plane (n.2).


seaport (n.)

1590s, from sea + port (n.1).


sear (v.)

Old English searian (intransitive) dry up, to wither, from Proto-Germanic *saurajan (cognates:
Middle Dutch soor dry, Old High German soren become dry), from root of sear dried up, withered (see
sere). Meaning cause to wither is from early 15c. Meaning to brand, to burn by hot iron is recorded
from c.1400, originally especially of cauterizing wounds; figurative use is from 1580s. Related:
Seared; searing.


search (v.)

c.1300, from Old French cerchier to search (12c., Modern French chercher), from Latin circare go
about, wander, traverse, in Late Latin to wander hither and thither, from circus circle (see
circus). Phrase search me as a verbal shrug of ignorance first recorded 1901. Search engine attested
from 1988. Search and destroy as a modifier is 1966, American English, from the Vietnam War. Search
and rescue is from 1944.


search (n.)

c.1400, act of searching; early 15c., right to investigate illegal activity; examination of records,
wills, etc.; a search through an area or a place, from Anglo-French serche, Old French cerche, from
cerchier (see search (v.)). Search warrant attested from 1739.


searchable (adj.)

1550s, from search (v.) + -able. Compare unsearchable.


searchlight (n.)

also search-light, 1882, from search (v.) + light (n.).


seashell (n.)

also sea-shell, Old English s&aelig;scel; see sea and shell (n.).


seashore (n.)

also sea-shore, 1520s, from sea + shore (n.). Old English used s&aelig;rima sea-rim,
s&aelig;-strande, etc.


seasick (adj.)

also sea-sick, 1560s, from sea + sick (n.). Related: Seasickness.


seaside (n.)

also sea-side, c.1200, from sea + side (n.). As an adjective from 1781. Old English had
s&aelig;healf.


season (n.)

c.1300, a period of the year, with reference to weather or work, also proper time, suitable
occasion, from Old French seison, saison season, date; right moment, appropriate time (Modern French
saison) a sowing, planting, from Latin sationem (nominative satio) a sowing, planting, noun of
action from past participle stem of serere to sow (see sow (v.)).    Sense shifted in Vulgar Latin
from act of sowing to time of sowing, especially spring, regarded as the chief sowing season. In Old
Proven&#231;al and Old French (and thus in English), this was extended to season in general. In
other Indo-European languages, generic season (of the year) words typically are from words for time,
sometimes with a word for year (as in Latin tempus (anni), German Jahrzeit). Of game (as in out of
season) from late 14c. Spanish estacion, Italian stagione are unrelated, being from Latin statio
station.    Meaning time of year during which a place is most frequented is from 1705. Season ticket
is attested from 1820.


season (v.)

improve the flavor of by adding spices, c.1300, from Old French assaisoner to ripen, season, from a-
to (see ad-) + root of season (n.) on the notion of fruit becoming more palatable as it ripens.
Applied to timber by 1540s. In 16c., it also meant to copulate with.


seasonable (adj.)

suitable as to the time or season, late 14c., from season (n.) + -able. Related: Seasonably;
seasonableness.


seasonal (adj.)

pertaining to the seasons; relating to a season, 1829, from season (n.) + -al (1). Of workers or
employment, from 1904. Related: Seasonally.


seasoned (adj.)

mid-15c., flavored, spiced, past participle adjective from season (v.). Meaning fit for use is from
1540s; that of acclimatized, accustomed is from 1640s.


seasoning (n.)

act of adding flavor, 1510s; something added to a dish to impart flavor, 1570s, verbal noun from
season (v.).


seat (n.1)

thing to sit on; act of sitting, c.1200, from Old Norse s&aelig;ti seat, position, from Proto-
Germanic *s&aelig;t- (cognates: Old High German saze, Middle Dutch gesaete seat, Old High German
gisazi, German Ges&auml;&szlig; buttocks), from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sit). Meaning
posterior of the body (the sitting part) is from c.1600; sense of part of a garment which covers the
buttocks is from 1835. Seat belt is from 1915, originally in airplanes.


seat (n.2)

residence, abode, established place, late 13c., extended use of seat (n.1), influenced by Old French
siege seat, established place, and Latin sedes seat. Meaning city in which a government sits is
attested from c.1400. Sense of right of taking a place in a parliament or other legislative body is
attested from 1774. Old English had s&aelig;t place where one sits in ambush, which also meant
residents, inhabitants, and is the source of the -set in Dorset and Somerset.


seat (v.)

1570s, to be in a certain position (implied in seated), from seat (n.2). Of diseases, in the body,
from 1610s (hence deep-seated). Meaning to cause to sit in a seat is from 1610s, from seat (n.1).
Related: Seated; seating.


SEATO

1954, acronym for Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.


Seattle

city founded 1853, named for Seatlh (c.1790-1866), native chief who befriended white settlers. His
name is in the Salishan tongue.


seavy (adj.)

overgrown with rushes, 1680s, from seave rush (c.1400), from Old Norse sef.


seaweed (n.)

1570s, from sea + weed (n.). An Old English word for it was s&aelig;war.


seaworthy (adj.)

1807, in fit condition to encounter heavy weather at sea, from sea + worthy. Related: Seaworthiness.
Old English had s&aelig;rof hardy at sea.


sebaceous (adj.)

1728, secreting sebum, from Latin sebaceus of tallow, from sebum tallow, grease (see sebum). Meaning
oily, greasy, fatty is from 1783.


Sebastian

masc. proper name, from Latin Sebastianus, from Greek Sebastianos, man of Sebastia, a city in Pontus
that was named for Augustus Caesar, first Roman emperor, from Greek sebastos venerable, a
translation of Latin augustus, the epithet of Caesar.


seborrhea (n.)

also seborrhoea, discharge of sebaceous matter, especially as a scalp condition, 1849, coined in
Modern Latin as a hybrid, from sebo-, used as comb. form of Latin sebum tallow, suet, grease (see
sebum) + Greek hroia flow, flux, from rhein to flow (see rheum)


sebum (n.)

secretion of the sebaceous glands, 1728, from medical use of Latin sebum sebum, suet, grease,
probably related to sapo soap (see soap (n.)).


sec (n.)

1956, conversational shortening of second (n.).


sec (adj.)

of wine, dry, French sec (10c.), from Latin siccus dry (also source of Italian secco); see
siccative.


secant (n.)

1590s, from Latin secantem (nominative secans) a cutting, present participle of secare to cut (see
section (n.)). First used by Danish mathematician Thomas Fincke in Geometria Rotundi (1583).


secateurs (n.)

pruning shears, 1881, from French s&eacute;cateur, ultimately from Latin secare to cut (see section
(n.)).


secede (v.)

1702, to leave one's companions, from Latin secedere go away, withdraw, separate; rebel, revolt (see
secession). Sense of to withdraw from a political or religious alliance of union is recorded from
1755, originally especially in reference to the Church of Scotland. Related: Seceded; seceding;
seceder.


secession (n.)

1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal,
insurrection, schism, noun of action from past participle stem of secedere secede, from se- apart
(see secret) + cedere to go (see cede). Originally in a Roman historical context, temporary
migration of plebeians from the city to compel patricians to address their grievances; modern use in
reference to religious or political unions dates from 1650s.


secessionist (n.)

1860, first recorded in U.S. context, from secession + -ist (colloquial short form secesh, noun and
adjective, is attested from 1861); the earlier noun had been seceder, but this had religious
overtones, especially in reference to Scottish Church history.


seclude (v.)

mid-15c., to shut up, enclose, confine, from Latin secludere shut off, confine, from se- apart (see
secret) + -cludere, variant of claudere to shut (see close (v.)). Meaning to remove or guard from
public view is recorded from 1620s. Related: Secluded; secluding.


secluded (adj.)

c.1600, of persons; in reference to places, 1798, past participle adjective from seclude (v.).
Earlier secluse (1590s).


seclusion (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin seclusionem (nominative seclusio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin secludere (see seclude).


seclusive (adj.)

1743, from Latin seclus-, past participle stem of secludere (see seclude) + -ive. Related:
Seclusively; seclusiveness.


Seconal

1935, U.S. proprietary name (Eli Lilly &amp; Co.), from Secon(dary) Al(lyl).


second (adj.)

next after first, c.1300, from Old French second, secont, and directly from Latin secundus
following, next in time or order, also secondary, subordinate, inferior, from root of sequi follow
(see sequel). Replaced native other in this sense because of the ambiguousness of the earlier word.
Second sight is from 1610s; an etymologically perverse term, because it means in reality the sight
of events before, not after, they occur. Second fiddle first attested 1809:    A metaphor borrowed
from a musical performer who plays the second or counter to one who plays the first or the air.
[Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


second (n.1)

one-sixtieth of a minute of degree, also sixtieth part of a minute of time, late 14c. in geometry,
from Old French seconde, from Medieval Latin secunda, short for secunda pars minuta second
diminished part, the result of the second division of the hour by sixty (the first being the prime
minute, now called the minute), from Latin secunda, fem. of secundus (see second (adj.)). The second
hand of a clock is attested from 1759.


second (v.)

1580s, to support or represent in a duel, fight, etc., from Middle French seconder, from Latin
secundare to assist, make favorable, from secundus assisting, favorable, following, second (see
second (adj.)). The parliamentary sense is first recorded 1590s. Related: Seconded; seconding.


second (n.2)

assistant, supporter, 1580s, from second (v.).


second nature (n.)

late 14c., from Latin secundum naturam according to nature (Augustine, Macrobius, etc.), literally
following nature; from medieval Aristotelian philosophy, contrasted to phenomena that were super
naturam (above nature, such as God's grace), extra naturam (outside nature), supra naturam (beyond
nature, such as miracles), contra naturam against nature, etc.


second-class (adj.)

1833, from noun phrase (1810), from second (adj.) + class (n.). Phrase second-class citizen is
recorded from 1942.    The Negro recognizes that he is a second-class citizen and that status is
fraught with violent potentialities, particularly today when he is living up to the full
responsibilities of citizenship on the field of battle. [Louis E. Martin, To Be or Not to Be a
Liberal, in The Crisis, September 1942]


second-guess (v.)

1941, back-formation from second-guesser (1937), American English, originally baseball slang for a
fan who loudly questions decisions by players, managers, etc.; perhaps from guesser in the baseball
slang sense of umpire.


second-hand (adj.)

also secondhand, late 15c., from second (adj.) + hand (n.).


second-rate (adj.)

1660s, originally of ships; see rate (n.).


secondary (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin secundarius pertaining to the second class, inferior, from secundus (see
second (adj.)). Of colors, from 1831; of education, from 1809. Of sex characteristics from 1780.
Opposed to primary or principal. Related: Secondarily.


secondly (adv.)

late 14c., from second (adj.) + -ly (2).


secondment (n.)

1897, from second (v.) + -ment.


seconds (n.)

articles below the first quality, c.1600, plural of second (n.) that which is after the first (early
14c.), from second (adj.); originally attested in this sense in a Shakespeare sonnet. Meaning second
helping of food at a meal is recorded from 1792.


secrecy (n.)

1570s, from secretee, quality of being secret (early 15c.), from Old French secr&eacute;, variant of
secret (see secret (n.)) + -ty (2). Form altered on model of primacy, etc.


secret (v.)

to keep secret (described in OED as obsolete), 1590s, from secret (n.). Related: Secreted;
secreting.


secret (n.)

late 14c., from Latin secretus set apart, withdrawn; hidden, concealed, private, past participle of
secernere to set apart, part, divide; exclude, from se- without, apart, properly on one's own (see
se-) + cernere separate (see crisis).    As an adjective from late 14c., from French secret,
adjective use of noun. Open secret is from 1828. Secret agent first recorded 1715; secret service is
from 1737; secret weapon is from 1936.


secretaire (n.)

cabinet for private papers, 1771, from French secr&eacute;taire (13c.), from Medieval Latin
secretarius (see secretary). Englished form secretary is attested in this sense from 1803.


secretarial (adj.)

1801, from stem of secretary (Medieval Latin secretarius) + -al (1).


secretariat (n.)

office of secretary, 1811, from French secr&eacute;tariat, from Medieval Latin secretariatus, from
secretarius (see secretary). Meaning division of the Central Committeee of the USSR is from 1926,
from Russian sekretariat.


secretary (n.)

late 14c., person entrusted with secrets, from Medieval Latin secretarius clerk, notary,
confidential officer, confidant, a title applied to various confidential officers, noun use of
adjective meaning private, secret, pertaining to private or secret matters (compare Latin
secretarium a council-chamber, conclave, consistory), from Latin secretum a secret, a hidden thing
(see secret (n.)).    Meaning person who keeps records, write letters, etc., originally for a king,
first recorded c.1400. As title of ministers presiding over executive departments of state, it is
from 1590s. The word also is used in both French and English to mean a private desk, sometimes in
French form secretaire. The South African secretary bird so called (1786) in reference to its crest,
which, when smooth, resembles a pen stuck over the ear. Compare Late Latin silentiarius privy
councilor, 'silentiary, from Latin silentium a being silent.


secrete (v.)

1707, back-formation from secretion. Related: Secreted; secretes; secreting.


secretion (n.)

1640s, act of secreting; 1732, that which is secreted, from French s&eacute;cr&eacute;tion, from
Latin secretionem (nominative secretio) a dividing, separation, noun of action from past participle
stem of secernere to separate, set apart (see secret (n.)).


secretive (adj.)

inclined to secrecy, 1815 (implied in secretiveness); see secret (n.) + -ive. The word also was in
Middle English with a sense secret, hidden (mid-15c.). Related: Secretively.


secretly (adv.)

early 15c., from secret (adj.) + -ly (2).


secretory (adj.)

1690s; see secrete + -ory.


sect (n.)

mid-14c., distinctive system of beliefs or observances; party or school within a religion, from Old
French secte, sete sect, religious community, or directly from Late Latin secta religious group,
sect in philosophy or religion, from Latin secta manner, mode, following, school of thought,
literally a way, road, beaten path, from fem. of sectus, variant past participle of sequi follow,
from PIE *sekw- (1) to follow (see sequel). Confused in this sense with Latin secta, fem. past
participle of secare to cut (see section (n.)). Meaning separately organized religious body is
recorded from 1570s.


sectarian (adj.)

1640s, originally applied by Presbyterians to Independents, from Medieval Latin sectarius, from
secta (see sect).


sectarianism (n.)

1670s, disposition to petty sects in opposition to things established [Johnson]; see sectarian +
-ism.


sectary (n.)

member or adherent of a sect, 1550s, from French sectaire or directly from Medieval Latin sectarius,
from secta (see sect).


section (n.)

late 14c., intersection of two straight lines; division of a scale; from Old French section or
directly from Latin sectionem (nominative sectio) a cutting, cutting off, division, noun of action
from past participle stem of secare to cut, from PIE root *sek- to cut (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic seko, se&#353;ti to cut, se &#269;ivo ax, hatchet; Lithuanian isekti to engrave, carve;
Albanian &#353;ate mattock; Old Saxon segasna, Old English sig&eth;e scythe; Old English secg sword,
seax knife, short sword; Old Irish doescim I cut; Latin saxum rock, stone).    From 1550s as act of
cutting or dividing. Meaning subdivision of a written work, statute, etc. is from 1570s. Meaning a
part cut off from the rest is from early 15c.


section (v.)

divide into sections, 1819, from section (n.). Related: Sectioned; sectioning.


sectional (adj.)

1806; see section (n.) + -al (1). Noun meaning piece of furniture composed of sections which can be
used separately is attested by 1961, from sectional seat, sectional sofa, etc. (1949).


sectionalism (n.)

1836, American English, from sectional + -ism. In frequent use from 1856.


sector (n.)

1560s, section of a circle between two radii, from Late Latin sector section of a circle, in
classical Latin a cutter, one who cuts, from sectus, past participle of secare to cut (see section
(n.)). Translated Greek tomeus in Latin editions of Archimedes. Meaning area, division appeared
1920, generalized from military sense (1916) of part of a front, based on a circle centered on a
headquarters. As a verb from 1884. Related: Sectoral; sectorial.


secular (adj.)

c.1300, living in the world, not belonging to a religious order, also belonging to the state, from
Old French seculer (Modern French s&#233;culier), from Late Latin saecularis worldly, secular,
pertaining to a generation or age, from Latin saecularis of an age, occurring once in an age, from
saeculum age, span of time, generation.    According to Watkins, this is probably from PIE *sai-
tlo-, with instrumental element *-tlo- + *sai- to bind, tie (see sinew), extended metaphorically to
successive human generations as links in the chain of life. Another theory connects it with words
for seed, from PIE root *se- to sow (see sow (v.), and compare Gothic mana-se&thorn;s mankind,
world, literally seed of men).    Used in ecclesiastical writing like Greek aion of this world (see
cosmos). It is source of French si&egrave;cle. Ancient Roman ludi saeculares was a three-day, day-
and-night celebration coming once in an age (120 years). In English, in reference to humanism and
the exclusion of belief in God from matters of ethics and morality, from 1850s.


secularism (n.)

doctrine that morality should be based on the well-being of man in the present life, without regard
to religious belief or a hereafter, 1846, from secular + -ism.


secularist (n.)

1846, one who theoretically rejects and ignores all forms of religion based on revelation; see
secularism + -ist. From 1851 as one who maintains that public education and civil policy should be
conducted without the introduction of a religious element. Related: Secularistic.


secularization (n.)

1706, conversion to secular purposes, in reference to Church property; see secularize + -ation.
General use by 1863.


secularize (v.)

1610s, of property, offices, etc., from secular + -ize. From 1711 as to become worldly; from 1846 of
education, social institutions, etc. Related: Secularized; secularizing.


secundine (n.)

afterbirth, from Late Latin secundinae (plural), from Latin secundae the afterbirth, shortened from
secundae membranae, literally the second membranes, from secundus second (see second (adj.)).
Related: Secundines.


secure (adj.)

1530s, without care, dreading no evil, from Latin securus, of persons, free from care, quiet, easy,
also in a bad sense, careless, reckless; of things, tranquil; free from danger, safe, from *se cura,
from se free from (see secret (n.)) + cura care (see cure (n.)).    In English, of places, free from
danger, unexposed, from 1580s. Meaning firmly fixed (of material things) is from 1841, on notion of
affording grounds for confidence. Of telephones, not wiretapped, from 1961. Replaced Middle English
siker, from Old English sicor, from the Latin word. Related: Securely.


secure (v.)

c.1600, to make safe, from secure (adj.). Meaning ensure, make certain is from 1650s; that of seize
and hold is from 1640s; sense of get possession is from 1743. Related: Secured; securing.


security (n.)

mid-15c., condition of being secure, from Latin securitas, from securus free from care (see secure).
Replacing sikerte (early 15c.), from an earlier borrowing from Latin; earlier in the sense security
was sikerhede (early 13c.); sikernesse (c.1200).    Meaning something which secures is from 1580s;
safety of a state, person, etc. is from 1941. Legal sense of property in bonds is from mid-15c.;
that of document held by a creditor is from 1680s. Phrase security blanket in figurative sense is
attested from 1966, in reference to the crib blanket carried by the character Linus in the Peanuts
comic strip (1956).


sedan (n.)

1630s, covered chair on poles, possibly from a southern Italian dialect derivative of Italian sede
chair (compare Italian seggietta, 1590s; the thing itself was said to have been introduced from
Naples), from Latin sedes, related to sedere sit (see sedentary). Since Johnson's conjecture, often
derived from the town of Sedan in France, where it was said to have been made or first used, but
historical evidence for this is lacking.    Introduced in England by Sir Sanders Duncombe in 1634
and first called a covered chair. In Paris the sedan-chair man was usually an Auvergnat, in London
an Irishman [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1929]. Meaning closed automobile seating four or more first
recorded 1912, American English.


sedate (v.)

treat with sedatives, 1945, a back-formation from the noun derivative of sedative (adj.). The word
also existed 17c. in a sense make calm or quiet. Related: Sedated; sedating.


sedate (adj.)

calm, quiet, 1660s, from Latin sedatus composed, moderate, quiet, tranquil, past participle of
sedare to settle, calm, causative of sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Sedately.


sedation (n.)

early 15c., alleviation of pain; 1540s, act of making calm, from Middle French s&#233;dation and
directly from Latin sedationem (nominative sedatio) a quieting, assuaging, a calming, noun of action
from past participle stem of sedare (see sedate (adj.)).


sedative (adj.)

tending to calm or soothe, early 15c., from Medieval Latin sedativus calming, allaying, from sedat-,
past participle stem of sedare, causative of sedere to sit (see sedentary). The noun derivative
meaning a sedative drug is attested from 1785. Hence, whatever soothes or allays.


sedentary (adj.)

1590s, remaining in one place, from Middle French s&#233;dentaire (16c.) and directly from Latin
sedentarius sitting, remaining in one place, from sedentem (nominative sedens), present participle
of sedere to sit; occupy an official seat, preside; sit still, remain; be fixed or settled, from PIE
root *sed- (1) to sit (cognates: Sanskrit a-sadat sat down, sidati sits; Old Persian hadis abode;
Greek ezesthai to sit, hedra seat, chair, face of a geometric solid; Old Irish suide seat, sitting;
Welsh sedd seat, eistedd sitting; Old Church Slavonic se&#382;da, sedeti to sit; Lithuanian sedmi to
sit; Russian sad garden, Lithuanian soditi to plant; Gothic sitan, Old English sittan to sit; see
sit). Of persons, the sense not in the habit of exercise is recorded from 1660s.


Seder (n.)

home service on the first nights of Passover, 1865, from Hebrew sedher order, procedure, related to
sedherah row, rank.


sederunt (n.)

sitting, session, Latin, literally they sat (typical opening word in recordings of such
proceedings), third person plural past tense of sedere to sit (see sedentary).


sedge (n.)

coarse grass-like plant growing in wet places, Old English secg sedge, reed, rush, from Proto-
Germanic *sagjoz (cognates: Low German segge, German Segge), probably from PIE root *sek- to cut
(see section (n.) and compare Old English secg, identical in form but meaning sword; and German
schwertel-gras sedge from schwert sword), on notion of plant with cutting leaves (compare
etymological sense of gladiolus). Old Irish seisg, Welsh hesgreed rush might represent a similar
sense development from the same root. Often spelled seg, segg until present form triumphed early
1900s.


sediment (n.)

1540s, matter which settles at the bottom of water or other liquid, from Middle French
s&eacute;diment (16c.) and directly from Latin sedimentum a settling, sinking down, from stem of
sedere to settle, sit (see sedentary).


sedimentary (adj.)

1764, from sediment + -ary. Sedimentary rock attested by 1830 (in Lyell). Sedimental (adj.) is
recorded from c.1600.


sedimentation (n.)

1845, from sediment + -ation.


sedition (n.)

mid-14c., rebellion, uprising, revolt, concerted attempt to overthrow civil authority; violent
strife between factions, civil or religious disorder, riot; rebelliousness against authority, from
Old French sedicion (14c., Modern French s&#233;dition) and directly from Latin seditionem
(nominative seditio) civil disorder, dissention, strife; rebellion, mutiny, literally a going apart,
separation, from se- apart (see secret) + itio a going, from past participle of ire to go (see ion).
Meaning conduct or language inciting to rebellion against a lawful government is from 1838. An Old
English word for it was folcslite. Less serious than treason, as wanting an overt act, But it is not
essential to the offense of sedition that it threaten the very existence of the state or its
authority in its entire extent [Century Dictionary].


seditious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French seditieux, from Latin seditiosus full of discord, factious, mutinous,
from seditio (see sedition). Related: Seditiously; seditiousness.


seduce (v.)

1520s, to persuade a vassal, etc., to desert his allegiance or service, from Latin seducere lead
away, lead astray, from se- aside, away (see secret (n.)) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sexual
sense, now the prevailing one, is attested from 1550s and apparently was not in Latin. Originally
entice (a woman) to a surrender of chastity. Related: Seduced; seducing.    Replaced Middle English
seduisen (late 15c.), from Middle French s&eacute;duire seduce, from Old French suduire to corrupt,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, withdraw, remove (see subduce).


seductible (adj.)

1620s, from seduct-, past participle stem of Latin seducere (see seduce) + -ible. Related:
Seductibly; seductibility.


seduction (n.)

1520s, from Middle French s&eacute;duction, from Latin seductionem (nominative seductio), noun of
action from past participle stem of seducere (see seduce). Originally with reference to actions or
beliefs; sexual sense is from 1769, originally always with women as the objects. Earlier appearance
of the word in Middle English with a sense treason, treachery probably is a confusion with sedition,
which confusion also is found in Old French seducion treason, betrayal.


seductive (adj.)

1740, from Latin seduct-, past participle stem of seducere (see seduce) + -ive. Related:
Seductively; seductiveness. Middle English had seducious deceitful, devious (mid-15c.).


seductress (n.)

1803, female seducer, with -ess + obsolete seductor (late 15c., displaced by seducer), from a direct
borrowing of the Latin agent noun of seducere (see seduce).


sedulity (n.)

1540s, from Latin sedulitas assiduity, application, noun of quality from sedulus (see sedulous).


sedulous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin sedulus attentive, painstaking, diligent, busy, zealous, probably from sedulo
(adv.) sincerely, diligently, from sedolo without deception or guile, from se- without, apart (see
secret) + dolo, ablative of dolus deception, guile, cognate with Greek dolos ruse, snare. Related:
Sedulously; sedulousness.


sedum (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin sedum houseleek.


see (v.)

Old English seon to see, look, behold; observe, perceive, understand; experience, visit, inspect
(contracted class V strong verb; past tense seah, past participle sewen), from Proto-Germanic
*sekhwan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German sehan, Middle High German, German sehen, Old Frisian
sia, Middle Dutch sien, Old Norse sja, Gothic saihwan), from PIE root *sekw- (2) to see, which is
probably identical with *sekw- (1) to follow  (see sequel), a root which produced words for say in
Greek and Latin, and also words for follow (such as Latin sequor), but opinions differ in regard to
the semantic starting-point and sequences [Buck]. Thus see might originally mean follow with the
eyes.    Used in Middle English to mean behold in the imagination or in a dream (c.1200), to
recognize the force of (a demonstration), also c.1200. Sense of escort (as in to see (someone) home)
first recorded 1607 in Shakespeare. Meaning to receive as a visitor is attested from c.1500.
Gambling sense of equal a bet is from 1590s. See you as a casual farewell first attested 1891. Let
me see as a pausing statement is recorded from 1510s. To have seen everything as a hyperbolic
expression of astonishment is from 1957.  When you have seen one of their Pictures, you have seen
all. [Blake, c.1811]


see (n.)

c.1300, throne of a bishop, archbishop, or pope, also throne of a monarch, a goddess, Antichrist,
etc., from Old French sie seat, throne; town, capital; episcopal see, from Latin sedem (nominative
sedes) seat, throne, abode, temple, related to sedere to sit (see sedentary). Early 14c. as
administrative center of a bishopric; c.1400 as province under the jurisdiction of a bishop.


see-saw (n.)

also seesaw, 1630s, in see-saw-sacke a downe (like a Sawyer), words in a rhythmic jingle used by
children and repetitive motion workers, probably imitative of the rhythmic back-and-forth motion of
sawyers working a two-man saw over wood or stone (see saw (n.1). Ha ha.). Reference to a game of
going up and down on a balanced plank is recorded from 1704; figurative sense is from 1714. Applied
from 1824 to the plank arranged for the game.


see-saw (v.)

also seesaw, move up and down, 1712, from see-saw (n.). Related: See-sawed; see-sawing.


see-through (adj.)

1950, from the verbal phrase (c.1400); see see (v.) + through (adv.).


seed (v.)

late 14c., to flower, flourish; produce seed; mid-15c., to sow with seed, from seed (n.). Meaning
remove the seeds from is from 1904. Sporting (originally tennis) sense (1898) is from notion of
spreading certain players' names so as to ensure they will not meet early in a tournament. The noun
in this sense is attested from 1924. Related: Seeded; seeding.


seed (n.)

Old English sed, s&aelig;d that which may be sown; an individual grain of seed; offspring,
posterity, from Proto-Germanic *sediz seed (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;, Old Saxon sad, Old Frisian
sed, Middle Dutch saet, Old High German sat, German Saat), from PIE *se-ti- sowing, from root *se-
(1) to sow (see sow (v.)). Figurative use in Old English. Meaning offspring, progeny rare now except
in biblical use. Meaning semen is from c.1300. For sporting sense, see seed (v.).


seed-cake (n.)

1570s, from seed (n.) + cake (n.).


seeded (adj.)

1922 in the sports sense (originally tennis), past participle adjective from seed (v.).


seedling (n.)

young plant developed from seed, 1650s, from seed (n.) + diminutive suffix -ling.


seedy (adj.)

mid-15c., fruitful, abundant, from seed (n.) + -y (2). From 1570s as abounding in seeds. Meaning
shabby is from 1739, probably in reference to the appearance of a flowering plant that has run to
seed. Related: Seediness.


seeing (adj.)

c.1300, present participle adjective from see (v.). Seeing Eye dog first attested 1929, American
English, trademarked by Seeing Eye Inc. of New Jersey.


seek (v.)

Old English secan inquire, search for; pursue; long for, wish for, desire; look for, expect from,
influenced by Old Norse soekja, both from Proto-Germanic *sokjan (cognates: Old Saxon sokian, Old
Frisian seka, Middle Dutch soekan, Old High German suohhan, German suchen, Gothic sokjan), from PIE
*sag-yo-, from root *sag- to track down, seek out (cognates: Latin sagire to perceive quickly or
keenly, sagus presaging, predicting, Old Irish saigim seek). The natural modern form of the Anglo-
Saxon word as uninfluenced by Norse is in beseech. Related: Sought; seeking.


seeker (n.)

early 14c., agent noun from seek.  The religious sect of the Seekers is attested from 1645.


seem (v.)

c.1200, to appear to be; c.1300, to be fitting, be appropriate, be suitable, though the more recent
sense in English is the etymological one; from Old Norse soema to honor; to put up with; to conform
to (the world, etc.), verb derived from adjective soemr fitting, from Proto-Germanic *somi-
(cognates: Old English som agreement, reconciliation, seman to conciliate, source of Middle English
semen to settle a dispute, literally to make one; Old Danish some to be proper or seemly), from PIE
*som-i-, from root *sem- one, as one (see same). Related: Seemed; seeming.


seeming (adj.)

late 14c., present participle adjective from seem. Seemingly in sense of to all appearances recorded
from 1590s.


seemly (adj.)

of pleasing or good appearance, also proper, tasteful, decorous, early 13c., semlich, from Old Norse
soemiligr becoming, honorable, from soemr (see seem). Related: Seemliness. Old Norse also had
soemleitr fine to look at.


seen

Middle English sein, from Old English gesegen, gesewen, past participle of seon (see see (n.)). From
c.1200 as perceived, discovered.  To have seen everything as a hyperbolic expression of astonishment
is from 1941.  When you have seen one of their Pictures, you have seen all. [Blake, c.1811]


seep (v.)

1790, variant of sipe (c.1500), possibly from Old English sipian to seep, from Proto-Germanic *sip-
(cognates: Middle High German sifen, Dutch sijpelen to ooze), from PIE root *seib- to pour out,
drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related: Seeped; seeping.


seepage (n.)

1825, from seep + -age.


seer (n.)

late 14c., one to whom divine revelations are made, agent noun from see (v.). Originally rendering
Latin videns, Greek bleptor (from Hebrew roeh) in Bible translations (such as I Kings ix:9). Literal
sense of one who sees is attested from early 15c.


seersucker (n.)

1722, from Hindi sirsakar, East Indian corruption of Persian shir o shakkar striped cloth, literally
milk and sugar, a reference to the alternately smooth and puckered surfaces of the stripes. From
Persian shir (cognate with Sanskrit ksiram milk) + shakar (cognate with Pali sakkhara, Sanskrit
sarkara gravel, grit, sugar; see sugar (n.)).


seethe (v.)

Old English seo&thorn;an to boil, also figuratively, be troubled in mind, brood (class II strong
verb; past tense sea&thorn;, past participle soden), from Proto-Germanic *seuthan (cognates: Old
Norse sjo&eth;a, Old Frisian siatha, Dutch zieden, Old High German siodan, German sieden to seethe),
from PIE root *seut- to seethe, boil.    Driven out of its literal meaning by boil (v.); it survives
largely in metaphoric extensions. Figurative use, of persons or populations, to be in a state of
inward agitation is recorded from 1580s (implied in seething). It had wider figurative uses in Old
English, such as to try by fire, to afflict with cares. Now conjugated as a weak verb, and past
participle sodden (q.v.) is no longer felt as connected.


seether (n.)

late 14c., one employed in boiling, agent noun from seethe.


segment (n.)

1560s, from Latin segmentum a strip or piece cut off, a cutting, strips of colored cloth, from
secare to cut (see section (n.)), with euphonious alteration of -c- to -g- before -m-. Latin
segmentum was used in Medieval Latin as a geometry term, translating Greek tmema, and the word was
first picked up in English in this sense. Meaning segmental portion of anything circular is from
1640s; general sense of a division, section is from 1762.


segment (v.)

1859, intransitive, in reference to cell division, from segment (n.). Transitive sense, divide
(something) into segments is from 1872. Related: Segmented; segmenting.


segmental (adj.)

1816, from segment (n.) + -al (1).


segmentation (n.)

1650s, a cutting in small pieces; 1851 of cells, from segment (v.) + -ation.


segregate (v.)

1540s, from Latin segregatus, past participle of segregare set apart, lay aside; isolate; divide,
literally separate from the flock, from *se gregare, from se apart from (see secret (n.)) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious). Originally often with reference to the religious
notion of separating the flock of the godly from sinners. In modern social context, to force or
enforce racial separation and exclusion, 1908. Related: Segregated; segregating.


segregation (n.)

1550s, act of segregating, from Late Latin segregationem (nominative segregatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of segregare (see segregate). Meaning state of being segregated is from
1660s. Specific U.S. sense of enforced separation of races is attested from 1883.    Rarely are we
met with a challenge, not to our growth or abundance, or our welfare or our security, but rather to
the values and the purposes and the meaning of our beloved nation. The issue of equal rights for
American Negroes is such an issue. And should we defeat every enemy, and should we double our wealth
and conquer the stars, and still be unequal to this issue, then we will have failed as a people and
as a nation. [Lyndon Johnson, speech introducing Voting Rights Act, March 15, 1965]


segregationist (n.)

1915, from segregation + -ist.


segue (n.)

1740, an instruction in musical scores, from Italian segue, literally now follows, meaning to play
into the following movement without a break, third person singular of seguire to follow, from Latin
sequi to follow, from PIE *sekw- (1) to follow (see sequel). Extended noun sense of transition
without a break is from 1937; the verb in this sense is first recorded 1958.


Segway

trademark name (Segway Inc., Bedford, New Hampshire, U.S.), in use from 2001; according to the
company, chosen for similarity to segue on notion of a smooth transition from one place to another,
with probably influence of way (n.).


seigneur (n.)

feudal landowner in France, 1590s, from Middle French seigneur, from Old French seignor (see
seignior). Related: Seigneuress.


seignior (n.)

lord of a manor, late 13c., from Old French seignior (11c., Modern French seigneur), from Latin
seniorem (nominative senior) older (see senior (adj.)). As a general title for a Frenchman, it dates
from 1580s. Related: Seigniorial; seignioral.


seigniorage (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French seignorage, from seignor (see seignior).


seine (n.)

Old English segne drag-net, from West Germanic *sagina (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German
segina), a borrowing of Latin sagena (source of French seine, 12c., which contributed to the form of
the English word), from Greek sagene a fishing net, also a hunting net, of unknown origin.


seismic (adj.)

1858, from seismo- + -ic.


seismo-

word-forming element meaning earthquake, from comb. form of Greek seismos a shaking, shock; an
earthquake, from seiein to shake, from PIE root *twei- to agitate, shake, toss.


seismogram (n.)

record made by a seismograph or seismometer, 1888, from seismo- + -gram.


seismograph (n.)

instrument for measuring the motions of an earthquake, 1858, from seismo- + -graph. Based on Italian
sismografo, coined and invented by Luigi Palmieri (1807-1896), director of meteorological
observation on Mount Vesuvius. Related: Seismographic; seismography (1865).


seismologist (n.)

1859, from seismology + -ist.


seismology (n.)

1852, from seismo- + -logy. Related: Seismological (1850).


seismometer (n.)

instrument for measuring the intensity and motion of earthquakes, 1841, from seismo- + -meter.
Originally different from a seismograph but now practically the same thing.


seize (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French seisir to take possession of, take by force; put in possession of, bestow
upon (Modern French saisir), from Late Latin sacire, which is generally held to be from a Germanic
source, but the exact origin is uncertain. Perhaps from Frankish *sakjan lay claim to (compare
Gothic sokjan, Old English secan to seek; see seek). Or perhaps from Proto-Germanic *satjan to place
(see set (v.)).    Originally a legal term in reference to feudal property holdings or offices.
Meaning to grip with the hands or teeth is from c.1300; that of to take possession by force or
capture (of a city, etc.) is from mid-14c. Figurative use, with reference to death, disease, fear,
etc. is from late 14c. Meaning to grasp with the mind is attested from 1855. Of engines or other
mechanisms, attested from 1878. Related: Seized; seizing.


seizure (n.)

act of seizing, late 15c., from seize + -ure. Meaning sudden attack of illness is attested from
1779.


sejm (n.)

congress of the Polish republic, 1690s, from Polish sejm assembly, from *syn-imu, literally a taking
together, from *syn- together (see syn-) + PIE root *em- to take (see exempt).


selah

1520s, Hebrew word occurring frequently at the end of verse in Psalter. Supposed to be a liturgical
direction, perhaps meaning pause, or perhaps a musical direction to raise the voice (compare Hebrew
base s-l-l to raise, lift).


seldom (adv.)

late Old English seldum, alteration of seldan seldom, rarely,  from Proto-Germanic *selda- strange,
rare (cognates: Old Norse sjaldan, Old Frisian selden, Dutch zelden, Old High German seltan, German
selten), perhaps ultimately from the base of self (q.v.).    Form shifted on analogy of adverbial
dative plurals in -um (such as whilom at one time, from while). The same development also created
litlum from little, miclum from mickle. German seltsam strange, odd, Dutch zeldzaam are related, but
with the second element conformed to their versions of -some.   Seldom-times is from mid-15c. (Old
English had seldhwanne seldwhen). Seldom-seen is from mid-15c. (Old English had seldsiene, seld-
seen).    Some compounds using the old form survived through Middle English, such as selcouthrarely
or little-known, unusual, strange, wonderful, from Old English selcu&eth;, seld-cu&eth;, from seldan
+ cu&eth;  (see couth). Old English seldan had comparative seldor, superlative seldost; in early
Middle English, as seldan changed form and lost its connection with these, selde was formed as a
positive. Shakespeare uses seld-shown.


select (adj.)

1560s, from Latin selectus, past participle of seligere choose out, single out, select; separate,
cull, from se- apart (see secret (n.)) + legere to gather, select (see lecture (n.)). The noun
meaning a selected person or thing, that which is choice is recorded from c.1600. New England
selectman first recorded 1640s.


select (v.)

1560s, from select (adj.) or from Latin selectus. Related: Selected; selecting.


selection (n.)

1620s, act of selecting, from Latin selectionem (nominative selectio) a choosing out, choice,
selection, noun of action from past participle stem of seligere (see select (adj.)). Meaning thing
selected is from 1805. Biological sense is from 1837; applied to actions of breeders (methodical
selection), hence its use by Darwin (natural selection; 1857). French s&#233;lection is a 19c.
borrowing from English.


selective (adj.)

1620s; see select (adj.) + -ive. Related: Selectively; selectiveness. Selective service is from
1917, American English.


Selene

moon goddess, equivalent of Latin Luna, from Greek selene the moon; name of the moon goddess,
related to selas light, brightness, bright flame, flash of an eye, from PIE root *swel- (2) to
shine, beam (cognates: Sanskrit svargah heaven, Lithuanian svilti to singe, Old English swelan to be
burnt up, Middle Low German swelan to smolder); related to swelter, sultry. Related: Selenian of or
pertaining to the moon as a world, 1660s.


selenium (n.)

element name, Modern Latin, from Greek selene moon (see Selene). Named by Berzelius (1818), on
analogy of tellurium, with which it had been at first confused, and which was named for the earth.
Despite the -ium ending it is not a metal and a more appropriate name selenion has been proposed.


selenographer (n.)

student of the moon, 1660s, from selenography (1640s), from comb. form of Selene + -graphy.


Seleucid

1803, in reference to dynasty founded in Syria 312 B.C.E. by Seleucus Nicator, general of Alexander.
It lasted until the Roman conquest 65 B.C.E. The Seleucidan Era, a local reckoning in the East
(maintained by Syrian Christians) usually is dated to Sept. 1, 312 B.C.E.


self (pron.)

Old English self, seolf, sylf one's own person, -self; own, same, from Proto-Germanic *selbaz
(cognates: Old Norse sjalfr, Old Frisian self, Dutch zelf, Old High German selb, German selb,
selbst, Gothic silba), Proto-Germanic *selbaz self, from PIE *sel-bho-, suffixed form of root
*s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive (referring back to the subject of a sentence),
also used in forms denoting the speaker's social group, (we our-)selves (see idiom).    Trying to
define yourself is like trying to bite your own teeth. [Alan Watts]    Its use in compounds to form
reflexive pronouns grew out of independent use in Old English. As a noun from early 14c.


self-

word forming element indicating oneself, also automatic, from Old English use of self (pron.) in
compounds, such as selfbana suicide, selflice self-love, pride, vanity, egotism, selfwill free will.


self-absorbed (adj.)

1796, from self- + absorbed (see absorb).


self-abuse (n.)

c.1600, self-deception, from self- + abuse (n.). As a synonym for masturbation, it is recorded from
1728; an earlier term was self-pollution (1620s).


self-actualization (n.)

1939, from self- + actualization. Popularized, though not coined, by U.S. psychologist and
philosopher Abraham H. Maslow (1908-1970).


self-aggrandizing (adj.)

1798, from self- + aggrandizing (see aggrandize).


self-appointed (adj.)

1750, from self- + appointed.


self-assertive (adj.)

1853, from self- + assertive. Related: Self-assertively; self-assertiveness.


self-assurance (n.)

1590s, from self- + assurance.


self-assured (adj.)

1711, from self- + assured.


self-aware (adj.)

1892, from self- + aware.


self-awareness (n.)

1876, from self- + awareness.


self-centered (adj.)

1670s, fixed, stationary, from self- + center (v.). In reference to persons, engrossed in the self,
with little regard for others, it is recorded from 1783.


self-complacency (n.)

1680s, from self- + complacency.


self-complacent (adj.)

1760, back-formation from self-complacency or else from self- + complacent. Related: Self-
complacently.


self-concept (n.)

also self concept, 1921, from self- + concept.


self-confidence (n.)

also self confidence, 1650s, from self- + confidence.


self-confident (adj.)

1610s, from self- + confident. Related: self-confidently.


self-congratulation (n.)

1630s, from self- + congratulation.


self-conscious (adj.)

1680s, aware of one's action, a word of the English Enlightenment (Locke was using it by 1690), from
self- + conscious. Morbid sense of preoccupied with one's own personality is attested from 1834 (in
J.S. Mill). Related: Self-consciously; self-consciousness.


self-contained (adj.)

1590s, from self- + contained (see contain).


self-control (n.)

1711, from self- + control (n.). Coined by English moral philosopher Anthony Ashley Cooper
Shaftesbury (1671-1713).


self-criticism (n.)

1780, from self- + criticism. First attested in George Eliot; communist party sense is attested from
1933.


self-deception (n.)

1670s, from self- + deception.


self-defense (n.)

1650s, act of defending oneself, first attested in Hobbes, from self- + defense. In sports sense,
first with reference to fencing (1728), then boxing (1820s).


self-deluded (adj.)

1766, from self- + deluded (see delude).


self-denial (n.)

1640s, from self- + denial.


self-deprecating (adj.)

1835, from self- + deprecating (see deprecate).


self-deprecation (n.)

1843, from self- + deprecation.


self-destruct (v.)

in reference to things, to destroy itself automatically, from self- + destruct, apparently first
attested in the U.S. television series Mission Impossible (1966). Self-destructive is recorded from
1650s, and self-destruction suicide is attested from 1580s.


self-determination (n.)

1680s, determination of mind, from self- + determination. Political sense is attested from 1911,
popularized by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson (1856-1924).


self-discipline (n.)

also self discipline, 1796, from self- + discipline (n.). Related: Self-disciplined.


self-educated (adj.)

1761, from self- + educated.


self-effacing (adj.)

1902, from self- + effacing (see efface). Self-effacement is recorded from 1866.


self-esteem (n.)

1650s, from self- + esteem (n.). Popularized by phrenology, which assigned it a bump (Spurzheim,
1815).


self-evident (adj.)

1680s, from self- + evident. First attested in Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Related: Self-evidently.


self-examination (n.)

1640s, from self- + examination.


self-explanatory (adj.)

1813, from self- + explanatory.


self-glorification (n.)

1826, from self- + glorification.


self-government (n.)

1734, of persons; 1798, of states, from self- + government. Related: Self-governing (1680s).


self-help (n.)

1831, from self- + help (n.). Apparently coined by Carlyle. British Self-Help Emigration Society is
attested from 1887.


self-image (n.)

also self-image, 1904 in psychology, from self- + image (n.).


self-immolation (n.)

also self immolation, 1817, from self- + immolation.


self-important (adj.)

having or showing an exaggerated estimation of one's own importance, 1728, from self- + important.
Related: Self-importance (1728).


self-improvement (n.)

also self improvement, 1748, from self- + improvement.


self-incrimination (n.)

also self incrimination, 1892, from self- + incrimination.


self-indulgence (n.)

also self indulgence, 1753, from self- + indulgence.


self-indulgent (adj.)

also self indulgent, 1791, from self- + indulgent. Related: Self-indulgently.


self-inflict (v.)

1784, from self- + inflict. Related: self-inflicted.


self-interest (n.)

also self interest, 1640s, from self- + interest (n.). Related: Self-interested.    [Self-interest]
is a doctrine not very lofty, but clear and sure. It does not seek to attain great objects; but it
attains those it aims for without too much effort. ... [It] does not produce great devotion; but it
suggests little sacrifices each day; by itself it cannot make a man virtuous; but it forms a
multitude of citizens who are regulated, temperate, moderate, farsighted, masters of themselves; and
if it does not lead directly to virtue through the will, it brings them near to it insensibly
through habits. [Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America]


self-involved (adj.)

1812, from self- + involved.


self-justification (n.)

1650s, from self- + justification.


self-love (n.)

also self love, 1560s, from self- + love (n.).


self-made (adj.)

1610s, made by oneself, from self- + made. Self-made man first recorded 1832, American English; the
sense is having attained material success in life without extraneous advantages.


self-motivation (n.)

1980 (self-motivated attested from 1949), from self- + motivation. Related: Self-motivational.


self-perception (n.)

1670s, from self- + perception.


self-perfection (n.)

perfection of one's character or life, 1810, from self- + perfection.


self-pity (n.)

1620s, from self- + pity (n.). Related: Self-pitying.


self-portrait (n.)

1821, from self- + portrait, translating German Selbstbildnis.


self-possession (n.)

command of one's emotions, 1745, from self- + possession (n.). Related: Self-possessed.


self-preservation (n.)

1610s, from self- + preservation. First attested in Donne.


self-protection (n.)

1706, from self- + protection.


self-realization (n.)

also self realization, 1839, from self- + realization.


self-regard (n.)

1590s, from self- + regard (n.).


self-regulating (adj.)

1837, from self- + present participle of regulate (v.).


self-reliance (n.)

1883, from self- + reliance. First recorded in J.S. Mill.


self-reliant (adj.)

1826, from self- + reliant.


self-respect (n.)

also self respect, proper regard for and care of the dignity of one's person, 1795, from self- +
respect (n.). Related: Self-respecting.


self-restraint (n.)

1754, from self- + restraint.


self-righteous (adj.)

1680s, from self- + righteous. Related: Self-righteously; self-righteousness.


self-sacrifice (n.)

1805, from self- + sacrifice (n.). Adjective self-sacrific'd attested from 1711. Related: self-
sacrificing.


self-satisfaction (n.)

1739, from self- + satisfaction. Related: Self-satisfied (1734).


self-seeking (n.)

a seeking after one's own benefit (before those of others), 1580s, from self + seeking, verbal noun
from seek. As an adjective, from 1620s.


self-service (adj.)

1919, in reference to grocery stores, from self- + service (n.1).


self-serving (adj.)

also self serving, 1827, from self- + serving, present participle adjective from serve (v.).


self-starter (n.)

1894, of engines, 1960, of persons (especially workers), from self- + starter. Self-starting (adj.),
of motors, is attested from 1866.


self-styled (adj.)

1833, from self- + past tense of style (v.).


self-sufficiency (n.)

1620s, originally an attribute of God (translating Greek autakreia), from self- + sufficiency. Of
mortals, self-sufficient able to supply one's own needs is recorded from 1580s.


self-sufficient (adj.)

able to supply one's own needs, 1580s, from self- + sufficient. Related: Self-sufficiently.


self-sustaining (adj.)

1806, from self- + present participle of sustain (v.).


self-willed (adj.)

late 15c., from self- + willed (see will (v.1)). In Old English, selfwill meant free will.


self-worth (n.)

also self worth, 1650s, from self- + worth (n.).


selfish (adj.)

1630s, from self- + -ish. Said in Hacket's life of Archbishop Williams (1693) to have been coined by
Presbyterians. In the 17c., synonyms included self-seeking (1620s), self-ended and self-ful.Let us
understand what our own selfish genes are up to, because we may then at least have the chance to
upset their designs. [Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene, 1976]  Related: Selfishly; selfishness.
Similar formations in German selbstisch, Swedish sjelfvisk, Danish selvisk.


selfless (adj.)

devoted to others' welfare or interest and not one's own, 1825, from self + -less. First attested in
Coleridge. Related: Selflessly; selflessness.


selfsame

identical, early 15c., from self + same. Written as two words until c.1600.


Selina

fem. proper name, nativized form of French C&#233;line, from Latin caelina heavenly, from caelum
(see celestial).


Seljuk

Turkish dynasty of 11c.-13c., c.1600 (Selzuccian), from Turkish seljuq, name of reputed ancestor of
the dynasty.


sell (v.)

Old English sellan to give, furnish, supply, lend; surrender, give up; deliver to; promise, from
Proto-Germanic *saljan offer up, deliver (cognates: Old Norse selja to hand over, deliver, sell; Old
Frisian sella, Old High German sellen to give, hand over, sell; Gothic saljan to offer a sacrifice),
ultimately from PIE root *sel- (3) to take, grasp.    Meaning to give up for money had emerged by
c.1000, but in Chaucer selle still can mean to give. Students of Old English learn early that the
word that looks like sell usually means give. An Old English word for to sell was bebycgan, from
bycgan to buy.    Slang meaning to swindle is from 1590s. The noun phrase hard sell is recorded from
1952. To sell one's soul is from c.1570. Sell-by date is from 1972. To sell like hot cakes is from
1839. Selling-point attested from 1959.    To sell (someone) down the river is first recorded 1927,
but probably from or with recollection of slavery days, on notion of sale from the Upper South to
the cotton plantations of the Deep South (attested in this literal sense since 1851).


seller (n.)

c.1200, agent noun from sell (v.).


Sellotape (n.)

1949, proprietary name, Great Britain.


sellout (n.)

also sell-out, corrupt bargain, 1862 (in Mary Chesnut's diary), from the verbal phrase (at that time
often meaning dispose of one's interests in a company, etc.), from sell (v.) + out (adv.). Meaning
event for which all tickets have been sold is attested from 1923. The verbal phrase sell out
prostitute one's ideals or talents is attested from 1888.


seltzer

1741, from German Selterser (Wasser), a kind of mineral water, literally of Selters, village near
Weisbaden in Hesse-Nassau, where the mineral water is found.


selvage (n.)

mid-15c., edge of web or cloth so finished as to prevent raveling, apparently literally its own
edge, a corruption of self + edge (n.); on analogy of Middle Flemish selvegge (compare also Low
German sulfegge; Dutch zelfkant, from kant border; Middle High German selbende, German Selbend,
literally self-end).


semantic (adj.)

1894, from French s&eacute;mantique, applied by Michel Br&eacute;al (1883) to the psychology of
language, from Greek semantikos significant, from semainein to show by sign, signify, point out,
indicate by a sign, from sema sign, mark, token; omen, portent; constellation; grave (Doric sama),
from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Sanskrit dhyati he meditates; see zen).


semantics (n.)

science of meaning in language, 1893, from French s&eacute;mantique (1883); see semantic (also see
-ics). Replaced semasiology (1847), from German Semasiologie (1829), from Greek semasia
signification, meaning.


semaphore (n.)

apparatus for signaling, 1816, probably via French s&eacute;maphore, literally a bearer of signals,
ultimately from Greek sema sign, signal (see semantic) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see
infer). Related: Semaphoric (1808).


sematic (adj.)

significant, indicative, 1890, from Greek semat-, comb. form of sema  (genitive sematos) sign (see
semantic) + -ic. Used especially in biology, in reference to warning colors, etc.


semblable (adj.)

resembling, late 14c., from Old French semblable (12c.), from sembler to be like (see semblance).


semblance (n.)

c.1300, fact of appearing to view, from Old French semblance, from semblant likeness, appearance,
present participle of sembler to seem, appear, from Latin simulare to resemble, imitate, from
similis like (see similar (adj.)). Meaning person's appearance or demeanor is attested from c.1400;
that of false, assumed or deceiving appearance is from 1590s. Meaning person or thing that resembles
another is attested from 1510s.


seme (n.)

in linguistics, 1866, from Greek sema sign (see semantic). Compare pheme, etc.


seme (adj.)

covered with a small, constantly repeating pattern, 1560s, from Middle French sem&#233;e strewn,
sprinkled, past participle of semer, from Latin seminare to sow, from semen (genitive seminis) seed
(see semen).


Semele

daughter of Cadmus and mother of Dionysus, from Latin, from Greek Semele, a Thraco-Phrygian earth
goddess, from Phrygian Zemele mother of the earth, probably cognate with Old Church Slavonic zemlja
earth, Latin humus earth, ground, soil (see chthonic).


semen (n.)

late 14c., from Latin semen seed of plants, animals, or men; race, inborn characteristic; posterity,
progeny, offspring, figuratively origin, essence, principle, cause, from PIE *si-so-, reduplication
of root *se- (1) to sow (cognates: Latin serere to sow, Old Prussian semen seed, Lithuanian semens
seed of flax, Old Church Slavonic seme, Old High German samo seed, German Same; see sow (v.)).


semester (n.)

1827, from German Semester half-year course in a university, from Latin semestris, in cursus
semestris course of six months, from semestris, semenstris of six months, lasting six months, half-
yearly, semi-annual, from sex six (see six) + mensis month (see moon (n.)). Related: Semestral;
semestrial.


semi-

before vowels sem-, word-forming element meaning half, part, partly; partial, imperfect; twice, from
Latin semi- half, from PIE *semi- half (cognates: Sanskrit sami half, Greek hemi- half, Old English
sam-, Gothic sami- half).    Old English cognate sam- was used in such compounds as samhal poor
health, literally half-whole; samsoden half-cooked, figuratively stupid (compare half-baked);
samcucu half-dead, literally half-alive; and the last survivor of the group, sandblind dim-sighted
(q.v.). Common in Latin (as in semi-gravis half-drunk, semi-hora half hour, semi-mortuus half-dead,
semi-nudus half-naked, semi-vir half-man, hermaphrodite). The Latin-derived form in English has been
active in forming native words since 15c.


semi-annual (adj.)

also semiannual, 1775, from semi- + annual. Related: Semiannually.


semi-arid (adj.)

also semiarid, 1886, from semi- + arid.


semi-automatic (adj.)

1853, from semi- + automatic (adj.). In reference to firearms, 1889.


semi-demi-

word-forming element meaning sixty-fourth part, 1660s; see semi- + demi-.


semi-detached (adj.)

in reference to houses, 1845, from semi- + past participle of detach (v.).    The Detached House
bears its peculiar characteristic on its front; it stands alone, and nothing more can be said about
it; but with the semi-detached house there is a subtle mystery, much to be marvelled at. Semi-
detached! Have the party-walls between two houses shrunk, or is there a bridge connecting the two,
as in Mr. Beckford's house in Landsdown Crescent, Bath? A semi-detached house may be a house with a
field on one side and a bone-boiling factory on the other. Semi-detached may mean half-tumbling to
pieces. I must inquire into it. [Houses to Let, in Household Words, March 20, 1852]


semi-monthly (adj.)

also semimonthly, 1809, from semi- + monthly.


semi-official (adj.)

1798, from semi- + official (adj.). Related: Semi-officially.


semi-permeable (adj.)

1873, from semi- + permeable. Translating German halbdurchl&#228;ssig.


semi-professional (adj.)

1824, from semi- + professional (adj.). As a noun from 1843. Related: Semi-professionally.


semi-solid (adj.)

1803, from semi- + solid (adj.).


semi-trailer (n.)

also semitrailer, 1910 in reference to motor vehicles (late 19c. in botany), from semi- +
trailer.Short form semi is attested from 1942.


semi-weekly (adj.)

also semiweekly, occurring twice a week, 1791, from semi- + weekly.


semicircle (n.)

1520s, from semi- + circle (n.) or else from Latin semicirculus.


semicircular (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin semicirculus (see semicircle) + -ar.


semicolon (n.)

punctuation-mark, 1640s, a hybrid coined from Latin-derived semi- + Greek-based colon (n.1). The
mark itself was in Greek the point of interrogation.


semiconductor (n.)

1838, material whose electrical conductivity is between that of a conductor and that of an
insulator, from semi- + conductor. Modern very specific sense is recorded from 1931.


semiconscious (adj.)

also semi-conscious, 1838, from semi- + conscious. Related: Semiconsciously; semiconsciousness.


semifinal (adj.)

also semi-final, 1867, from semi- + final. As a noun from 1868.


seminal (adj.)

late 14c., of seed or semen, from Old French seminal (14c.) and directly from Latin seminalis, from
semen (genitive seminis) seed (see semen). Figurative sense of full of possibilities is attested
from 1630s. Related: Seminally; seminality.


seminar (n.)

1887, special group-study class for advanced students, from German Seminar group of students working
with a professor, from Latin seminarium breeding ground, plant nursery (see seminary). Sense of
meeting for discussion of a subject first recorded 1944.


seminarian (n.)

seminary student, 1580s, from seminary + -ian.


seminary (n.)

mid-15c., plot where plants are raised from seeds, from Latin seminarium plant nursery, seed plot,
figuratively, breeding ground, from seminarius of seed, from semen (genitive seminis) seed (see
semen). Meaning school for training priests first recorded 1580s; commonly used for any school
(especially academies for young ladies) from 1580s to 1930s.


semination (n.)

1530s, action of sowing, from Latin seminationem (nominative seminato) a sowing, propagation, noun
of action from past participle stem of seminare to plant, propagate, from semen (genitive seminis)
seed (see semen).


Seminole (n.)

1763, from Creek (Muskogean) simano:li, earlier simalo:ni wild, untamed, runaway, from American
Spanish cimarron (see maroon (v.)). They fought ward against U.S. troops 1817-18 and 1835-42, after
which they largely were removed to Indian Territory (Oklahoma).


semiology (n.)

1690s, sign language, from Greek semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema (compare semiotic) + -ology.
As branch of medical science concerned with symptoms, 1839; as logical theory of signs from 1923.
Related: Semiological.


semiotic (adj.)

1620s, of symptoms, relating to signs of diseases, from Greek semeiotikos significant, also
observant of signs, adjective form of semeiosis indication, from semeioun to signal, to interpret a
sign, from semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema sign (see semantic). Its use in psychology dates
to 1923. Related: Semiotical (1580s).


semiotics (n.)

study of signs and symbols with special regard to function and origin, 1880, from semiotic; also see
-ics. Medical sense is from 1660s.


semiprecious (adj.)

also semi-precious, 1818, from semi- + precious (adj.).


semiquaver (n.)

sixteenth-note, 1570s, from semi- + quaver (n.).


semisweet (adj.)

also semi-sweet, 1943, from semi- + sweet.


Semite (n.)

1847, a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic
language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French S&#233;mite (1845), from Modern
Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem Shem, one of the three sons of Noah (Gen. x:21-30), regarded as
the ancestor of the Semites (in old Bible-based anthropology), from Hebrew Shem. In modern sense
said to have been first used by German historian August Schl&#246;zer in 1781.


Semitic (adj.)

1797, denoting the language group that includes Hebrew, Arabic, Aramaic, Assyrian, etc.; 1826 as of
or pertaining to Semites, from Medieval Latin Semiticus (source of Spanish semitico, French
semitique, German semitisch), from Semita (see Semite). As a noun, as the name of a linguistic
family, from 1813. In non-linguistic use, perhaps directly from German semitisch. In recent use
often with the specific sense Jewish, but not historically so limited.


Semitism (n.)

1848, characteristic attributes of Semitic languages; 1851, characteristic attributes of Semitic
people, from Semite + -ism. From 1870 as Jewish influence in a society.


semitone (n.)

c.1600, from semi- + tone (n.) in the musical sense.


semolina (n.)

meal from hard kernels of wheat, 1797, alteration of Italian semolino grits; paste for soups,
diminutive of semola bran, from Latin simila the finest flour, probably from the same Semitic source
as Greek semidalis the finest flour (compare Assyrian samidu, Syrian semida fine meal).


semper idem

Latin, literally always the same; see semper- + identical.


semper-

word-forming element meaning always, ever, from Latin semper always, ever, at all times,
continuously (literally once for all), from PIE *sem- (1) one, as one, together (cognates: Latin
semel once, similis like; see same).


sempiternal (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French sempiternel eternal, everlasting (13c.) or directly from Late Latin
sempiternalis, from Latin sempiternus everlasting, from semper always, ever (see semper-) + aeternus
eternal (see eternal). Related: Sempiternally.


senate (n.)

c.1200, legal and administrative body of ancient Rome, from Old French senat or Latin senatus
highest council of the state in ancient Rome, literally council of elders, from senex (genitive
senis) old man, old (see senile). Attested from late 14c. in reference to governing bodies of free
cities in Europe; of national governing bodies from 1550s; specific sense of upper house of U.S.
legislature is recorded from 1775.


senator (n.)

c.1200, member of an (ancient) senate, from Old French senator (Modern French s&#233;nateur), from
Latin senator member of the senate, from senex old; old man (see senate). An Old English word for
one was folcwita. As member of a (modern) governing body from late 14c.; specifically in U.S. use
from 1788. Fem. form senatress attested from 1731. The Senators was the name of the professional
baseball team in Washington, D.C., from 1891 to 1971.


senatorial (adj.)

1740, from French s&#233;natorial or from Latin senatorius pertaining to a senator or formed in
English from senator + -al (1). Earlier adjectives were senatory (1520s), senatorian (1610).
Related: Senatorially.


send (v.)

Old English sendan send, send forth; throw, impel, from Proto-Germanic *sandijan (cognates: Old
Saxon sendian, Old Norse and Old Frisian senda, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch senden, Dutch
zenden, German senden, Gothic sandjan), causative form of base *sin&thorn;an, denoting go, journey
(source of Old English si&eth; way, journey, Old Norse sinn, Gothic sin&thorn;s going, walk, time),
from PIE root *sent- to head for, go (cognates: Lithuanian siusti send; see sense (n.)).    Also
used in Old English of divine ordinance (as in godsend, from Old English sand messenger, message,
from Proto-Germanic *sandaz that which is sent). Slang sense of to transport with emotion, delight
is recorded from 1932, in American English jazz slang.


send-off (n.)

a farewell (especially a funeral), 1872, from verbal phrase (attested by 1660s), from send (v.) +
off (adv.).


send-up (n.)

a spoof, British slang, 1958, from verbal phrase send up to mock, make fun of (1931), from send (v.)
+ up (adv.), perhaps a transferred sense of the public school term for to send a boy to the
headmaster (usually for punishment), which is attested from 1821.


sended

alternative past tense and past participle of send. Attested since late 14c.


sender (n.)

c.1200, agent noun from send (v.). In 1930s slang, a popular musician or song. Sendee is recorded
from 1806.


Seneca

1610s, from Dutch Sennecas, collective name for the Iroquois tribes of what became upper New York,
of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Mahican name for the Oneida or their village. Earlier sinnekens,
senakees; form probably influenced by the name of the ancient Roman philosopher.


Senegal

African nation, named for the river through it, perhaps from a local word meaning navigable.


senescence (n.)

1690s, from senescent + -ence. Related: Scenescency (1660s).


senescent (adj.)

1650s, from Latin senescentem (nominative scenescens), present participle of senescere to grow old,
from senex old (see senile).


seneschal (n.)

late 14c., steward, majordomo, officer in a royal household in charge of ceremonies and feasts, from
Old French seneschal, title of a high administrative court officer, from Frankish Latin siniscalcus,
from Proto-Germanic *sini-skalk senior servant; first element cognate with Latin senex old (see
senile); second element from Proto-Germanic *skalkoz servant (cognates: Gothic skalks, Old High
German scalc, Old English scealc servant; see second element of marshal).


senicide (n.)

killing of the old men, 1889, from stem of Latin senex old man (see senile) + -cide.


senile (adj.)

1660s, suited to old age, from French s&eacute;nile (16c.), from Latin senilis of old age, from
senex (genitive senis) old, old man, from PIE root *sen- old (cognates: Sanskrit sanah old; Avestan
hana- old; Old Persian hanata- old age, lapse of time; Armenian hin old; Greek enos old, of last
year; Lithuanian senas old, senis an old man; Gothic sineigs old (used only of persons), sinistra
elder, senior; Old Norse sina dry standing grass from the previous year; Old Irish sen, Old Welsh
hen old). Meaning weak or infirm from age is first attested 1848.


senility (n.)

1753, from senile + -ity.


senior (adj.)

late 13c., from Latin senior older, comparative of senex (genitive senis) old, from PIE root *sen-
old (see senile). Original use in English was as an addition to a personal name indicating the
father when father and son had the same name; meaning higher in rank, longer in service first
recorded 1510s.    The Latin word yielded titles of respect in many languages, such as French sire,
Spanish se&ntilde;or, Portuguese senhor, Italian signor. Senior citizen first recorded 1938,
American English.


senior (n.)

mid-14c., person of authority; late 14c., person older than another, from senior (adj.). Sense of
fourth-year student is from 1741, from earlier general sense of advanced student (1610s).


seniority (n.)

priority on office or service, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin senioritas, from Latin senior (see
senior (adj.)). Meaning state or quality of being senior is from 1530s.


senna (n.)

tropical shrub, 1540s, from Modern Latin senna, from Arabic sana. Earlier was sene (c.1400), from
French.


sennight (n.)

period of seven days, a week (archaic), c.1200, contracted from Old English seofon nihta; see seven
+ night. Also compare fortnight.


senor

1620s, from Spanish se&ntilde;or a gentleman; sir, from Latin seniorem (source also of Portuguese
senhor; see senior (adj.)).


senora

1570s, from Spanish se&ntilde;ora a lady; madam, fem. of se&ntilde;or (see senor). The Portuguese
equivalent is senhora.


senorita (n.)

a young Spanish lady, 1823, from Spanish se&ntilde;orita, Spanish title corresponding to English
Miss, diminutive of se&ntilde;ora (see senora). The Portuguese equivalent is senhorita.


senryu

form of Japanese poetry, 1901, from name of Karai Senryu (1718-90), Japanese poet.


Sens

city in north-central France, Roman Senones, the capital of the Gaulish people of the same name.


sensate (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin sensatus gifted with sense, from sensus (see sense (n.)). From 1937 in
sociology. As a verb from 1650s.


sensation (n.)

1610s, a reaction to external stimulation of the sense organs, from French sensation (14c.) and
directly from Medieval Latin sensationem (nominative sensatio), from Late Latin sensatus endowed
with sense, sensible, from Latin sensus feeling (see sense (n.)). Meaning state of shock, surprise,
in a community first recorded 1779.    The great object of life is sensation -- to feel that we
exist, even though in pain. It is this 'craving void' which drives us to gaming -- to battle, to
travel -- to intemperate, but keenly felt, pursuits of any description, whose principal attraction
is the agitation inseparable from their accomplishment. [Lord Byron, letter, Sept. 6, 1813]


sensational (adj.)

of or pertaining to sensation or the senses, 1840; aiming at violently excited effects, 1863, from
sensation in its secondary sense. Related: Sensationalistic; sensationalistically.


sensationalism (n.)

1846 in philosophy, theory that sensation is the only source of knowledge; 1865, of journalism that
aims to excite the feelings, from sensational + -ism.


sensationalist

1846 in philosophy; 1868 of writers; from sensational + -ist. Related: Sensationalistic.


sensationalize (v.)

1863, from sensational + -ize. Originally of audiences as well as topics. Related: Sensationalized;
sensationalizing.


sense (n.)

c.1400, faculty of perception, also meaning, import, interpretation (especially of Holy Scripture),
from Old French sens one of the five senses; meaning; wit, understanding (12c.) and directly from
Latin sensus perception, feeling, undertaking, meaning, from sentire perceive, feel, know, probably
a figurative use of a literally meaning to find one's way, or to go mentally, from PIE root *sent-
to go (cognates: Old High German sinnan to go, travel, strive after, have in mind, perceive, German
Sinn sense, mind, Old English si&eth; way, journey, Old Irish set, Welsh hynt way). Application to
any one of the external or outward senses (touch, sight, hearing, etc.) in English first recorded
1520s.    A certain negro tribe has a special word for see; but only one general word for hear,
touch, smell, and taste. It matters little through which sense I realize that in the dark I have
blundered into a pig-sty. In French sentir means to smell, to touch, and to feel, all together.
[Erich M. von Hornbostel, Die Einheit der Sinne (The Unity of the Senses), 1927]    Meaning that
which is wise is from c.1600. Meaning capacity for perception and appreciation is from c.1600 (as in
sense of humor, attested by 1783, sense of shame, 1640s).


sense (v.)

to perceive by the senses, 1590s, from sense (n.). Meaning be conscious inwardly of (one's state or
condition) is from 1680s. Meaning perceive (a fact or situation) not by direct perception is from
1872. Related: Sensed; sensing.


senseless (adj.)

1550s, without sensation, from sense (n.) + -less. Of actions, etc., devoid of purpose, proceeding
from lack of intelligence, it is attested from 1570s. Related: Senselessly; senselessness.


senses (n.)

mental faculties, conscious cognitive powers, sanity, 1560s, from sense (n.). Meaning faculties of
physical sensation is from 1590s.


sensibility (n.)

late 14c., capability of being perceived by the senses; ability to sense or perceive, from Old
French sensibilite, from Late Latin sensibilitatem (nominative sensibilitas), from sensibilis (see
sensible). Rarely recorded until the emergence of the meaning emotional consciousness, capacity for
higher feelings or refined emotion (1751). Related: Sensibilities.


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


sensibly (adv.)

early 15c., in a manner perceived to the senses, from sensible + -ly (2). Meaning with good sense is
attested from 1755.


sensitive (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to the body or its parts, having the function of sensation; also (early
15c.) pertaining to the faculty of the soul that receives and analyzes sensory information; from Old
French sensitif capable of feeling (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin sensitivus capable of
sensation, from Latin sensus, past participle of sentire feel perceive (see sense (n.)).    Meaning
easily affected (with reference to mental feelings) first recorded 1816; meaning having intense
physical sensation is from 1849. Original meaning is preserved in sensitive plant (1630s), which is
mechanically irritable in a higher degree than almost any other plant [Century Dictionary]. Meaning
involving national security is recorded from 1953. Related: Sensitively; sensitiveness.


sensitivity (n.)

1803, from sensitive + -ity. Sensitivity training attested by 1954.


sensitization (n.)

1862, originally in photography, noun of action from sensitize.


sensitize (v.)

1856, in photography; see sensitive + -ize. Of persons from 1880. Related: Sensitized; sensitizing.


sensor (n.)

1947, from an adjective (1865), a shortened form of sensory (q.v.).


sensorimotor

pertaining to sensation and to motion, 1855, from comb. form of sensory + motor (n.).


sensorium (n.)

1640s, seat of the soul in the brain, from Late Latin sensorium, from sens-, past participle stem of
sentire to feel (see sense (n.)) + -orium (see -ory).


sensory (adj.)

1749, pertaining to sense or sensation, from Latin sensorius, from sensus, past participle of
sentire to perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).


sensual (adj.)

early 15c., carnal, unspiritual; mid-15c., of or pertaining to the senses, from Middle French
sensuel (15c.) and directly from Late Latin sensualis endowed with feeling (see sensuality). Meaning
connected with gratification of the senses, especially lewd, unchaste is attested from late 15c.


sensualism (n.)

1803, the philosophical doctrine that the senses are the sole source of knowledge, from sensual +
-ism. From 1813 as addiction to sensual indulgence.


sensualist (n.)

1660s, from sensual + -ist.


sensuality (n.)

mid-14c., the part of man that is concerned with the senses, from Old French sensualite the five
senses; impression, from Late Latin sensualitatem (nominative sensualitas) capacity for sensation,
from  Latin sensualis endowed with feeling, sensitive, from sensus feeling (see sense (n.)). Chiefly
animal instincts and appetites, hence the lower nature regarded as a source of evil, lusts of the
flesh (1620s).


sensualize (v.)

1680s, from sensual + -ize. Related: Sensualized; sensualizing.


sensuous (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to the senses apparently coined by Milton to recover the original meaning of
sensual and avoid the lascivious connotation that the older word had acquired, but by 1870 sensuous,
too, had begun down the same path and come to mean alive to the pleasures of the senses. Rare before
Coleridge popularized it To express in one word all that appertains to the perception, considered as
passive and merely recipient .... (1814). From Latin sensus (see sense (n.)) + -ous. Related:
Sensuously; sensuousness.


Sensurround

1974, proprietary name for movie special effects apparatus, coined from sense (n.) + surround.


sentence (n.)

c.1200, doctrine, authoritative teaching; an authoritative pronouncement, from Old French sentence
judgment, decision; meaning; aphorism, maxim; statement of authority (12c.) and directly from Latin
sententia thought, way of thinking, opinion; judgment, decision, also a thought expressed; aphorism,
saying, from sentientem, present participle of sentire be of opinion, feel, perceive (see sense
(n.)). Loss of first -i- in Latin by dissimilation.    From early 14c. as judgment rendered by God,
or by one in authority; a verdict, decision in court; from late 14c. as understanding, wisdom;
edifying subject matter. From late 14c. as subject matter or content of a letter, book, speech,
etc., also in reference to a passage in a written work. Sense of grammatically complete statement is
attested from mid-15c. Meaning, then meaning expressed in words. Related: Sentential.


sentence (v.)

to pass judgment, c.1400, from sentence (n.). Related: Sentenced; sentencing.


sententious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of meaning, from Middle French sententieux, from Latin sententiosus full of meaning,
pithy, from sententia thought; expression of a thought (see sentence (n.)). Meaning addicted to
pompous moralizing first recorded 1590s. Related: Sententiously; sententiousness.


sentience (n.)

1817, faculty of sense; feeling, consciousness; see sentient + -ence. Related: Sentiency (1796).


sentient (adj.)

1630s, capable of feeling, from Latin sentientem (nominative sentiens) feeling, present participle
of sentire to feel (see sense (n.)). Meaning conscious (of something) is from 1815.


sentiment (n.)

late 14c., sentement, personal experience, one's own feeling, from Old French sentement (12c.), from
Medieval Latin sentimentum feeling, affection, opinion, from Latin sentire to feel (see sense (n.)).
Meaning what one feels about something (1630s) and modern spelling seem to be a re-introduction from
French (where it was spelled sentiment by 17c.). A vogue word mid-18c. with wide application,
commonly a thought colored by or proceeding from emotion (1762), especially as expressed in
literature or art. The 17c. sense is preserved in phrases such as my sentiments exactly.


sentimental (adj.)

1749, pertaining to or characterized by sentiment, from sentiment + -al (1). At first without
pejorative connotations; meaning having too much sentiment, apt to be swayed by prejudice had
emerged by 1793 (implied in sentimentalist). Related: Sentimentally.


sentimentalism (n.)

1801, from sentimental + -ism.


sentimentalist (n.)

1768, from sentimental + -ist.


sentimentality (n.)

1768, from sentimental + -ity.


sentimentalize (v.)

1764, intransitive, indulge in sentiments, from sentimental + -ize. Meaning to make sentimental
(transitive) is from 1813. Related: Sentimentalized; sentimentalizing.    Think on these things, and
let S______ go to Lincoln sessions by himself, and talk classically with country justices. In the
meantime we will philosophize and sentimentalize;--the last word is a bright invention of the moment
in which it was written, for yours or Dr. Johnson's service .... [Laurence Sterne, letter to William
Combe, Esq., dated Aug. 5, 1764, published 1787]


sentinel (n.)

1570s, from Middle French sentinelle (16c.), from Italian sentinella a sentinel. OED says No
convincing etymology of the It. word has been proposed, but perhaps (via a notion of perceive,
watch), from sentire to hear, from Latin sentire feel, perceive by the senses (see sense (n.)).


sentry (n.)

1610s, originally watchtower; perhaps a shortened variant of sentinel, which had a variant form
centrinel (1590s); or perhaps worn down from sanctuary, on notion of shelter for a watchman. Meaning
military guard posted around a camp is first attested 1630s. Sentry-box is from 1728.


Seoul

South Korean capital, from Korean soul, literally capital. It was the national capital from 1392
until Japanese annexation in 1910.


sepal (n.)

leaf of the calyx, 1821, from French s&eacute;pal, from Modern Latin sepalum (H.J. de Necker, 1790),
coined from Latin separatus separate, distinct (see separate (v.)) + petalum petal (see petal).


separable (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin separabilis, from separare (see separate (v.)). Related: Separability.


separate (v.)

late 14c., from Latin separatus, past participle of separare to pull apart, from se- apart (see
secret) + parare make ready, prepare (see pare). Sever (q.v.) is a doublet, via French. Related:
Separated; separating.


separate (adj.)

detached, kept apart, c.1600, from separate (v.) or from Latin separatus. Separate but equal in
reference to U.S. segregation policies on railroads is attested from 1888. Separate development,
official name of apartheid in South Africa, is from 1955. Related: Separately (1550s); separateness.
Frequently the colored coach is little better than a cattle car. Generally one half the smoking car
is reserved for the colored car. Often only a cloth curtain or partition run half way up separates
this so-called colored car from the smoke, obscene language, and foul air of the smokers' half of
the car. All classes and conditions of colored humanity, from the most cultured and refined to the
most degraded and filthy, without regard to sex, good breeding or ability to pay for better
accommodation, are crowded into this separate, but equal (?) half car. [Rev. Norman B. Wood, The
White Side of a Black Subject, 1897]


separated (adj.)

1530s, past participle adjective from separate (v.). In reference to married couples deciding to
live apart, from 1878.


separates (n.)

articles of (women's) clothing that may be worn in various combinations, 1945, from separate (adj.).
As a noun, separate is attested from 1610s in the sense separatist.


separation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French separacion (Modern French s&#233;paration), from Latin separationem
(nominative separatio) noun of action from past participle stem of separare (see separate (v.)).
Specific sense of sundering of a married couple is attested from c.1600. Sense in photography is
from 1922. Separation of powers first recorded 1788, in Federalist (Hamilton), from French
s&eacute;par&eacute;e de la puissance (Montesquieu, 1748). Separation anxiety first attested 1943.


separationist (n.)

1831, from separation + -ist.


separatism (n.)

1620s, from separate + -ism. First used in a denominational religious sense; from 1866 in a
political sense.


separatist

c.1600, from separate + -ist. First used in a denominational religious sense; of political
separations from 1871.


separator (n.)

c.1600, separatist, agent noun from separate (v.). As a mechanical device for separating, from 1831.


separatrix (n.)

line or hooked line used to separate printed figures, originally with numerals and used where modern
texts use a decimal point, also in other specialized senses, from Late Latin (linea) separatrix,
feminine agent noun from separare (see separate (v.)).


Sephardim

plural of Sephardi a Spanish or Portuguese Jew (1851), from Modern Hebrew Sepharaddim Spaniards,
Jews of Spain, from Sepharad, name of a country mentioned only in Obad. v:20, probably meaning Asia
Minor or a part of it (Lydia, Phrygia), but identified by the rabbis after the Jonathan Targum as
Spain. Related: Sephardic.


sepia (n.)

rich brown pigment, 1821, from Italian seppia cuttlefish (borrowed with that meaning in English by
1560s), from Latin sepia cuttlefish, from Greek sepia cuttlefish, related to sepein to make rotten
(see sepsis). The color was that of brown paint or ink prepared from the fluid secretions of the
cuttlefish. Meaning a sepia drawing is recorded from 1863.


sepoy (n.)

native of India in British military service, 1717, from Portuguese sipae, from Urdu sipahi, from
Persian sipahi soldier, horseman, from sipah army. The Sepoy Mutiny was 1857-8.


sepsis (n.)

1876, putrefaction, from Modern Latin sepsis, from Greek sepsis putrefaction, from sepein to rot, of
unknown origin.


sept (n.)

1540s, enclosed area, from Latin septum (see septum). As division of a nation or tribe, 1510s, prob.
a var. of sect [OED].


sept-

see septi-.


septangle (n.)

1550s, from Late Latin septangulus, from Latin sept- seven (see septi-) + angulus angle (see angle
(n.)). Related: Septangular.


septem-

word-forming element meaning seven, from Latin septem-, from septem seven (see seven).


September

late Old English, from Latin September (also source of Old French Septembre, Spanish Setiembre,
Italian Settembre, German September), from septem seven (see seven). So called because it was the
seventh month of the old Roman calendar, which began the year in March; Julian calendar reform (46
B.C.E.) shifted the new year back two months. For -ber suffix, see December. Replaced Old English
h&aelig;rfestmona&eth;, haligmona&eth;. Related: Septembral.


Septembrist (n.)

1798 in reference to French history, a participant in the massacre of the political prisoners in
Paris, Sept. 2-5, 1792. In French, Septembriseur, hence English Septembriser (1797). Hence also
septembrize assassinate while in custody (1793).


septemdecimal (adj.)

of seventeen years, in reference to cicadas, 1885, from Latin septemdecim seventeen ((see seven,
ten) + -al (1). Related: Septemdecimally.


septentrion (n.)

the Big Dipper; Middle English septentrioun (1530s in reference to the star pattern; late 14c. as
the North, and septentrional northern, in reference to the sky, is attested from late 14c.), from
Latin septentriones, septemtriones (plural) the Great Bear, the seven stars of the Big Dipper; also
figuratively the northern regions, the North; literally seven plow oxen, from septem seven (see
seven) + trio (genitive triones) plow ox, from stem of terere (past participle tritus) to rub (see
throw (v.)). Also see Charles's Wain.


septet (n.)

1828, from German Septett, from Latin septem seven (see seven).


septi-

before vowels sept-, word-forming element meaning seven, from Latin septem (see seven).


septic (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin septicus of or pertaining to putrefaction, from Greek septikos characterized by
putrefaction, from sepein make rotten or putrid, cause to rot (see sepsis). Septic tank is attested
from 1902.


septicemia (n.)

1857, Modern Latin septic&aelig;mia, from French septicoemi, coined irregularly by French physician
Pierre-Adolphe Piorry (1794-1879) in 1837 from Greek septikos (see septic) + haima blood (see
-emia).    Dr. Piorry, in a second communication, insists upon the fact, that in a great number of
cases the decaying contents of the uterus, and the putrid infection of the blood from this source,
constitute the so-called puerperal fever, and he thinks that the discussion in the Academy is only a
fight about words, as the different speakers agree, without knowing it themselves, upon the nature
of the disease. He proposes the name of septicemia, as best designating the sources of the disease,
viz., from putrid infection from the uterus, and by the respiration of an atmosphere pregnant with
septic particles. ... The admission of this septicemia explains the putrid accidents, as observed in
men, the foetus, and wounded persons during a puerperal epidemic. [E. Noeggerath and A. Jacobi,
Contributions to Midwifery, New York, 1859]


septillion (n.)

1680s, from sept- (see septi-) + (m)illion. Compare billion.


septuagenarian (adj.)

of age 70, seventy-year-old, 1793, from Latin septuagenarius containing seventy, from septuageni
seventy each, related to septuaginta seventy (see Septuagint). Noun meaning a 70-year-old person
first recorded 1805. As an adjective, septuagenary is recorded from c.1600.


Septuagint (n.)

Greek version of the Old Testament, 1630s, earlier as the word for the translators collectively
(1570s), from Late Latin septuaginta (interpretes) seventy (interpreters), from Latin septuaginta
seventy, from septem seven (see seven) + -ginta tens, ten times, from PIE *dkm-ta-, from *dekm- ten
(see ten).    So called in reference to the (incorrect) tradition that the translation was done 3c.
B.C.E. by 70 or 72 Jewish scholars (in Middle English, the Seuenty turneres) from Palestine and
completed in 70 or 72 days. The translation is believed now to have been carried out at different
times by an undetermined number of Egyptian Jews. Often denoted by Roman numerals, LXX. Related:
Septuagintal.


septum (n.)

partition between the nostrils, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Latin saeptum a fence, enclosure,
partition, from neuter past participle of saepire to hedge in, from saepes hedge, fence. Related:
Septal.


sepulchral (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to a burial or place of burial, from Latin sepulcralis of a tomb, sepulchral, from
sepulcrum (see sepulchre) + -al (1). Transferred sense of gloomy is from 1711. Related:
Sepulchrally.


sepulchre (n.)

also sepulcher, c.1200, tomb, burial place, especially the cave where Jesus was buried outside
Jerusalem (Holy Sepulcher or Saint Sepulcher), from Old French sepulcre tomb; the Holy Sepulchre
(11c.), from Latin sepulcrum grave, tomb, place where a corpse is buried, from root of sepelire to
bury, embalm, originally to perform rituals on a corpse, from PIE *sep-el-yo-, suffixed form of root
*sep- (2) to handle (skillfully), to hold (reverently); cognates: Sanskrit saparyati honors. No
reason for the -ch- spelling, which dates to 13c. Whited sepulchre hypocrite is from Matt. xxiii.27.


sepulture (n.)

burial, interment, late 13c., from Old French sepulture, sepoutre tomb, coffin (12c.), from Latin
sepultura burial, funeral obsequies, from sepult-, past participle stem of sepelire to bury (see
sepulchre).


sequacious (adj.)

given to following leaders, 1630s, from Latin sequac-, stem of sequax that follows, following,
seeking after, from sequi to follow (see sequel) + -ous. Related: Sequaciously; sequaciousness;
sequacity (1620s).


sequel (n.)

early 15c., train of followers, from Old French sequelle (14c.), from Late Latin sequela that which
follows, result, consequence, from sequi to follow, come after, follow after, attend, follow
naturally, from PIE root *sekw- (1) to follow (cognates: Sanskrit sacate accompanies, follows,
Avestan hacaiti, Greek hepesthai to follow, Lithuanian seku to follow, Latin secundus second, the
following, Old Irish sechim I follow). Meaning consequence is attested from late 15c. Meaning story
that follows and continues another first recorded 1510s.


sequela (n.)

plural sequelae, 1793, originally in pathology, from Latin sequela that which follows, consequence
(see sequel).


sequence (n.)

late 14c., hymn sung after the Hallelujah and before the Gospel, from Old French sequence answering
verses (13c.), from Medieval Latin sequentia a following, a succession, from Latin sequentem
(nominative sequens), present participle of sequi to follow (see sequel). In Church use, a partial
loan-translation of Greek akolouthia, from akolouthos following. General sense of succession, also a
sequence at cards, appeared 1570s.


sequence (v.)

arrange in a sequence, 1954, from sequence (n.). Related: Sequenced; sequencing.


sequent (adj.)

1550s, following, from Old French sequent following, subsequent, from Latin sequentem (nominative
sequens) next, following, present participle of sequi to follow (see sequel). As a noun from 1580s.


sequential (adj.)

1816, from Late Latin sequentia (see sequence) + -al (1). Related: Sequentially.


sequester (v.)

late 14c., remove something, quarantine, isolate (someone); excommunicate; also intransitive,
separate oneself from, from Old French sequestrer (14c.), from Late Latin sequestrare to place in
safekeeping, from Latin sequester trustee, mediator, noun use of an adjective meaning intermediate,
which probably is related to sequi to follow (see sequel). Meaning seize by authority, confiscate is
first attested 1510s. Alternative sequestrate (v.) is early 15c., from Latin sequestratus. Related:
Sequestered; sequestering.


sequestration (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin sequestrationem (nominative sequestratio) a depositing, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin sequestrare (see sequester).


sequin (n.)

1610s, name of a former Italian and Turkish gold coin, from French sequin (17c.), from Italian
zecchino, name of a Venetian coin, from zecca a mint, from Arabic sikkah a minting die. Meaning
ornamental disc or spangle is first recorded 1882, from resemblance to a gold coin. Related:
Sequined (1890).


sequitur

Latin, literally it follows.


sequoia (n.)

large American coniferous tree, 1857, from Modern Latin tree genus name given 1847 by Austrian
botanist Stephan Endlicher (1804-1849), originally to a different tree, the coast redwood,
apparently in honor of Sequoya (a.k.a. George Guess, 1760-1843), Cherokee man who invented a system
of writing for his people's language, whose name is from Cherokee (Iroquoian) Sikwayi, a word of
unknown etymology.    Endlicher was a specialist in conifers, and he also was a philologist. But he
never gave an etymology of this name and a search of his papers discovered no mention of Sequoya or
the Cherokee writing system, and the connection is an assumption that some botanists have
challenged, though no better candidate for a source has yet been found.    The giant sequoia was
unseen by Europeans until 1833 and unknown to scientists until 1852. In May 1855, a pair of American
botanists named it Taxodium giganteum, but that name was deemed inappropriate for several scientific
reasons. Meanwhile, English botanist John Lindley, who had never been to California, in 1853 named
it Wellingtonia in honor of the Duke of Wellington. As high as Wellington towers above his
contemporaries, as high towers this California tree above the forest surrounding it. Therefore, it
shall bear for all time to come the name Wellingtonia gigantea. This sat poorly with the Americans,
and much ink was spilled until a French botanist provided the solution by transferring Endlicher's
name. In Britain still popularly called Wellingtonia.


seraglio (n.)

harem, also the name of a former palace of the sultan in Istanbul, 1580s, from Italian seraglio,
alteration of Turkish saray palace, court, from Persian sara'i palace, inn, from Iranian base
*thraya- to protect (cognates: Avestan thrayeinti they protect), from PIE *tra-, variant form of
root *tere- (2) to cross over, pass through, overcome (see through).    The Italian word probably
reflects folk etymology influence of serraglio enclosure, cage, from Medieval Latin serraculum bung,
stopper (see serried).


serape (n.)

also sarape, type of shawl for men, 1834, from Mexican Spanish sarape, probably from Nahuatl, but
exact source difficult to identify source because there is no -r- sound in Nahuatl.


seraph (n.)

1667, first used by Milton (probably on analogy of cherub/cherubim), back-formed singular from Old
English seraphim (plural), from Late Latin seraphim, from Greek seraphim, from Hebrew seraphim (only
in Isa. vi), plural of *saraph (which does not occur in the Bible), probably literally the burning
one, from saraph it burned. Seraphs were traditionally regarded as burning or flaming angels, though
the word seems to have some etymological sense of flying, perhaps from confusion with the root of
Arabic sharafa be lofty. Some scholars identify it with a word found in other passages interpreted
as fiery flying serpent.


seraphic (adj.)

1630s, from Church Latin seraphicus, from seraphim (see seraph). Related: Seraphical (1560s).


Serapis

god of the lower world, from Latin, from Greek Serapis, earlier Sarapis, from Egyptian User-hapi,
literally Osiris-Apis.


Serb (n.)

1813, but in reference to the Wends; 1861 as native of Serbia, from Serbian Srb, perhaps from a root
meaning man. Serbian is attested from 1848 as a noun, 1876 as an adjective. More common in 19c. was
Servian.


Serbian (adj.)

1833, from Serb + -ian. As a noun from 1848.


Serbo-

word-forming element meaning Serbian, Serbian and, from Latinized comb. form of Serb.


sere (adj.)

Old English sear dried up, withered, barren, from Proto-Germanic *sauzas (cognates: Middle Low
German sor, Dutch zoor), from PIE root *saus- dry (cognates: Sanskrit susyati dries, withers; Old
Persian u&#353;ka- dry (adj.), land (n.); Avestan hu&#353;ka- dry; Latin sudus dry). A good word now
relegated to bad poetry. Related to sear. Sere month was an old name for August.


Serena

fem. proper name, from Latin serena, fem. of serenus clear, bright, fair, joyous (see serene).


serenade (n.)

1640s, musical performance at night in open air (especially one given by a lover under the window of
his lady), from French s&eacute;r&eacute;nade (16c.), from Italian serenata an evening song,
literally calm sky, from sereno the open air, noun use of sereno clear, calm, from Latin serenus
peaceful, calm, serene. Sense influenced by Italian sera evening, from Latin sera, fem. of serus
late. Meaning piece of music suitable for a serenade is attested from 1728.


serenade (v.)

1660s, from serenade (n.). Related: Serenaded; serenading.


serendipitous (adj.)

1914; see serendipity + -ous. Related: Serendipitously.


serendipity (n.)

1754 (but rare before 20c.), coined by Horace Walpole (1717-92) in a letter to Horace Mann (dated
Jan. 28); he said he formed it from the Persian fairy tale The Three Princes of Serendip, whose
heroes were always making discoveries, by accidents and sagacity, of things they were not in quest
of. The name is from Serendip, an old name for Ceylon (modern Sri Lanka), from Arabic Sarandib, from
Sanskrit Simhaladvipa Dwelling-Place-of-Lions Island.


serene (adj.)

mid-15c., clear, calm, from Latin serenus peaceful, calm, clear (of weather), figuratively cheerful,
glad, tranquil, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a suffixed variant of PIE *ksero- dry, source of
Greek xeros dry (see xerasia). In English, applied to persons since 1630s. Related: Serenely.


serenity (n.)

1530s, of weather, 1590s, of persons, from Middle French s&eacute;r&eacute;nit&eacute;, from Latin
serenitatem (nominative serenitas) clearness, serenity, from serenus (see serene). Earliest use
(mid-15c.) was as a title of honor for kings, probably from the similar use of Latin serenitas,
applied to Roman emperors, later popes.


serf (n.)

late 15c., servant, serving-man, slave, from Old French serf vassal, servant, slave (12c.), from
Latin servum (nominative servus) slave (see serve). Fallen from use in original sense by 18c.
Meaning lowest class of cultivators of the soil in continental European countries is from 1610s. Use
by modern writers with reference to medieval Europeans first recorded 1761 (contemporary Anglo-Latin
records used nativus, villanus, or servus).


serfdom (n.)

1850, from serf + -dom. Earlier in the same sense was serfage (1775).


serge (n.)

late 14c., from Old French serge (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *sarica, in Medieval Latin cloth of wool
mixed with silk or linen, from Latin serica (vestis) silken (garment), from serica, from Greek
serike, fem. of serikos silken (see silk). The French word is the source of German sarsche, Danish
sarge, etc.


sergeant (n.)

c.1200, servant, from Old French sergent, serjant (domestic) servant, valet; court official;
soldier, from Medieval Latin servientum (nominative serviens) servant, vassal, soldier (in Late
Latin public official), from Latin servientem serving, present participle of servire to serve (see
serve (v.)); cognate with Spanish sirviente, Italian servente; a twin of servant, and 16c. writers
sometimes use the two words interchangeably.    Specific sense of military servant is attested from
late 13c.; that of officer whose duty is to enforce judgments of a tribunal or legislative body is
from c.1300 (sergeant at arms is attested from late 14c.). Meaning non-commissioned military officer
first recorded 1540s. Originally a much more important rank than presently. As a police rank, in
Great Britain from 1839.    Middle English alternative spelling serjeant (from Old French) was
retained in Britain in special use as title of a superior order of barristers (c.1300, from legal
Latin serviens ad legem, one who serves (the king) in matters of law), from which Common Law judges
were chosen; also used of certain other officers of the royal household. sergeant-major is from
1570s. The sergeant-fish (1871) so-called for lateral markings resembling a sergeant's stripes.
Related: Sergeancy.


Sergius

masc. proper name, from Latin, of Etruscan origin.


serial (adj.)

coming in regular succession, 1840, from series + -al (1); popularized in reference to Dickens'
novels, published one part at a time in periodicals (as opposed to all at once in a book). Found to
be a useful word and given wide application. Serial number, indicating position in a series, first
recorded 1866, originally of papers, packages, etc.; of soldiers from 1918. Serial killer is first
attested 1981 (in relation to John Wayne Gacy and Ted Bundy), though serial had been used in
connection with murders since the early 1960s. Related: Serially.


serial (n.)

1846, from serial (adj.).


serialization (n.)

1856, noun of action from serialize.


serialize (v.)

1852 (implied in serialized), from serial + -ize. Related: Serializing.


seriatim

1670s (earlier seratim, c.1500), one after another, from Medieval Latin seriatim, from Latin series
(see series).


seriation (n.)

the forming of an orderly sequence, 1650s; see series + -ation.


sericulture (n.)

breeding, rearing and treatment of silkworms, 1839, from French s&eacute;riciculture (19c.), from
Latin sericum (nominative serica) silk (see serge) + cultura (see culture (n.)).


series (n.)

1610s, a number or set of things of one kind arranged in a line, from Latin series row, chain,
series, sequence, succession, from serere to join, link, bind together, arrange, attach, put; join
in speech, discuss, from PIE root *ser- (3) to line up, join (cognates: Sanskrit sarat- thread,
Greek eirein to fasten together in rows, Gothic sarwa (plural) armor, arms, Old Norse s&ouml;rve
necklace of stringed pearls, Old Irish sernaid he joins together, Welsh ystret row).    Meaning set
of printed works published consecutively is from 1711. Meaning set of radio or television programs
with the same characters and themes is attested from 1949. Baseball sense set of games on
consecutive days between the same teams is from 1862.


serif (n.)

in typography, 1841, earlier ceref (1827); see sans-serif.


serine (n.)

type of amino acid, 1880, from German serin (1865), from Latin sericum silk (see serge), with
chemical suffix -ine (2).


seriocomic (adj.)

also serio-comic, 1749 (implied in seriocomical), a blend of serious + comic.


serious (adj.)

mid-15c., expressing earnest purpose or thought (of persons), from Middle French s&eacute;rieux
grave, earnest (14c.), from Late Latin seriosus, from Latin serius weighty, important, grave,
probably from a PIE root *swer- (4) heavy (cognates: Lithuanian sveriu to weigh, lift, svarus heavy;
Old English sw&aelig;re heavy, German schwer heavy, Gothic swers honored, esteemed, literally
weighty). As opposite of jesting, from 1712; as opposite of light (of music, theater, etc.), from
1762. Meaning attended with danger is from 1800.


seriously (adv.)

c.1500, from serious + -ly (2). To take (something) seriously is from 1782.


seriousness (n.)

1520s, from serious + -ness.


sermocination (n.)

1510s, a talk, from Latin sermonationem (nominative sermonatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of sermonari talk, discourse, harangue, from sermo (see sermon). From 1753 in rhetoric, a form
of prosopopoeia in which the speaker, having addressed a real or imaginary hearer with a remark or
especially a question, immediately answers for the hearer. Related: Sermocinator, agent noun;
sermocinatrix a female talker (1620s).


sermon (n.)

c.1200, sarmun, a discourse upon a text of scripture; what is preached, from Anglo-French sermun,
Old French sermon speech, words, discourse; church sermon, homily (10c.), from Latin sermonem
(nominative sermo) continued speech, conversation; common talk, rumor; learned talk, discourse;
manner of speaking, literary style, originally a stringing together of words, from PIE *ser-mo-,
suffixed form of root *ser- (3) to line up, join (see series).    Main modern sense in English and
French is elliptical for Latin sermo religiosus. In transferred (non-religious) use from 1590s. The
Sermon on the Mount is in 5,6,7 Matt. and 6 Luke. Related: Sermonic; sermonical; sermonish.


sermonette (n.)

1814, diminutive from sermon + -ette. Poe used sermonoid (1849); sermuncle (1886) also has been
tried. English writers have turned to the Italian double diminutive sermonettino (1818) to describe
notably trifling efforts.


sermonize (v.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin sermonizari, from Latin sermo (see sermon). Chiefly depreciatory [OED].
Related: Sermonizing.


serology (n.)

1907, from sero-, comb. form of serum, + -ology. Related: Serological; serologist.


serotine (adj.)

late, 1590s, from French s&#233;rotine, from Latin serotinus that which comes late; that which
happens in the evening, from sero, adverb of serus late (see soiree). Also as a noun, a type of
small, brown bat, from 1771. Related: serotinous, in botany (1880) appearing later in the season
than usual.


serotonin (n.)

neurotransmitting chemical, 1948, coined from sero-, comb. form of serum (q.v.) + ton(ic) + chemical
suffix -in (2).


serous (adj.)

early 15c., watery, later of or pertaining to serum (16c.), from French s&eacute;reux (16c.) and
directly from Latin serosus, from serum watery fluid, whey (see serum). Related: Serosity.


serpent (n.)

c.1300, limbless reptile, also the tempter in Gen. iii:1-5, from Old French serpent, sarpent snake,
serpent (12c.), from Latin serpentem (nominative serpens) snake; creeping thing, also the name of a
constellation, from present participle of serpere to creep, from PIE *serp- to crawl, creep
(cognates: Sanskrit sarpati creeps, sarpah serpent; Greek herpein to creep, herpeton serpent;
Albanian garper serpent).    Used figuratively of things spiral or regularly sinuous, such as a type
of musical instrument (1730). Serpent's tongue as figurative of venomous or stinging speech is from
mistaken medieval notion that the serpent's tongue was its sting. Serpent's tongue also was a name
given to fossil shark's teeth (c.1600).


serpentine (n.)

c.1400, plant reputed to contain antivenom, from Old French serpentin name of a precious stone, noun
use of adjective meaning of a snake, snake-like; sly, deceptive, from Late Latin serpentius of a
serpent, from Latin serpentem (nominative serpens) snake (see serpent). As the name of a greenish
igneous rock consisting mainly of hydrous magnesium silicate, attested from early 15c.


serpentine (adj.)

twisting, winding, 1610s; see serpent + -ine (1). An earlier adjective meaning having the evil
qualities of a serpent is recorded from late 14c., from the French source of serpentine (n.). The
winding lake of that name in Hyde Park, London, was constructed in 1730.


serrate (adj.)

notched, 1660s, from Latin serratus sawlike, notched like a saw, from serra a saw, of unknown
origin. Related: Serrated; serrating.


serrated (adj.)

1703, past participle adjective based on Latin serratus (see serrate (adj.)). Serrating sawing
attested from 1590s, but serrate as a transitive verb not attested before 1750 according to OED.


serration (n.)

condition of being serrated, 1808, noun of state from serrate (adj.).


serried (adj.)

pressed close together, 1667 (in Paradise Lost), probably a  past participle adjective from serry to
press close together (1580s), a military term, from Middle French serre close, compact (12c.), past
participle of serrer press close, fasten, from Vulgar Latin *serrare to bolt, lock up, from Latin
serare, from sera a bolt, bar, cross-bar, perhaps from PIE *ser- (3) to line up (see series). Modern
use is due to the popularity of Scott, who used it with phalanx.


serum (n.)

1670s, watery animal fluid, from Latin serum watery fluid, whey, from PIE root *ser- (2) to run,
flow (cognates: Greek oros whey; Sanskrit sarah flowing, sarit brook, river). First applied 1893 to
blood serum used in medical treatments.


serval (n.)

African wild cat, 1771, from Modern Latin serval, French serval (Buffon, 1765), from Portuguese
(lobo) cerval lynx, from Latin lupus cervarius (source of French loup cervier) lynx, literally wolf
that hunts the stag, from cervarius pertaining to a stag, from cervus stag, from PIE *ker-wo- having
horns, suffixed form of root *ker- (1) horn, head (see horn (n.)).


servant (n.)

c.1200, personal or domestic attendant, from Old French servant servant; foot-soldier, noun use of
servant serving, waiting, present participle of servir to attend, wait upon (see serve (v.)).
Meaning professed lover, one devoted to the service of a lady is from mid-14c. In North American
colonies and U.S., the usual designation for slave 17c.-18c. (in 14c.-15c. and later in Biblical
translations the word often was used to render Latin servus, Greek doulos slave). Public servant is
attested from 1670s.


serve (v.)

late 12c., to render habitual obedience to, also minister, give aid, give help, from Old French
servir to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with, from
Latin servire be a servant, be in service, be enslaved; figuratively be devoted; be governed by;
comply with; conform; flatter, originally be a slave, related to servus slave, perhaps from Etruscan
(compare Etruscan proper names Servi, Serve, Latinized as Servius).    By c.1200 also as to be in
the service of, perform a service for; attend upon, be personal servant to; be a slave; owe
allegiance to; officiate at Mass or other religious rites; from early 13c. as set food at table;
mid-14c. as to wait on (customers). From late 14c. as treat (someone or something) in some fashion.
To serve (someone) right to treat as he deserves is recorded from 1580s.    He no schuld neuer wond
To seruen him fro fot to hond  [Amis and Amiloun, c.1330]    Sense of be useful, be beneficial, be
suitable for a purpose or function is from early 14c.; that of take the place or meet the needs of,
be equal to the task is from late 14c.; that of suffice is from mid-15c. Meaning render active
military service is from 1510s. Sporting sense, in tennis, badminton, etc., first recorded 1580s.
Legal sense present (a writ, warrant,etc.), give legal notice of is from early 15c.


serve (n.)

1680s, in sports (tennis, etc.), from serve (v.).


served (adj.)

found guilty, convicted; ordered to be punished or transported; beaten, 1811, slang past participle
adjective from serve (v.).


server (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from serve (v.). Computer sense by 1992.


servery (n.)

1893, from serve + -ery.


Servian

1754 (n.), 1723 (adj.), from Medieval Latin Servia, from Serb Serb (see Serb).


service (n.1)

c.1100, celebration of public worship, from Old French servise act of homage; servitude; service at
table; Mass, church ceremony, from Latin servitium slavery, condition of a slave, servitude, also
slaves collectively, from servus slave (see serve (v.)).    Meaning act of serving, occupation of an
attendant servant is attested from c.1200, as is that of assistance, help; a helpful act. From
c.1300 as provision of food; sequence of dishes served in a meal; from late 14c. as service at
table, attendance during a meal. Meaning the furniture of the table (tea service, etc.) is from mid-
15c.    Meanings state of being bound to undertake tasks for someone or at someone's direction;
labor performed or undertaken for another are mid-13c. Sense of service or employment in a court or
administration is from c.1300, as is that of military service (especially by a knight); employment
as a soldier; hence the military as an occupation (1706).     Also in Middle English sexual
intercourse, conjugal relations (mid-15c.; service of Venus, or flesh's service). Service industry
(as distinct from production) attested from 1938. A service station originally was a gas stop that
also repaired cars.


service (v.)

1893, to provide with service, from service (n.1). Meaning perform work on first recorded 1926.
Related: Serviced; servicing.


service (n.2)

type of tree or berry, extended form of serve (perhaps via Middle English plural serves being taken
as a singular), from Old English syrfe, Old French sorbe, both from Vulgar Latin *sorbea, from Latin
sorbus (see sorb).


serviceable (adj.)

ready to do service, early 14c., from Old French servicable, from servise (see service (n.1)).
Related: Serviceability.     Edgar: I know thee well: a serviceable villain,  As duteous to the
vices of thy mistress  As badness would desire.  [King Lear, IV.vi.]


serviceman (n.)

1899, from service (n.) + man (n.).


servient (adj.)

1640s, from Latin servientem subordinate, present participle of servire be a servant, be a slave
(see serve (v.)).


serviette (n.)

table napkin, late 15c., from Middle French serviette napkin, towel (14c.), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from past participle of servir to serve (see serve (v.)). Primarily Scottish at first; re-
introduced from French 1818.


servile (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin servilis of a slave (as in Servile Wars, name given to the slave revolts in
the late Roman Republic), also slavish, servile, from servus slave (see serve (v.)). Earliest sense
was legal, servile work being forbidden on the Sabbath; sense of cringing, fawning first recorded
c.1600.


servility (n.)

1570s; see servile + -ity.


serving (n.)

action of serving, c.1200, verbal noun from serve (v.). As a helping of food from 1769.


servitude (n.)

early 15c., condition of being enslaved, from Old French servitude, servitute (13c.) and directly
from Late Latin servitudo slavery, from Latin servus a slave (see serve (v.)) + abstract noun
suffix.


servo

1910, from servo-motor (1889), from French servo-moteur (1873), ultimately from Latin servus slave
(see serve (v.)) + motor mover (see motor (n.)).


sesame (n.)

early 15c., probably from Middle French sisame and directly from Latin sesamum (nominative sesama),
from Greek sesamon (Doric sasamon) seed or fruit of the sesame plant, a very early borrowing via
Phoenician from Late Babylonian *shawash-shammu (compare Assyrian shamash-shammu sesame, literally
oil-seed). First as a magic password in 1785 translation of Galland's Mille et une nuits, where it
opens the door of the thieves' den in Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves. Phrase open sesame current
since about 1826.


sesqui-

word-forming element, from Latin sesqui- one-half more, contraction of *semis-que- a half in
addition, from semis a half (see semi-) + -que and, from PIE *kwe-.


sesquicentennial (adj.)

pertaining to a century and a half, 1878, from sesqui- + centennial. As a noun from 1880; first
recorded reference is to Baltimore's.


sesquipedalian (n.)

1610s, person or thing a foot and a half long, from Latin sesquipedalia a foot-and-a-half long, from
sesqui- half as much again (see sesqui-) + stem of pes foot (see foot (n.)). As an adjective 1650s.
Meaning sesquipedalian word (1830) is from Latin sesquipedalia verba words a foot-and-a-half long,
in Horace's Ars Poetica (97), nicely illustrating the thing he is criticizing.


sessile (adj.)

1725, adhering close to the surface, from Latin sessilis pertaining to sitting, for sitting on, from
sessum, past participle of sedere to sit (see sedentary). In botany from 1753. Meaning sedentary
first recorded 1860.


session (n.)

late 14c., periodical sitting of a court, from Old French session act or state of sitting; assembly,
from Latin sessionem (nominative sessio) act of sitting; a seat; loitering; a session, noun of
action from past participle stem of sedere to sit (see sedentary). Sense of period set aside for
some activity is first recorded 1920, in bull session, probably from quarter sessions courts (see
quarter (n.)). Musical sense of recording occasion in a studio is from 1927.


sestet (n.)

1801, from Italian sestetto, diminutive of sesto sixth, from Latin sextus (see Sextus).


sestina (n.)

1797, from Italian, poem of six-lined stanzas, from sesto sixth, from Latin sextus (see six).
Invented by 12c. Proven&ccedil;al troubadour Arnaut Daniel. The line endings of the first stanza are
repeated in different order in the rest, and in an envoi.


set (v.)

Old English settan (transitive) cause to sit, put in some place, fix firmly; build, found; appoint,
assign, from Proto-Germanic *(bi)satjan to cause to sit, set (cognates: Old Norse setja, Swedish
s&#228;tta, Old Saxon settian, Old Frisian setta, Dutch zetten, German setzen, Gothic satjan),
causative form of PIE *sod-, variant of *sed- (1) to sit (see sit (v.)). Also see set (n.2).
Intransitive sense from c.1200, be seated. Used in many disparate senses by Middle English; sense of
make or cause to do, act, or be; start and that of mount a gemstone attested by mid-13c. Confused
with sit since early 14c. Of the sun, moon, etc., to go down, recorded from c.1300, perhaps from
similar use of the cognates in Scandinavian languages. To set (something) on incite to attack
(c.1300) originally was in reference to hounds and game.


set (adj.)

fixed, c.1200, sett, past participle of setten to set (see set (v.)). Meaning ready, prepared first
recorded 1844.


set (n.1)

collection of things, mid-15c., from Old French sette sequence, variant of secte religious
community, from Medieval Latin secta retinue, from Latin secta a following (see sect). [I]n
subsequent developments of meaning influenced by SET v.1 and apprehended as equivalent to 'number
set together' [OED]. The noun set was in Middle English, but only in the sense of religious sect
(late 14c.), which likely is the direct source of some modern meanings, such as group of persons
with shared status, habits, etc. (1680s).    Meaning complete collection of pieces is from 1680s.
Meaning group of pieces musicians perform at a club during 45 minutes (more or less) is from c.1925,
though it is found in a similar sense in 1580s. Set piece is from 1846 as grouping of people in a
work of visual art; from 1932 in reference to literary works.


set (n.2)

act of setting; condition of being set (of a heavenly body), mid-14c., from set (v.) or its
identical past participle. Many disparate senses collect under this word because of the far-flung
meanings assigned to the verb:   Action of hardening, 1837; also manner or position in which
something is set (1530s), hence general movement, direction, tendency (1560s); build, form (1610s),
hence bearing, carriage (1855); action of fixing the hair in a particular style (1933).    Something
that has been set (1510s), hence the use in tennis (1570s) and the theatrical meaning scenery for an
individual scene in a play, etc., recorded from 1859. Other meanings OED groups under miscellaneous
technical senses include piece of electrical apparatus (1891, first in telegraphy); burrow of a
badger (1898). Old English had set seat, in plural camp; stable, but OED finds it doubtful whether
this survived beyond OE. Compare set (n.1).   Set (n.1) and set (n.2) are not always distinguished
in dictionaries; OED has them as two entries, Century Dictionary as one. The difference of opinion
seems to be whether the set meaning group, grouping (here (n.2)) is a borrowing of the unrelated
French word that sounds like the native English one, or a borrowing of the sense only, which was
absorbed into the English word.


Set

Egyptian god, from Greek Seth, from Egyptian Setesh.


set off (v.)

verbal phrase; see set (v.) + off (adv.). From 1590s as make prominent by contrast, 1610s as adorn.
Intransitive sense of start on a journey is from 1774. Meaning separate from contect (in typography)
is from 1824; sense of ignite, discharge, cause to explode is from 1810.


set-aside (n.)

1943, from verbal phrase (early 15c.); see set (v.) + aside (adv.).


set-to (n.)

bout, fight, 1743, originally pugilistic slang, from verbal phrase; see set (v.) + to.


set-up (n.)

arrangement, 1890, from verbal phrase set up, attested from c.1200 as to make ready for use and from
1950 (in pugilism) as to bring (someone) to a vulnerable position; from set (v.) + up (adv.). The
verbal phrase also can mean to establish (early 15c.) and put drinks before customers (1880).


seta (n.)

plural setae, 1793, from Latin seta bristle, from PIE root *sai- to tie, bind (see sinew). Related:
Setaceous.


setback (n.)

also set-back, 1670s, reversal, check to progress, from set (v.) + back (adv.). Sometimes backset
was used in the same sense. Meaning space between a building and a property line is from 1916. To
set (someone) back cost is from 1900.


Seth

masc. proper name, Biblical third son of Adam, literally set, appointed, from Hebrew Sheth, from
shith to put, set. The Gnostic sect of Sethites (2c.) believed Christ was a reappearance of Seth,
whom they venerated as the first spiritual man.


setness (n.)

1640s, from set (n.2) + -ness. Old English had setnes, which was pressed into service to translate
various ideas in Roman law and Christianity: foundation, creation, construction; size, extent; law,
ordinance; instruction; sentence.


sett (n.)

see set (n.1).    The extra t is an arbitrary addition in various technical senses, from a lawn-
tennis to a granite set. Each class of persons has doubtless added it to distinguish the special
sense that means most to it from all others ; but so many are the special senses that the
distinction is now no more distinctive than an Esq. after a man's name, &amp; all would do well to
discard it. [Fowler]


settee (n.)

long seat with back and arms, 1716, perhaps a variant of settle (n.), or a diminutive of set (v.)
act of setting.


setter (n.)

one who sets (something), c.1400, agent noun from set (v.). As a type of hunting-dog (originally a
type of spaniel), 1570s, so called because the dog is set on game.


setting (n.)

late 14c., fact or action of setting (something), putting, placing, planting, verbal noun from set
(v.).    Meaning place, location, site is late 14c. Surgical sense, with reference to broken bones,
etc., is from early 15c. In reference to heavenly bodies, from c.1400. Also in Middle English act of
creation; thing created (c.1400). In reference to mounts for jewels, etc. from 1815; meaning
background, history, environment is attested from 1841.


settle (v.)

come to rest, Old English setlan cause to sit, place, put, from setl a seat (see settle (n.)).
Related: Settling. Compare German siedeln to settle, colonize.     From c.1300 of birds, etc., to
alight. From early 14c. as sink down, descend; cave in. Early 15c. in reference to suspended
particles in a liquid. Sense of establish a permanent residence first recorded 1620s; that of decide
is 1620s. Meaning secure title to by deed is from 1660s.    Meaning reconcile (a quarrel,
differences, etc.) perhaps is influenced by Middle English sahtlen to reconcile, from Old English
saht reconciliation, from Old Norse satt reconciliation. To settle down become content is from 1853;
transitive sense from 1520s; as what married couples do in establishing domesticity, from 1718. To
settle for content oneself with is from 1943.


settle (n.)

long bench, 1550s, from Middle English setle a seat, from Old English setl a seat, stall; position,
abode; setting of a heavenly body, related to sittan to sit, from Proto-Germanic *setla- (cognates:
Middle Low German, Middle Dutch setel, Dutch zetel, German Sessel, Gothic sitls), from PIE *sedla-
(cognates: Latin sella seat, chair, Old Church Slavonic sedlo saddle, Old English sadol saddle),
from root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


settled (adj.)

firmly fixed, also quiet, orderly, steady, 1550s, past participle adjective from settle (v.).


settlement (n.)

1620s, act of fixing or steadying; from settle (v.) + -ment. Meaning a colony, especially a new one,
tract of country newly developed is attested from 1690s; that of small village on the frontier is
from 1827, American English. Sense of payment of an account is from 1729; legal sense a settling of
arrangements (of divorce, property transfer, etc.) is from 1670s.


settler (n.)

1590s, a thing that settles (a debate, etc.); agent noun from settle (v.). Meaning a person who
moves into a new country is from 1690s.


seven (n.)

Old English seofon, from Proto-Germanic *sebun (cognates: Old Saxon sibun, Old Norse sjau, Swedish
sju, Danish syv, Old Frisian sowen, siugun, Middle Dutch seven, Dutch zeven, Old High German sibun,
German sieben, Gothic sibun), from PIE *septm seven (cognates: Sanskrit sapta, Avestan hapta,
Hittite shipta, Greek hepta, Latin septem, Old Church Slavonic sedmi, Lithuanian septyni, Old Irish
secht, Welsh saith).    Long regarded as a number of perfection (seven wonders; seven sleepers, the
latter translating Latin septem dormientes; seven against Thebes, etc.), but that notion is late in
Old English and in German a nasty, troublesome woman could be eine b&ouml;se Sieben an evil seven
(1662).    Magical power or healing skill associated since 16c. with the seventh son [The seuenth
Male Chyld by iust order (neuer a Gyrle or Wench being borne betweene), Thomas Lupton, A Thousand
Notable Things, 1579]. The typical number for very great, strong, as in seven-league boots in the
fairy story of Hop o'my Thumb. The Seven Years' War (1756-63) is also the Third Silesian War.    The
Seven Stars (Old English sibunsterri), usually refers to the Pleiades, though in 15c. and after this
name occasionally was given to the Big Dipper (which also has seven stars), or the seven planets of
classical astronomy. Popular as a tavern sign, it might also (with six in a circle, one in the
center) be a Masonic symbol.    FOOL:  ... The reason why the     seven stars are no more than seven
is a pretty reason.     LEAR:  Because they are not eight?  FOOL:  Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a
good fool.  [King Lear, I.v.]


Seven Champions (n.)

1590s, the national saints of England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, France, Spain, and Italy, viz.
George, Andrew, David, Patrick, Denys, James, and Anthony.


Seven Seas (n.)

1872, the Arctic, Antarctic, North Atlantic, South Atlantic, North Pacific, South Pacific, and
Indian.


Seven Sisters

the Pleiades, early 15c. (see Pleiades), seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, placed among the
stars by Zeus. The Pleiades also are known as the Seven Stars  (see seven). As a late-20c. name for
the major multi-national petroleum companies, it is attested from 1962. They were listed in 1976 as
Exxon, Mobil, Gulf, Standard Oil of California, Texaco, British Petroleum, and Royal Dutch Shell.


seven-up (n.)

children's game, 1830; with capital initials, as the proprietary name of a brand of carbonated
drink, it is attested from 1928.


seven-year itch (n.)

1899, American English, some sort of skin condition (sometimes identified with poison ivy infection)
that either lasts seven years or returns every seven years. Jocular use for urge to stray from
marital fidelity is attested from 1952, as the title of the Broadway play (made into a film, 1955)
by George Axelrod (1922-2003), in which the lead male character reads an article describing the high
number of men have extra-marital affairs after seven years of marriage.


sevenfold (adj.)

Old English seofonfeald; see seven + -fold.


seventeen

late Old English seofontyne; see seven + -teen. Replacing Old English form seofon-teo&eth;a. Compare
German siebzehn, a contraction of Middle High German siben-zehen.


seventeenth (adj.)

c.1300, seventen&#254;e, from seventeen + -th (1); replacing forms based on Old English
seofonteo&#254;a.


seventh

c.1300, from seven + -th (1); earlier sevende, seveth, from Old English seofunda (Anglian,
Northumbrian), seofo&#254;a (West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *sebundon (cognates: Old Norse
sjaundi, Old Saxon sivondo, Old High German sibunto, German siebente, siebte). The music note sense
is from 1590s.


seventies (n.)

1859 as the years of someone's life between 70 and 79; from 1837 as the eighth decade of years in a
given century. See seventy.


seventieth (adj.)

late 13c., from seventy + -th (1).


seventy

Old English (hund)seofontig, from seofon (see seven) + -tig (see -ty (1)). Similar formation in Old
Frisian soventich, Middle Dutch seventich, Old Norse sjau tiger.


sever (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French severer, Old French sevrer to separate (12c., later in French restricted
to to wean, i.e. to separare from the mother), from Vulgar Latin *seperare, from Latin separare to
separate (see separate (v.)).


several (adj.)

early 15c., existing apart, from Anglo-French several, from Middle French seperalis separate, from
Medieval Latin separalis, from Latin separ separate, different, back-formation from separare to
separate (see separate (v.)). Meaning various, diverse, different is attested from c.1500; that of
more than one is from 1530s, originally in legal use.    Here we are all, by day; by night we're
hurled  By dreams, each one into a several world  [Herrick, 1648]  Related: Severalty. Jocular
ordinal form severalth attested from 1902 in American English dialect (see -th (2)).


severally (adv.)

separately, late 14c., from several + -ly (2).


severance (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French, from Old French sevrance separation, parting, from sevrer (see
sever). Meaning discharge from employment contract is attested from 1941. Severance pay attested by
1942.


severe (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French severe (12c., Modern French s&eacute;v&egrave;re) or directly from Latin
severus serious, grave, strict, austere (see severity). From 1660s with reference to styles or
tastes; from 1725 of diseases.


severely (adv.)

1540s, from severe + -ly (2). Colloquial sense of excessively attested by 1854.


severity (n.)

late 15c., austerity or strictness of life, from Middle French severite, from Latin severitas
seriousness, strictness, sternness, from severus stern, strict, serious, of uncertain origin.
Possibly from PIE root *segh- to have, hold (see scheme (n.)), or possibly from *se vero without
kindness, from se without (see secret) + *vero kindness, neuter ablative of verus true (see very).
Meaning strictness in dealing with others is recorded from 1520s.


Seville

inland port city in Spain, Spanish Sevilla, ultimately from Phoenician, from sefela plain, valley.


sew (v.)

Old English siwian to stitch, sew, mend, patch, knit together, earlier siowian, from Proto-Germanic
*siwjanan (cognates: Old Norse syja, Swedish sy, Danish sye, Old Frisian sia, Old High German
siuwan, Gothic siujan to sew), from PIE root *syu- to bind, sew (cognates: Sanskrit sivyati sews,
sutram thread, string; Greek hymen thin skin, membrane, hymnos song; Latin suere to sew, sew
together; Old Church Slavonic &#353;ijo to sew, &#353;ivu seam; Lettish siuviu, siuti to sew,
siuvikis tailor; Russian &#353;vec tailor). Related: Sewed; sewing. To sew (something) up bring it
to a conclusion is a figurative use attested by 1904.


sewage (n.)

1818, from sew (v.) to drain, draw off water (late 15c., from sewer (n.1)) + -age.


sewer (n.1)

c.1400, conduit, from Anglo-French sewere, Old North French sewiere sluice from a pond (13c.),
literally something that makes water flow, from shortened form of Gallo-Roman *exaquaria (source of
Middle French esseveur), from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + aquaria, fem. of aquarius pertaining to
water, from aqua water (see aqua-).    Specifically of underground channels for wastewater from
c.1600; figurative use of this is from 1640s.


sewer (n.2)

one who sews, late 14c., agent noun from sew (v.).


sewerage (n.)

1832, from sewer (n.1) + -age.


sewing (n.)

late 13c., action of sewing; c.1400, sewn work, verbal noun from sew (v.). Sewing machine is
attested from 1847.


sex (n.)

late 14c., males or females collectively, from Latin sexus a sex, state of being either male or
female, gender, of uncertain origin. Commonly taken with seco as division or 'half' of the race
[Tucker], which would connect it to secare to divide or cut (see section (n.)). Meaning quality of
being male or female first recorded 1520s. Meaning sexual intercourse first attested 1929 (in
writings of D.H. Lawrence); meaning genitalia is attested from 1938. Sex appeal attested by 1904.
For the raw sex appeal of the burlesque shows there is no defense, either. These shows should be
under official supervision, at the least, and boys beneath the age of eighteen forbidden, perhaps,
to attend their performance, just as we forbid the sale of liquors to minors. [Walter Prichard
Eaton, At the New Theatre and Others: The American Stage, Its Problems and Performances, Boston,
1910]   Sex drive is from 1918; sex object is 1901; sex symbol is 1871 in anthropology; the first
person to whom the term was applied seems to have been Marilyn Monroe (1959). Sex therapist is from
1974.


sex (v.)

1884, to determine the sex of, from sex (n.); to sex (something) up increase the sex appeal of is
recorded from 1942. Related: Sexed; sexing.


sexagenarian (n.)

1738, person sixty years old, from Latin sexagenarius containing sixty, from sexagenarius, from
sexageni sixty each, sixty at a time, from sexaginta sixty, from comb. form of sex (see six) +
-genaria ten times, from -ginta tens, from PIE *dkm-ta-, from *dekm- ten (see ten). As an adjective
from 1836.


sexagesimal (adj.)

pertaining to 60, 1680s, from Medieval Latin sexagesimalis, from Latin sexagesimus the sixtieth,
from sexaginta sixty.


sexiness (n.)

1922, from sexy + -ness.


sexism (n.)

1968; see sexist + -ism.


sexist (adj.)

1965, from sex (n.) on model of racist, coined by Pauline M. Leet, director of special programs at
Franklin &amp; Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, U.S., in a speech which was circulated in
mimeograph among feminists. Popularized by use in print in Caroline Bird's introduction to Born
Female (1968).


sexless (adj.)

1590s, from sex (n.) + -less. Related: Sexlessly; sexlessness.


sexology (n.)

1902, from sex (n.) + -ology. Related: Sexologist.


sexpert (n.)

sex therapist, 1924, from jocular merger of sex (n.) + expert.


sexploitation (n.)

1942, from sex (n.) + exploitation. Other similar coinages include sexpert (1924); sexcapade (1953);
sexational (1927); and sexophone in Brave New World.


sexpot (n.)

erotically willing and desirable female, 1929, from sex (n.) + pot (n.1), perhaps suggested by
fleshpot.


sext (v.)

by 2005, from contraction of sex (n.) + text (v.). Related: Sexted; sexting.


sext (n.)

early 15c., third of the lesser canonical hours, from Latin sexta (hora), fem. of sextus, ordinal of
sex (see six).


sextant (n.)

instrument for determining latitude, 1620s, from Modern Latin sextans, said to have been coined
c.1600 by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, from Latin sextans a sixth, from sex six (see six). So
called because the sextans has a graduated arc equal to a sixth part of a circle.


sextet (n.)

1841, altered (by influence of German Sextett) from sestet.


sextile

1550s (adj.), at a distance of 60 degrees; 1590s (n.); from Latin sextilis (adj.) the sixth, from
sextus sixth (ordinal number; see Sextus).


sextillion (n.)

1680s, from Latin sext-, comb. form of sex six (see six) + (m)illion. Compare billion. Related:
Sextillionth.


sexton (n.)

c.1300, sekesteyn, person in charge of the sacred objects of a church, from Old French segrestien,
from Medieval Latin sacristanus (see sacristan). Sense of custodian of a church first recorded
1580s. Fem. forms sextress, sextrice are recorded 15c., but the usual form is sextoness (early
15c.).


sextuple (adj.)

sixfold, 1620s, from Latin sextus sixth (from sex six; see six) + -plus more (see plus).


sextuplet (n.)

1852, from adjective sextuple (1620s); patterned on triplet, etc.


Sextus

masc. proper name, from Latin, properly the sixth, originally denoting a sixth child, from sextus
sixth, from sex six (see six; also see Octavian).


sexual (adj.)

1650s, of or pertaining to the fact of being male or female, from Late Latin sexualis relating to
sex, from Latin sexus (see sex (n.)). Meaning pertaining to copulation or generation is from 1766;
sexual intercourse attested by 1778; sexual orientation by 1967; sexual harassment by 1975. Sexual
revolution attested by 1962. Sexual politics is from 1970. Related: Sexually.


sexuality (n.)

1789, action or fact of being sexual; see sexual + -ity. Meaning capability of sexual feelings is
from 1879. Meaning sexual identity is by 1980.


sexualization (n.)

1872, noun of action from sexualize.


sexualize (v.)

1839, from sexual + -ize. Related: Sexualized; sexualizing.


sexy (adj.)

1905, from sex (n.) + -y (2). Originally engrossed in sex; sense of sexually attractive is 1923,
first in reference to Valentino. An earlier word in this sense was sexful (1898). Related: Sexier;
sexiest.


Seychelles

renamed 1756 in honor of French finance minister Jean Moreau de S&eacute;chelles; spelling altered
1794 by the English when they took the islands from France. Related: Seychellois.


sforzando (adj.)

with sudden energy or impulse, 1801, from Italian sforzando, gerundive of sforza to force (see
effort).


sfumato (adj.)

1847, from Italian sfumato, literally smoked, from Latin fumus smoke (see fume (n.)).


sh (interj.)

exclamation used to urge or request silence, 1847. The gesture of putting a finger to the lips to
express silence is attested from Roman times. As a transitive verb from 1887; intransitive from
1925.


sh-

sound represented in Old English by -sc- (fisc fish), which originally was pronounced -sk- but which
by late Old English had softened to -sh-. Modern English words with -sc- mostly are imports
(generally Scandinavian).    The sh sound did not exist in Old French, therefore French scribes
after the Norman conquest often represented it with -ssh- in medial and final positions, and sch- in
initial positions (schape, schamful, schaft for shape, shameful, shaft). But the spelling -sh- has
been standard since Caxton, probably as a worn-down form of Middle English -sch-.    In some East
Anglian texts from 14c.-15c., x- is used (xal, xulde for shall, should), which would have given the
language a very different look had it prevailed, but the London-based sh- ended up as the standard
form. The same Germanic sound has become, by natural evolution, modern German and Dutch sch-,
Scandinavian sk-.


Shabbat (n.)

1934, from Hebrew shabbat (see Sabbath). Earlier in English as Shabbos (1870), from Yiddish shabes.


shabbify (v.)

1866, from shabby + -ify. Related: Shabified; shabifying.


shabby (adj.)

1660s, of persons, poorly dressed, with -y (2) + shab a low fellow (1630s), literally scab (now only
dialectal in the literal sense, in reference to a disease of sheep), from Old English sceabb (the
native form of the Scandinavian word that yielded Modern English scab; also see sh-). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch schabbich, German sch&auml;big shabby.    Of clothes, furniture, etc., of
mean appearance, no longer new or fresh from 1680s; meaning inferior in quality is from 1805.
Figurative sense contemptibly mean is from 1670s. Related: Shabbily; shabbiness. Shabby-genteel run-
down but trying to keep up appearances, retaining in present shabbiness traces of former gentility,
first recorded 1754. Related: Shabaroon disreputable person, c.1700.


shack (n.)

1878, American English and Canadian English, of unknown origin, perhaps from Mexican Spanish jacal,
from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xacalli wooden hut. Or perhaps a back-formation from dialectal English
shackly shaky, rickety (1843), a derivative of shack, a dialectal variant of shake (v.). Another
theory derives shack from ramshackle.    Slang meaning house attested by 1910. In early radio
enthusiast slang, it was the word for a room or office set aside for wireless use, 1919, perhaps
from earlier U.S. Navy use (1917). As a verb, 1891 in the U.S. West in reference to men who hole up
for the winter; from 1927 as to put up for the night; phrase shack up cohabit first recorded 1935
(in Zora Neale Hurston).


shackle (n.)

Old English sceacel shackle, fetter, probably also in a general sense a link or ring of a chain,
from Proto-Germanic *skakula- (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch schakel link of a chain, ring of a net,
Old Norse sk&ouml;kull pole of a carriage), of uncertain origin. According to OED, the common notion
of something to fasten or attach makes a connection with shake unlikely. Figurative use from early
13c. Related: Shackledom marriage (1771); shackle-bone the wrist (1570s).


shackle (v.)

mid-15c., from shackle (n.). Figurative use from 1560s. Related: Shackled; shackling.


shacklebolt (n.)

bolt which passes through the eyes of a shackle, 1680s, from shackle (n.), which has been used
specifically of the bar of a padlock from mid-14c., + bolt (n.).


shad (n.)

Old English sceadd shad, important food fish in the Atlantic, possibly from Scandinavian (Norwegian
dialectal skadd small whitefish); but compare Welsh ysgadan (plural), Irish and Gaelic sgadan
herring. OED says Low German schade may be from English.    Its importance suggested by its use in
forming the common names of U.S. East Coast plants and wildlife whose active period coincides with
the running of the shad up rivers, such as shad-bird, shad-bush, shad-flower, shad-fly, shad-frog.
From the shape of the fish comes shad-bellied, 1832 in reference to persons, having little abdominal
protuberance; of coats (1842) sloping apart in front, cut away, especially in reference to the
characteristic garb of male Quakers.


shade (n.)

Middle English schade, Kentish ssed, from late Old English scead partial darkness; shelter,
protection, also partly from sceadu shade, shadow, darkness; shady place, arbor, protection from
glare or heat, both from Proto-Germanic *skadwaz (cognates: Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch scade,
Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato, German Schatten, Gothic skadus), from PIE *skot-wo-, from root
*skot- dark, shade (cognates: Greek skotos darkness, gloom, Albanian kot darkness, Old Irish scath,
Old Welsh scod, Breton squeut darkness, Gaelic sgath shade, shadow, shelter).    Figurative use in
reference to comparative obscurity is from 1640s. Meaning a ghost is from 1610s; dramatic (or mock-
dramatic) expression shades of _____ to invoke or acknowledge a memory is from 1818, from the ghost
sense. Meaning lamp cover is from 1780. Sense of window blind first recorded 1845. Meaning cover to
protect the eyes is from 1801. Meaning grade of color first recorded 1680s; that of degree or
gradiation of darkness in a color is from 1680s (compare nuance, from French nue cloud). Meaning
small amount or degree is from 1782.


shade (v.)

c.1400, to screen from light or heat, from shade (n.). From 1520s as to cast a shadow over;
figurative use in this sense from 1580s. Sense in painting and drawing is from 1797. In reference to
colors, 1819. Related: Shaded; shading.


shade-tree (n.)

1806, from shade (n.) + tree (n.).


shades (n.)

sunglasses, 1958, American English, plural of shade (n.).


shadow (n.)

Old English sceadwe, sceaduwe the effect of interception of sunlight, dark image cast by someone or
something when interposed between an object and a source of light, oblique cases (to the, from the,
of the, in the) of sceadu (see shade (n.)). Shadow is to shade (n.) as meadow is to mead (n.2).
Similar formation in Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch schaeduwe, Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato,
German schatten, Gothic skadus shadow, shade.    From mid-13c. as darkened area created by shadows,
shade. From early 13c. in sense anything unreal; mid-14c. as a ghost; late 14c. as a foreshadowing,
prefiguration. Meaning imitation, copy is from 1690s. Sense of the faintest trace is from 1580s;
that of a spy who follows is from 1859.    As a designation of members of an opposition party chosen
as counterparts of the government in power, it is recorded from 1906. Shadow of Death (c.1200)
translates Vulgate umbra mortis (Ps. xxiii:4, etc.), which itself translates Greek skia thanatou,
perhaps a mistranslation of a Hebrew word for intense darkness. In Beowulf, Gendel is a sceadugenga,
a shadow-goer, and another word for darkness is sceaduhelm. To be afraid of one's (own) shadow be
very timorous is from 1580s.


shadow (v.)

Middle English schadowen, Kentish ssedwi, from late Old English sceadwian to protect as with
covering wings (also see overshadow), from the root of shadow (n.). Similar formation in Old Saxon
skadoian, Dutch schaduwen, Old High German scatewen, German (&#252;ber)schatten. From mid-14c. as
provide shade; late 14c. as cast a shadow over (literal and figurative), from early 15c. as darken
(in illustration, etc.). Meaning to follow like a shadow is from c.1600 in an isolated instance; not
attested again until 1872. Related: Shadowed; shadowing.


shadow boxing (n.)

1906; see shadow (n.) + box (v.2). To shadow-box (v.) is attested from 1932. Shadow-fight is
attested from 1768; also see sciamachy.


shadow-box (n.)

protective display case, 1892, from shadow (n.) + box (n.1).


shadow-figure (n.)

silhouette, 1851, from shadow (n.) + figure (n.).


shadowland (n.)

also shadow-land, 1821, abode of ghosts and spirits, from shadow (n.) + land (n.). From 1923 as
indeterminate place.


shadowless (n.)

1630s, from shadow (n.) + -less.


shadowy (adj.)

late 14c., shadewy, full of shadows, also transitory, fleeting, unreal; see shadow (n.) + -y (2).
From 1797 as faintly perceptible. Related: Shadowiness. Old English had sceadwig shady.


Shadrach

name of one of the three children delivered from the fiery furnace in Dan. iii:26.


shady (adj.)

affording shade, 1570s; protected by shade, 1590s; from shade (n.) + -y (2). Meaning disreputable
(1862) probably is from earlier university slang sense of of questionable merit, unreliable (1848).
Related: Shadily; shadiness. Old English had sceadlic shady, 'shadely.'


Shafi&#039;i (n.)

member of one of the four principal schools of Sunni Muslims, 1704, from Arabic, from ash-Shafi'i,
cognomen of founder Abu Abdallah Muhammad ibn Idris (767-819). Related: Shafi'ite.


shaft (n.1)

Old English sceaft long, slender rod, staff, pole; spear-shaft; spear, from Proto-Germanic *skaftaz
(cognates: Old Norse skapt, Old Saxon skaft, Old High German scaft, German schaft, Dutch schacht,
not found in Gothic), which some connect with a Germanic passive past participle of PIE root
*(s)kep- to cut, to scrape (source of Old English scafan to shave, scrape, polish) on notion of tree
branch stripped of its bark. But compare Latin scapus shaft, stem, shank, Greek skeptron a staff
(see scepter) which appear to be cognates.    Meaning beam or ray (of light, etc.) is attested from
c.1300. Sense of an arrow is from c.1400; that of a handle from 1520s. Mechanical sense is from
1680s. Vulgar slang meaning penis first recorded 1719 on notion of columnar part (late 14c.); hence
probably shaft (v.) and the related noun sense act of unfair treatment (1959), though some early
sources insist this is from the notion of a wound.


shaft (n.2)

long, narrow passage sunk into the earth, early 15c., probably from shaft (n.1) on notion of long
and cylindrical, perhaps as a translation of cognate Low German schacht in this sense (Grimm's
suggestion, though OED is against it). Or it may represent a separate (unrecorded) development in
Old English directly from Proto-Germanic *skaftaz if the original sense is scrape, dig. The slang
sense of shaft (n.1) is punned upon in country music song She Got the Gold Mine, I Got the Shaft, a
hit for Jerry Reed in 1982.


shaft (v.)

treat cruelly and unfairly, by 1958, perhaps from shaft (n.1) with overtones of sodomy. Related:
Shafted; shafting.


shag (n.)

1590s, cloth having a velvet nap on one side, perhaps from Old English sceacga rough matted hair or
wool, from Proto-Germanic *skagjan (cognates: Old Norse skegg, Swedish sk&#228;gg beard), perhaps
related to Old High German scahho promontory, Old Norse skagi a cape, headland, with a connecting
sense of jutting out, projecting. But the word appears to be missing in Middle English. Of tobacco,
cut in fine shreds, it is recorded from 1789; of carpets, rugs, etc., from 1946.


shag (v.1)

copulate with, 1788, probably from obsolete verb shag (late 14c.) to shake, waggle, which probably
is connected to shake (v.).   And &thorn;e boot, amydde &thorn;e water, was shaggid. [Wyclif]
Compare shake it in U.S. blues slang from 1920s, ostensibly with reference to dancing. But compare
shag (v.), used from 1610s in a sense to roughen or make shaggy. Also the name of a dance popular in
U.S. 1930s and '40s. Related: Shagged; shagging.


shag (v.2)

in baseball, to go after and catch (fly balls), by 1913, of uncertain origin. Century Dictionary has
it as a secondary sense of a shag (v.) to rove about as a stroller or beggar (1851), which is
perhaps from shack (n.) disreputable fellow (1680s), short for shake-rag, an old term for a beggar.


shagbark (n.)

type of hickory, 1751, from shag (n.) + bark (n.1).


shaggy (adj.)

rough, coarse, unkempt, 1590s, from shag (n.) + -y (2). Related: Shaggily; shagginess. Earlier was
shagged, from Old English sceacgede hairy; compare Old Norse skeggja&#240;r, Danish sk&#230;gget
bearded. The shaggy-dog story as a type of joke is attested from 1944, perhaps from vaudeville.


shah (n.)

title of the king of Persia, 1560s, shaw, from Persian shah, shortened from Old Persian
x&#353;ayathiya king, from Indo-Iranian *ksayati he has power over, rules from PIE *tke- to gain
control of, gain power over (cognates: Sanskrit ksatram dominion; Greek krasthai to acquire, get,
kektesthai to possess). His wife is a shahbanu (from banu lady); his son is a shahzadah (from zadah
son).


shake (v.)

Old English sceacan move (something) quickly to and fro, brandish; move the body or a part of it
rapidly back and forth; also go, glide, hasten, flee, depart (related to sceacdom flight); of
persons or parts of the body, to tremble especially from fever, cold, fear (class VI strong verb;
past tense scoc, past participle scacen), from Proto-Germanic *skakanan (cognates: Old Norse,
Swedish skaka, Danish skage to shift, turn, veer). No certain cognates outside Germanic, but some
suggest a possible connection to Sanskrit khaj to agitate, churn, stir about, Old Church Slavonic
skoku a leap, bound, Welsh ysgogi move.    Of the earth in earthquakes, c.1300. Meaning seize and
shake (someone or something else) is from early 14c. In reference to mixing ingredients, etc., by
shaking a container from late 14c. Meaning to rid oneself of by abrupt twists is from c.1200, also
in Middle English in reference to evading responsibility, etc. Meaning weaken, impair is from late
14c., on notion of make unstable.    To shake hands dates from 1530s. Shake a (loose) leg hurry up
first recorded 1904; shake a heel (sometimes foot) was an old way to say to dance (1660s); to shake
(one's) elbow (1620s) meant to gamble at dice. Phrase more _____ than you can shake a stick at is
attested from 1818, American English. To shake (one's) head as a sign of disapproval is recorded
from c.1300.


shake (n.)

late 14c., charge, onrush, from shake (v.). Meaning a hard shock is from 1560s. From 1580s as act of
shaking; 1660s as irregular vibration. The hand-grip salutation so called by 1712. As a figure of
instantaneous action, it is recorded from 1816. Phrase fair shake honest deal is attested from 1830,
American English. The shakes nervous agitation is from 1620s. Short for milk shake from 1911.
Dismissive phrase no great shakes (1816, Byron) perhaps is from dicing.


shake-down (n.)

also shakedown, 1730, impromptu bed made upon loose straw, from verbal phrase; see shake (v.) + down
(adv.). Meaning forced contribution (1902) is from the verbal phrase in a slang sense blackmail,
extort (1872). Meaning a thorough search is from 1914; perhaps from the notion of measuring corn.
The oldest use of the verbal phrase shake down is cause to totter and fall (c.1400).


shake-up (n.)

also shakeup, reorganization, 1899, from verbal phrase, from shake (v.) + up (adv.).


shaken (adj.)

of persons, weakened and agitated by shocks, 1640s, past participle adjective from shake (v.).


shakeout (n.)

also shake-out, business upheaval, 1895, from verbal phrase; see shake (v.) + out (adv.).


shaker (n.)

mid-15c., one who or which shakes, agent noun from shake (v.). Applied from 1640s (with capital
initial) to various Christian sects whose devotional exercises often involved convulsions. The best-
known, the American-based Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing; so called from 1784;
the adjective with reference to furniture styles associated with these Shakers is recorded from
1866. Meaning container for mixing cocktails, etc. is recorded from 1868. Phrase movers and shakers
is attested from 1874.


Shakespeare

surname recorded from 1248; it means a spearman. This was a common type of English surname
(Shakelance (1275), Shakeshaft (1332)). Shake (v.) in the sense of to brandish or flourish (a
weapon) is attested from late Old English  Heo sc&aelig;ken on heore honden speren swi&eth;e
stronge.  [Laymon, Brut, c. 1205]  Compare also shake-buckler a swaggerer, a bully; shake-rag ragged
fellow, tatterdemalion. Never a name in English nomenclature so simple or so certain in origin. It
is exactly what it looks -- Shakespear [Bardsley, Dictionary of English and Welsh Surnames, 1901].
Nevertheless, speculation flourishes. The name was variously written in contemporary records, also
Shakespear, Shakespere, the last form being the one adopted by the New Shakespere Society of London
and the first edition of the OED. Related: Shakespearian (1753); Shakesperean (1796); Shakesperian
(1755).


shaking (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from shake (v.).


shako (n.)

cylindrical soldier's hat with plume, 1815, from Hungarian cs&aacute;k&oacute;, short for
cs&aacute;k&oacute;s s&uuml;veg peaked cap, from adjectival form of cs&aacute;ko peak, projecting
point of a cow's horn, which some European etymologists derive from German zacken point, spike, but
which Hungarian sources regard as of unknown origin.


Shakti (n.)

from Sanskrit saknoti is able, is strong, from PIE root *kak- to enable, help.


shaky (adj.)

1840, of handwriting; 1841 of persons, horses, and credit; 1850 of structures; from shake (v.) + -y
(2). General sense of uncertain, of questionable integrity is from 1834. Earliest of trees or logs,
split, having fissures (1808). Related: Shakily; shakiness.


shale (n.)

1747, possibly a specialized use of Middle English schale shell, husk, pod (late 14c.), also fish
scale, from Old English scealu (see shell (n.)) in its base sense of thing that divides or separate,
in reference to the way the rock breaks apart in layers. Compare Middle English sheel to shell, to
take off the outer husk (late 15c.). Geological use also possibly influenced by German Schalstein
laminated limestone, and Schalgebirge layer of stone in stratified rock.


shall (v.)

Old English sceal, Northumbrian scule I owe/he owes, will have to, ought to, must (infinitive
sculan, past tense sceolde), a common Germanic preterite-present verb (along with can, may, will),
from Proto-Germanic *skal- (cognates: Old Saxon sculan, Old Frisian skil, Old Norse and Swedish
skola, Middle Dutch sullen, Old High German solan, German sollen, Gothic skulan to owe, be under
obligation; related via past tense form to Old English scyld guilt, German Schuld guilt, debt; also
Old Norse Skuld, name of one of the Norns), from PIE root *skel- (2) to be under an obligation.
Ground sense of the Germanic word probably is I owe, hence I ought. The sense shifted in Middle
English from a notion of obligation to include futurity. Its past tense form has become should
(q.v.). Cognates outside Germanic are Lithuanian skeleti to be guilty, skilti to get into debt; Old
Prussian skallisnan duty, skellants guilty.


shallop (n.)

kind of light boat, 1570s, from French chaloupe, from Dutch sloep sloop (see sloop). Compare Spanish
chalupa, Italian scialuppa.


shallot (n.)

small onion, 1660s, shortened from eschalot, from French &eacute;chalote, from Middle French
eschalotte, from Old French eschaloigne, from Vulgar Latin *escalonia (see scallion).


shallow (adj.)

c.1400, schalowe not deep, probably from or related to Old English sceald (see shoal (n.)). Of
breathing, attested from 1875; of thought or feeling, superficial, first recorded 1580s. The noun,
usually shallows, is first recorded 1570s, from the adjective.


shalom

Jewish word of greeting, Hebrew, literally peace, properly completeness, soundness, welfare, from
stem of shalam was intact, was complete, was in good health. Related to Arabic salima was safe,
aslama surrendered, submitted.


sham (n.)

1670s, a trick, a hoax, a fraud, also as a verb and an adjective, of uncertain origin; the words
burst into use in 1677. Perhaps from sham, a northern dialectal variant of shame (n.); a derivation
OED finds not impossible. Sense of something meant to be mistaken for something else is from 1728.
The meaning false front in pillow-sham (1721) is from the notion of counterfeit. Related: Shammed;
shamming; shammer. Shamateur amateur sportsman who acts like a professional is from 1896.


shaman (n.)

1690s, priest of the Ural-Altaic peoples, probably via German Schamane, from Russian sha'man, from
Tungus saman, which is perhaps from Chinese sha men Buddhist monk, from Prakrit samaya-, from
Sanskrit sramana-s Buddhist ascetic [OED]. Related: Shamanic.


shamanism (n.)

1780, from shaman + -ism. Related: Shamanistic.


shamble (v.)

to walk with a shuffling gait, walk awkwardly and unsteadily, 1680s, from an adjective meaning
ungainly, awkward (c.1600), from shamble (n.) table, bench (see shambles), perhaps on the notion of
the splayed legs of bench, or the way a worker sits astride it. Compare French bancal bow-legged,
wobbly (of furniture), properly bench-legged, from banc bench. The noun meaning a shambling gait is
from 1828. Related: Shambled; shambling.


shambles (n.)

early 15c., meat or fish market, from schamil table, stall for vending (c.1300), from Old English
scamol, scomul stool, footstool (also figurative); bench, table for vending, an early Proto-Germanic
borrowing (Old Saxon skamel stool, Middle Dutch schamel, Old High German scamel, German schemel,
Danish skammel footstool) from Latin scamillus low stool, a little bench, ultimately a diminutive of
scamnum stool, bench, from PIE root *skabh- to prop up, support. In English, sense evolved from
place where meat is sold to slaughterhouse (1540s), then figuratively place of butchery (1590s), and
generally confusion, mess (1901, usually in plural).


shambolic (adj.)

1961, apparently from shamble in the sense disorder (see shambles), perhaps on model of symbolic.


shame (n.)

Old English scamu, sceomu feeling of guilt or disgrace; confusion caused by shame; disgrace,
dishonor, insult, loss of esteem or reputation; shameful circumstance, what brings disgrace;
modesty; private parts, from Proto-Germanic *skamo (cognates: Old Saxon skama, Old Norse sk&ouml;mm,
Swedish skam, Old Frisian scome, Dutch schaamte, Old High German scama, German Scham). The best
guess is that this is from PIE *skem-, from *kem- to cover (covering oneself being a common
expression of shame).    Until modern times English had a productive duplicate form in shand. An Old
Norse word for it was kinnro&eth;i, literally cheek-redness, hence, blush of shame. Greek
distinguished shame in the bad sense of disgrace, dishonor (aiskhyne) from shame in the good sense
of modesty, bashfulness (aidos). To put (someone or something) to shame is mid-13c. Shame culture
attested by 1947.


shame (v.)

Old English scamian be ashamed, blush, feel shame; cause shame, from the root of shame (n.). Compare
Old Saxon scamian, Dutch schamen, Old High German scamen, Danish skamme, Gothic skaman, German
sch&auml;men sich. Related: Shamed; shaming.


shamefaced (adj.)

modest, bashful, 1550s, folk etymology alteration of shamefast, from Old English scamf&aelig;st
bashful, literally restrained by shame, or else firm in modesty, from shame (n.) + -f&aelig;st,
adjectival suffix (see fast (adj.)). Related: Shamefacedly; shamefacedness.   <b>shamefaced,
-fast</b>. It is true that the second is the original form, that -faced is due to a mistake, &amp;
that the notion attached to the word is necessarily affected in some slight degree by the change.
But those who, in the flush of this discovery, would revert to -fast in ordinary use are rightly
rewarded with the name of pedants .... [Fowler]


shameful (adj.)

Old English scamful modest; see shame (n.) + -ful. Meaning disgraceful, causing shame is from
c.1300. Related: Shamefully; shamefulness. Middle English shamely (adv.) shamefully for some reason
has fallen from use. Old English scamlic (adj.) shameful, disgraceful, but this also could mean
modest.


shameless (adj.)

Old English scamleas shameless, impudent, immodest; see shame (n.) + -less. Related: Shamelessly;
shamelessness. Similar formation in Old Norse skammlauss, Dutch schaamteloos, Old High German
scamalos, German schamlos.


shammy (n.)

1650s, phonetic spelling of chamois. Other bungled spellings include shambo (1610s), shamois,
shamoys, shammies. Compare shay from chaise; shappo (1700) for chapeau; shapperoon (1620s) for
chaperon.


shampoo (v.)

1762, to massage, from Anglo-Indian shampoo, from Hindi champo, imperative of champna to press,
knead the muscles, perhaps from Sanskrit capayati pounds, kneads. Meaning wash the hair first
recorded 1860; extended 1954 to carpets, upholstery, etc. Related: Shampooed; shampooing.


shampoo (n.)

soap for shampooing, 1866, from shampoo (v.).


shamrock (n.)

1570s, from Irish seamrog, diminutive of seamar clover. Compare Gaelic seamrag trefoil.


shamus (n.)

police officer, detective, 1920, apparently first in The Shamus, a detective story published that
year by Harry J. Loose (1880-1943), a Chicago police detective and crime writer; the book was
marketed as a true tale of thiefdom and an expose of the real system in crime. The word is said to
be probably from Yiddish shames, literally sexton of a synagogue (a potent personage only next in
influence to the President [Israel Zangwill]), from Hebrew shamash servant; influenced by Celtic
Seamus James, as a typical name for an Irish cop.


shan&#039;t

by 1660s, colloquial [OED] contraction of shall not.


shanachie (n.)

skilled teller of tales and legends, from Old Irish sen old, from PIE root *sen- (see senile).


shandy (n.)

mix of beer and fizzy lemonade, 1888, shortening of shandygaff (1853), of obscure origin.


Shane

masc. proper name, pronunciation-based variant of Sean.


shanghai (v.)

to drug a man unconscious and ship him as a sailor, 1854, American English, from the practice of
kidnapping to fill the crews of ships making extended voyages, such as to the Chinese seaport of
Shanghai.


Shanghai

Chinese seaport, literally by the sea, from Shang on, above + hai sea. In 19c., a long-legged breed
of hens, supposed to have come from there; hence U.S. slang senses relating to long, tall persons or
things.


Shangri La (n.)

imaginary earthly paradise, 1938, from Shangri La, name of Tibetan utopia in James Hilton's novel
Lost Horizon (1933, film version 1937). In Tibetan, la means mountain pass.


shank (v.)

1927, in golf, to strike (the ball) with the heel of the club, from shank (n.). Related: Shanked;
shanking. Earlier as to take to one's legs (1774, Scottish); to send off without ceremony (1816).


shank (n.)

Old English sceanca leg, shank, shinbone, specifically, the part of the leg from the knee to the
ankle, from Proto-Germanic *skankon- (cognates: Middle Low German schenke, German schenkel shank,
leg), perhaps literally that which bends, from PIE root *skeng- crooked (cognates: Old Norse skakkr
wry, distorted, Greek skazein to limp). Shank's mare one's own legs as a means of transportation is
attested from 1774 (shanks-naig).


Shannon

river in Ireland, the name is something like old man river, from a Proto-Celtic word related to
Irish sean old (see senile).


shantung (n.)

type of coarse silk, 1882, from Shantung province, in China, where the fabric was made. The place
name is east of the mountain, from shan (mountain) + dong (east). The mountain in question is Tan
Shan. West of it is Shansi, from xi west.


shanty (n.1)

rough cabin, 1820, from Canadian French chantier lumberjack's headquarters, in French, timberyard,
dock, from Old French chantier gantry, from Latin cantherius rafter, frame (see gantry). Shanty
Irish in reference to the Irish underclass in the U.S., is from 1928 (title of a book by Jim Tully).


shanty (n.2)

sea song, 1867, alternative spelling of chanty (n.).


shantytown (n.)

also shanty town, 1836, from shanty (n.1) + town.


shape (v.)

Old English scapan, past participle of scieppan to create, form, destine (past tense scop), from
Proto-Germanic *skapjanan create, ordain (cognates: Old Norse skapa, Danish skabe, Old Saxon scapan,
Old Frisian skeppa, Middle Dutch schappen do, treat, Old High German scaffan, German schaffen shape,
create, produce), from PIE root *(s)kep- a base forming words meaning to cut, scrape, hack (see
scabies), which acquired broad technical senses and in Germanic a specific sense of to create.
Old English scieppan survived into Middle English as shippen, but shape emerged as a regular verb
(with past tense shaped) by 1500s. The old past participle form shapen survives in misshapen. Middle
English shepster (late 14c.) dressmaker, female cutter-out, is literally shape-ster, from Old
English scieppan.    Meaning to form in the mind is from late 14c. Phrase Shape up (v.) is literally
to give form to by stiff or solid material; attested from 1865 as progress; from 1938 as reform;
shape up or ship out is attested from 1956, originally U.S. military slang, with the sense being do
right or get shipped up to active duty.


shape (n.)

Old English sceap, gesceap form; created being, creature; creation; condition; sex, genitalia, from
root of shape (v.)). Meaning contours of the body is attested from late 14c. Meaning condition,
state is first recorded 1865, American English. In Middle English, the word in plural also had a
sense of a woman's private parts. Shape-shifter attested from 1820. Out of shape not in proper shape
is from 1690s. Shapesmith one who undertakes to improve the form of the body was used in 1715.


shapeless (adj.)

c.1300, from shape (n.) + -less. Related: Shapelessly; shapelessness.


shapely (adj.)

well-formed, having a regular and pleasing shape, late 14c., from shape (n.) + -ly (1). Related:
Shapeliness.


shard (n.)

also sherd, Old English sceard incision, cleft, gap; potshard, a fragment, broken piece, from Proto-
Germanic *skardas (cognates: Middle Dutch schaerde a fragment, a crack, Dutch schaard a flaw, a
fragment, German Scharte a notch, Danish skaar chink, potsherd), a past participle from the root of
Old English sceran to cut (see shear). Meaning fragment of broken earthenware developed in late Old
English. Used late 14c. as scale of a dragon. French &eacute;charde prickle, splinter is a Germanic
loan-word.


share (n.1)

portion, Old English scearu a cutting, shearing, tonsure; a part or division, related to sceran to
cut, from Proto-Germanic *skaro- (cognates: Old High German scara troop, share of forced labor,
German Schar troop, band, properly a part of an army, Old Norse sk&ouml;r rim), from PIE root
*(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    Meaning part of the capital of a joint stock company is
first attested c.1600. Share and share alike attested from 1560s. The same Old English noun in the
sense division led to an obsolete noun share fork ('division') of the body at the groin; pubic
region (late Old English and Middle English); hence share-bone pubis (early 15c.).


share (n.2)

iron blade of a plow, Old English scear, sc&aelig;r plowshare, properly that which cuts, from Proto-
Germanic *skar- (cognates: Old Frisian skere, Middle Low German schar, Old High German scar, German
Schar, Dutch ploegschaar, Middle High German pfluocschar), from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear).


share (v.)

1580s, to apportion to someone as his share; to apportion out to others; to enjoy or suffer
(something) with others, from share (n.1). Meaning to divide one's own and give part to others is
recorded from 1590s. Meaning confess one's sins openly (1932, implied in sharing) is from the
language of Moral Rearmament [OED]. Related: Shared; sharer; sharing.


sharecropper (n.)

also share-cropper, 1887, in a U.S. Southern context; from share + agent noun from crop (v.). Share-
crop system attested from 1871. As a verb, share-crop is recorded by 1867. Sharecropping attested by
1936.


shareholder (n.)

c.1830, from share (n.1) in the financial sense + agent noun from hold (v.).


shareware (n.)

by 1982, from share (v.) + ware.


sharia (n.)

Islamic religious law, 1855, from Arabic shari'ah the revealed law, from shar' revelation.


sharif (n.)

1550s, shereef, from Arabic sharif noble, glorious, from sharafa to be exalted. A descendant of
Muhammad through his daughter Fatima.


shark (n.)

1560s, of uncertain origin; apparently the word and the first specimen were brought to London by
Capt. John Hawkins's second expedition (landed 1565; see Hakluyt).  There is no proper name for it
that I knowe, but that sertayne men of Captayne Haukinses doth call it a 'sharke' [handbill
advertising an exhibition of the specimen, 1569]    The meaning dishonest person who preys on
others, though attested only from 1599 (sharker artful swindler in this sense is from 1594), may be
the original sense, later transferred to the large, voracious marine fish. If so, it is possibly
from German Schorck, a variant of Schurke scoundrel, villain, agent noun of Middle High German
sch&uuml;rgen (German sch&uuml;ren) to poke, stir.    But on another theory, the English word is
from a Mayan word, xoc, which might have meant shark. Northern Europeans seem not to have been
familiar with sharks before voyages to the tropics began. A slightly earlier name for it in English
was tiburon, via Spanish (where it is attested by 1520s), from the Carib name for the fish.    The
English word was applied (or re-applied) to voracious or predatory persons, on the image of the
fish, from 1707 (originally of pick-pockets); loan shark is attested from 1905. Sharkskin (1851) was
used for binding books, etc. As the name of a type of fabric held to resemble it, it is recorded
from 1932.    There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called by sailors; a grasping,
rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our
steering oar. [Herman Melville, Mardi]


shark (v.)

c.1600, to live by one's wits, of uncertain origin (see shark (n.)); according to OED, at least
partly a variant of shirk. Meaning obtain by sharking is from 1610s. Related: Sharked; sharking.


sharn (n.)

Old English scearn dung, muck, from Proto-Germanic *skarnom- (cognates: Old Frisian skern, Old Norse
skarn, Danish skarn), a past participle form from *sker- to cut (see shear). Compare Old English
scearnbudda dung beetle, and Scottish Sharnie a name given to the person who cleans a cow-house
[Jamieson].


Sharon

fem. proper name; from the name of the fertile coastal plain between Jaffa and Mount Carmel, from
Hebrew, short for yesharon, properly the Plain, from stem of yashar was straight, was even (compare
Hebrew mishor level land, plain). A top-10 list name for girls born in the U.S. between 1943 and
1949.


sharp (adj.)

Old English scearp having a cutting edge; pointed; intellectually acute, active, shrewd; keen (of
senses); severe; biting, bitter (of tastes), from Proto-Germanic *skarpaz, literally cutting
(cognates: Old Saxon scarp, Old Norse skarpr, Old Frisian skerp, Dutch scherp, German scharf sharp),
from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Lettish skarbs sharp, Middle Irish cerb cutting; see shear
(v.)).    The figurative meaning acute or penetrating in intellect or perception was in Old English;
hence keenly alive to one's own interests, quick to take advantage (1690s). Of words or talk,
cutting, sarcastic, from early 13c. Meaning distinct in contour is from 1670s. The adverbial meaning
abruptly is from 1836; that of promptly is first attested 1840. The musical meaning half step above
(a given tone) is from 1570s. Meaning stylish is from 1944, hepster slang, from earlier general
slang sense of excellent (1940). Phrase sharp as a tack first recorded 1912 (sharp as a needle has
been around since Old English). Sharp-shinned attested from 1704 of persons, 1813 of hawks.


sharp (n.)

a cheat at games, 1797, short for sharper (1680s) in this sense. Meaning expert, connoisseur is
attested from 1840, and likely is from sharp (adj.). Music sense is from 1570s. The noun was used
14c. as a sharp weapon, edge of a sword.


sharpen (v.)

1520s, bring to an edge or point, from sharp (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Sharpened; sharpening. Old
English verb scearpian meant to score, scarify; also compare scearpung scarifying. To sharpen
(one's) pencil prepare to get to work is from 1957, American English.


sharpener (n.)

1630s, agent noun from sharpen.


sharper (n.)

1560s, one who makes sharp, agent noun from obsolete verb sharp to make sharp (see sharp (adj.)).
Meaning swindler is from 1680s, probably a variant of sharker (see shark (n.)). Shortened form
sharpie is from 1942, also probably involving the sharply dressed sense of the adjective.


sharply (adv.)

Old English scearplice acutely, keenly; painfully, severely; attentively, quickly; see sharp (adj.)
+ -ly (2). Old English also had adverbial form scearpe sharply.


sharpness (n.)

Old English scearpnis; see sharp (adj.) + -ness.


Sharps (n.)

type of breech-loading single-shot rifle, 1850, from J. Christian Sharps (1811-1874), U.S. gunsmith.


sharpshooter (n.)

also sharp-shooter, 1800; see sharp (adj.) + shoot (v.). A translation of German Scharfsch&uuml;tze,
from scharf (adj.) sharp + sch&uuml;tze shooter, from schie&#223;en to shoot. Related:
Sharpshooting.


Shasta

mountain in California, named for local native tribe, for whose name Bright offers no etymology.


shatter (v.)

early 14c., transitive, probably a variant of Middle English scateren (see scatter (v.)). Compare
Old Dutch schetteren Low German schateren. Formations such as scatter-brained had parallel forms in
shatter-brained, etc. Intransitive sense from 1560s. Related: Shattered; shattering. Carlyle (1841)
used shatterment. Shatters fragments is from 1630s.


shattering (adj.)

1560s, present participle adjective from shatter (v.). Related: Shatteringly.


shave (v.)

Old English sceafan (strong verb, past tense scof, past participle scafen), to scrape, shave,
polish, from Proto-Germanic *skaban (cognates: Old Norse skafa, Middle Dutch scaven, German schaben,
Gothic skaban scratch, shave, scrape), from PIE *skabh-, collateral form of root *(s)kep- to cut, to
scrape, to hack (see scabies). Related: Shaved; shaving. Original strong verb status is preserved in
past tense form shaven. Specifically in reference to cutting the hair close from mid-13c. Figurative
sense of to strip (someone) of money or possessions is attested from late 14c.


shave (n.)

c.1600, something shaved off; from shave (v.); Old English sceafa meant tool for shaving. Meaning
operation of shaving is from 1838. Meaning a grazing touch is recorded from 1834. Phrase a close
shave is from 1856, on notion of a slight, grazing touch.


shaveling (n.)

contemptuous term for a friar, literally shaven person, 1520s, from shave + -ling. Very common in
16th and 17th c. [OED]. Also as an adjective (1570s).


shaver (n.)

one who shaves, early 15c., agent noun from shave (v.); sense of fellow, chap is slang from 1590s.
Meaning shaving tool is from 1550s. Mad shaver (1610s) was 17c. slang for a swashbuckler, roisterer.


Shavian (adj.)

1903, in the style or manner of George Bernard Shaw (1856-1950), from Latinized form of his name. An
earlier form was Shawian (1894).


shaving (n.)

act of removing hair with a razor, also thin slice taken off, late 14c., verbal noun from shave
(v.).


shavuot (n.)

1892, from Hebrew &#353;abuot, plural of &#353;abua week.


shaw (n.)

strip of wood forming the border of a field, 1570s, from Old English sceaga copse, cognate with
North Frisian skage farthest edge of cultivated land, Old Norse skage promontory, and perhaps with
Old English sceaga rough matted hair (see shag (n.)). The Old English word also is the source of the
surname Shaw (attested from late 12c.) and its related forms.


shawl (n.)

1660s, originally of a type of scarf worn in Asia, from Urdu and other Indian languages, from
Persian shal, sometimes said to be named for Shaliat, town in India where it was first manufactured
[Klein]. French ch&acirc;le, Spanish chal, Italian scialle, German Shawl (from English), Russian
shal all are ultimately from the same source. As the name of an article of clothing worn by Western
women, it is recorded from 1767.


shawm (n.)

medieval oboe-like instrument, mid-14c., schalmeis (plural), also schallemele (late 14c.), from Old
French chalemie, chalemel, from Late Latin calamellus, literally a small reed, diminutive of Latin
calamus reed, from Greek kalamos, from PIE *kole-mo- grass, reed (cognates: Old English healm straw,
Latin culmus stalk). Mistaken as a plural and trimmed of its -s ending from mid-15c. Related:
Shawmist.


Shawnee

Algonquian people, probably originally from what is now southern Ohio, 1670s, from Munsee sawanow,
from Shawnee /&#353;a:wanwa/, the people's self-designation, literally person of the south.


shay (n.)

1717, back-formation from chaise (q.v.), wrangled into English and mistaken for a plural.


shazam

invented word from Captain Marvel comics, 1940.


she (pron.)

mid-12c., probably evolving from Old English seo, sio (accusative sie), fem. of demonstrative
pronoun (masc. se) the, from PIE root *so- this, that (see the). The Old English word for she was
heo, hio, however by 13c. the pronunciation of this had converged by phonetic evolution with he he,
which apparently led to the fem. demonstrative pronoun being used in place of the pronoun (compare
similar development in Dutch zij, German sie, Greek he, etc.). The original h- survives in her. A
relic of the Old English pronoun is in Manchester-area dialectal oo she. As a noun meaning a female,
she is attested from 1530s.


she-devil (n.)

difficult woman, 1840, from she + devil (n.).


she-male (n.)

early 19c. U.S. colloquial, a female, a woman, from she + male.    Davy Crockett's hand would be
sure to shake if his iron was pointed within a hundred miles of a shemale. [Treasury of American
Folklore]    This became obsolete, and by 1972 it had been recoined (disparagingly) for masculine
lesbian. The sense of transsexual male seems to date from c.1984.


sheaf (n.)

Old English sceaf (plural sceafas) large bundle of corn, from Proto-Germanic *skauf- (cognates: Old
Saxon scof, Middle Dutch scoof, Dutch schoof, Old High German scoub sheaf, bundle, German Schaub
sheaf; Old Norse skauf fox's tail; Gothic skuft hair on the head, German Schopf tuft), from PIE root
*(s)keup- cluster, tuft, hair of the head. Extended to bundles of things other than grain by c.1300.
Also used in Middle English for two dozen arrows. General sense of a collection is from 1728.


shear (v.)

Old English sceran, scieran (class IV strong verb; past tense scear, past participle scoren) to
cleave, hew, cut with a sharp instrument; cut (hair); shear (sheep), from Proto-Germanic *sker- to
cut (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian skera, Dutch scheren, German scheren to shear), from PIE
*(s)ker- (1) to cut, to scrape, to hack (cognates: Sanskrit krnati hurts, wounds, kills, krntati
cuts; Hittite karsh- to cut off; Greek keirein to cut, shear; Latin curtus short; Lithuanian skiriu
to separate; Old Irish scaraim I separate; Welsh ysgar to separate, ysgyr fragment).


shear (n.)

act of clipping, 1610s, also as a unit of measure of the age of a sheep, from shear (v.). Scientific
and mechanical sense type of strain is from 1850.


shears (n.)

large scissors, Old English scearra (plural) shears, scissors, from Proto-Germanic *sker- to cut
(cognates: Middle Dutch schaer, Old High German scara, German Schere; see shear (v.)). In 17c., also
a device for raising the masts of ships (1620s). As scissors, OED labels it Scottish and dialectal.
Chalk is no shears (1640s) was noted as a Scottish proverb expressing the gap between planning and
doing.


sheath (n.)

Old English scea&eth;, sc&aelig;&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *skaithiz (cognates: Old Saxon scethia,
Old Norse skei&eth;ir (plural), Old Frisian skethe, Middle Dutch schede, Dutch schede, Old High
German skaida, German scheide a sheath, scabbard), according to OED, possibly from root *skei-
divide, split (see shed (v.)) on notion of a split stick with the sword blade inserted. Meaning
condom is recorded from 1861; sense of close-fitting dress or skirt is attested from 1904.


sheathe (v.)

c.1400, to furnish (a sword, etc.) with a sheath, from sheath; meaning to put (a sword, etc.) in a
sheath is attested from early 15c. Related: Sheathed; sheathing.


sheave (v.)

to gather up in sheaves, 1570s; see sheaf. Related: Sheaved; sheaving. Earlier verb in this sense
was simply sheaf (c.1500).


sheave (n.)

grooved wheel to receive a cord, pulley (mid-14c.), also slice of bread (late 14c.), related to
shive (n.).


shebang (n.)

1862, hut, shed, shelter, popularized among soldiers in the U.S. Civil War, but like other Civil War
slang (such as skedaddle) of uncertain origin. Perhaps an alteration of shebeen (q.v.), but shebang
in the sense tavern, a seemingly necessary transitional sense, is not attested before 1878 and
shebeen seems to have been not much used in the U.S. Bartlett's 1877 edition describes it as A
strange word that had its origin during the late civil war. It is applied alike to a room, a shop,
or a hut, a tent, a cabin; an engine house. Phrase the whole shebang first recorded 1869, but
relation to the earlier use of the word is obscure. Either or both senses also might be mangled
pronunciations of French char-&agrave;-banc, a bus-like wagon with many seats. For an older guess:
[Shebang] used even yet by students of Yale College and elsewhere to designate their rooms, or a
theatrical or other performance in a public hall, has its origin probably in a corruption of the
French cabane, a hut, familiar to the troops that came from Louisiana, and constantly used in the
Confederate camp for the simple huts, which they built with such alacrity and skill for their winter
quarters. The constant intercourse between the outposts soon made the term familiar to the Federal
army also. [Americanisms: The English of the New World,  Maximillian Schele De Vere, New York,
Charles Scribner &amp; Co., 1872.]


shebeen (n.)

cabin where unlicensed liquor is sold and drunk, 1781, chiefly in Ireland and Scotland, from Irish
seibin small mug, also bad ale, diminutive of seibe mug, bottle, liquid measure. The word immigrated
and persisted in South African and West Indian English.


shed (n.)

building for storage, 1855, earlier light, temporary shelter (late 15c., shadde), possibly a
dialectal variant of a specialized use of shade (n.). Originally of the barest sort of shelter. Or
from or influenced in sense development by Middle English schudde (shud) a shed, hut.


shed (v.)

cast off, Old English sceadan, scadan to divide, separate, part company; discriminate, decide;
scatter abroad, cast about, strong verb (past tense scead, past participle sceadan), from Proto-
Germanic *skaithan (cognates: Old Saxon skethan, Old Frisian sketha, Middle Dutch sceiden, Dutch
scheiden, Old High German sceidan, German scheiden part, separate, distinguish, Gothic skaidan
separate), from *skaith divide, split.    According to Klein's sources, this probably is related to
PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide, part, split (cognates: Sanskrit chid-, Greek skhizein,
Latin scindere to split; Lithuanian skedzu I make thin, separate, divide; Old Irish scian knife;
Welsh chwydu to break open). Related: Shedding. A shedding-tooth (1799) was a milk-tooth or baby-
tooth.     In reference to animals, to lose hair, feathers, etc. recorded from c.1500; of trees
losing leaves from 1590s; of clothes, 1858. This verb was used in Old English to gloss Late Latin
words in the sense to discriminate, to decide that literally mean to divide, separate (compare
discern). Hence also scead (n.) separation, distinction; discretion, understanding, reason;
sceadwisnes discrimination, discretion.


sheela-na-gig (n.)

1846, from Irish Sile na gcioch, literally Sheila of the breasts [OED]. According to modern
folklorists, not a Celtic survival, but originating rather in the Romanesque churches of France and
northern Spain. Their theories that it is meant to degrade the female body and discourage sexuality,
or that it is meant as an apotropaic gesture to ward off the devil, are not entirely convincing.


sheen (n.)

shining, brightness, 1602 (first attested in Hamlet iii.2), noun use of adjective sheene beautiful,
bright, from Old English scene, sciene beautiful; bright, brilliant, from Proto-Germanic *skauniz
conspicuous (cognates: Old Frisian skene, Middle Dutch scone, Dutch schoon, Old High German skoni,
German sch&ouml;n fair, beautiful; Gothic skaunja beautiful), from PIE root *skeue- to pay
attention, perceive (see caveat). Meaning film of oil on water is from 1970.    As an adjective now
only in poetic or archaic use, but in Middle English used after a woman's name, or as a noun, fair
one, beautiful woman.


sheeney (n.)

a Jew, 1816, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Russian zhid, Polish &#380;yd, Czech zid a Jew.
Now a vulgar term of abuse, but used before c.1870 by Jews and Gentiles without intent of insult.


sheep (n.)

ruminant mammal, Old English sceap, scep, from West Germanic *sk&aelig;pan (cognates: Old Saxon
scap, Old Frisian skep, Middle Low German schap, Middle Dutch scaep, Dutch schaap, Old High German
scaf, German Schaf), of unknown origin. Not found in Scandinavian (Danish has faar for sheep) or
Gothic (which uses lamb), and with no known cognates outside Germanic. The more usual Indo-European
word for the animal is represented in English by ewe.    The plural form was leveled with the
singular in Old English, but Old Northumbrian had a plural scipo. Used since Old English as a type
of timidity and figuratively of those under the guidance of God. The meaning stupid, timid person is
attested from 1540s. The image of the wolf in sheep's clothing was in Old English (from Matt.
vii:15); that of separating the sheep from the goats is from Matt. xxv:33. To count sheep in a bid
to induce sleep is recorded from 1854 but seems not to have been commonly written about until 1870s.
It might simply be a type of a tedious activity, but an account of shepherd life from Australia from
1849 [Sidney's Emigrant's Journal] describes the night-shepherd (hut-keeper) taking a count of the
sheep regularly at the end of his shift to protect against being answerable for any animals later
lost or killed.    Sheep's eyes loving looks is attested from 1520s (compare West Frisian
skiepseach, Dutch schaapsoog, German Schafsauge). A sheep-biter was a dog that worries sheep
(1540s); a mutton-monger (1590s); and a whore-monger (1610s, i.e. one who chases mutton); hence
Shakespeare's sheep-biting thieving, sneaky.


sheep-dog (n.)

1774, from sheep (n.) + dog (n.).


sheep-shank (n.)

also sheepshank, 1670s, leg of a sheep, from sheep + shank (n.). A type of something lank, slender,
or weak. Attested earlier in transferred sense of type of sailor's knot used to shorten a rope
without cutting it (1620s).


sheepish (adj.)

c.1200, resembling a sheep in some perceived characteristic, from sheep + -ish. The sense of
bashful, over-modest, awkward among strangers first is recorded 1690s. Related: Sheepishly;
sheepishness. Old English had sceaplic of a sheep, 'sheep-ly.'


sheepskin (n.)

c.1200, the skin of a sheep, from sheep + skin (n.). Meaning diploma dates from 1804; so called
because formerly made of sheepskin parchment.


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


sheer (v.)

1620s, deviate from course (of a ship), of obscure origin, perhaps from Dutch scheren to move aside,
withdraw, depart, originally to separate (see shear (v.)). Related: Sheered; shearing. As a noun
from 1660s.


sheet (n.1)

Old English sciete (West Saxon), scete (Mercian) cloth, covering, towel, shroud, from Proto-Germanic
*skautjon-, from *skauta- project (cognates: Old Norse skaut, Gothic skauts seam, hem of a garment;
Dutch schoot; German Scho&szlig; bosom, lap), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see
shoot (v.)).    Sense of piece of paper first recorded c.1500; that of any broad, flat surface (of
metal, open water, etc.) is from 1590s. Of falling rain from 1690s. Meaning a newspaper is first
recorded 1749. Sheet lightning is attested from 1794; sheet music is from 1857. Between the sheets
in bed (usually with sexual overtones) is attested from 1590s; to be white as a sheet is from 1751.
The first element in sheet-anchor (late 15c.) appears to be a different word, of unknown origin.


sheet (n.2)

rope that controls a sail, late 13c., shortened from Old English sceatline sheet-line, from sceata
lower part of sail, originally piece of cloth, from same root as sheet (n.1). Compare Old Norse
skaut, Dutch schoot, German Schote rope fastened to a sail.    This probably is the notion in phrase
three sheets to the wind drunk and disorganized, first recorded 1812 (in form three sheets in the
wind), an image of a sloop-rigged sailboat whose three sheets have slipped through the blocks are
lost to the wind, thus out of control. Apparently there was an early 19c. informal drunkenness scale
in use among sailors and involving one, two, and three sheets, three signifying the highest degree
of inebriation; there is a two sheets in the wind from 1813.    It must not be wondered at that the
poor, untutored, savage Kentuckyan got more than two thirds drunk, that is, as the sailors term it,
three sheets in the wind and the fourth shivering, before the dinner was ended. [Niles' Weekly
Register, May 2, 1812]


Sheetrock (n.)

1921, proprietary name (claiming use from 1917) of a type of plaster wall-board, U.S. Gypsum Co.,
Chicago, Ill.;   from sheet (n.1) + rock (n.).


Sheffield

manufacturing city in Yorkshire, noted for cutlery and metalwork since at least 14c. The name is
from late Old English Scafeld Open Land by the River Sheaf, an Old English river name, perhaps from
scea&#240; boundary.


sheik (n.)

head of an Arab family, also head of a Muslim religious order, 1570s, from Arabic shaykh chief,
literally old man, from base of shakha to grow old. Popularized by The Sheik, novel in Arabian
setting by E.M. Hull (1919), and the movie version, The Sheikh, 1921, starring Rudolph Valentino,
which gave it a 1920s sense of strong, romantic lover.


Sheila

fem. proper name, Irish equivalent of Celia, shortened form of Cecilia, the fem. form of Cecil. A
standard type of an Irish women's name since 1828; slang for girlfriend, young woman dates from
1839.


shekel (n.)

early 13c., sicle, via Old French and Latin, from Hebrew sheqel, from shaqal he weighed. Chief
silver coin of ancient Hebrews, also a unit of weight. Modern form in English dates from mid-16c. As
slang for money, it dates from 1871.


sheldrake (n.)

early 14c., from sheld- variegated + drake male duck. First element cognate with Middle Dutch
schillede separated, variegated, West Flemish schilde, from schillen (Dutch verschillen to make
different), from Proto-Germanic *skeli-, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut (see scale (n.1)). This
is the origin considered most likely, though English sheld by itself is a dialect word attested only
from c.1500. OED finds derivation from  shield (n.), on resemblance to the patterns on shields,
improbable.


shelf (n.)

late 14c., from Middle Low German schelf shelf, set of shelves, or from Old English cognate scylfe,
which perhaps meant shelf, ledge, floor, and scylf peak, pinnacle, from Proto-Germanic *skelf-
split, possibly from the notion of a split piece of wood (compare Old Norse skj&ouml;lf bench), from
PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).   Shelf life first recorded 1927. Phrase on
the shelf out of the way, inactive is attested from 1570s; of unmarried women with no prospects from
1839. Off the shelf ready-made is from 1936. Meaning ledge of rock is from 1809, perhaps from or
influenced by shelf (n.2). Related: Shelves.


shelf (n.2)

sandbank, 1540s, of unknown origin. Related: Shelfy abounding in sandbanks.


shell (n.)

Old English sciell, scill, Anglian scell seashell, eggshell, related to Old English scealu shell,
husk, from Proto-Germanic *skaljo piece cut off; shell; scale (cognates: West Frisian skyl peel,
rind, Middle Low German schelle pod, rind, egg shell, Gothic skalja tile), with the shared notion of
covering that splits off, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, cleave (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
skolika shell, Russian skala bark, rind; see scale (n.1)). Italian scaglia chip is from Germanic.
Sense of mere exterior is from 1650s; that of hollow framework is from 1791. Meaning structure for a
band or orchestra is attested from 1938. Military use (1640s) was first of hand grenades, in
reference to the metal case in which the gunpowder and shot were mixed; the notion is of a hollow
object filled with explosives. Hence shell shock, first recorded 1915. Shell game a swindle is from
1890, from a version of three-card monte played with a pea and walnut shells.


shell (v.)

1560s, to remove (a nut, etc.) from a shell, from shell (n.). The meaning to bombard with shells is
first attested 1856. To shell out disburse (1801) is a figurative use from the image of extracting
nuts. Related: Shelled; shelling.


shellac (n.)

1713, from shell (n.) + lac (see lacquer). Translates French laque en &eacute;cailles lac in thin
plates.


shellac (v.)

1876, from shellack (n.). The slang sense of beat soundly is 1920s, perhaps from the notion of
shellac as a finish. Shellacked drunk is from 1922 (compare plastered). Related: Shellacking.


shellfish (n.)

also shell-fish, Old English scylfiscas (plural); see shell (n.) + fish (n.).


shelta (n.)

secret language of Irish tinkers, 1876, of unknown origin. According to OED it mostly consists of
Irish or Gaelic words with inversion or arbitrary substitution of initial consonants.


shelter (n.)

1580s, structure affording protection, possibly an alteration of Middle English sheltron, sheldtrume
roof or wall formed by locked shields, from Old English scyldtruma, from scield shield (see shield
(n.)) + truma troop, related to Old English trum firm, strong (see trim).    If so, the original
notion is of a compact body of men protected by interlocking shields. OED finds this untenable and
proposed derivation from shield + -ture. Figurative sense is recorded from 1580s; meaning temporary
lodging for homeless poor is first recorded 1890 in Salvation Army jargon; sense of temporary home
for animals is from 1971. Related: Shelterless.


shelter (v.)

1580s, to screen, protect, from shelter (n.); in the income investment sense, from 1955. Meaning to
take shelter is from c.1600. Related: Sheltered; sheltering.


sheltered (adj.)

screened, protected, 1590s, past participle adjective from shelter (v.). Meaning protected from the
usual hardships of life is from 1888. Related: Shelteredness.


Sheltie (n.)

small pony, 1640s, Shetland pony, from Shelty, abbreviation of Sheltand, metathesis of Shetland. Or
the word may represent the Orkney pronunciation of Old Norse Hjalti Shetlander.


shelve (v.1)

1590s, to overhang, also to provide with shelves, probably a back-formation from shelves, plural of
shelf (n.1). Meaning put on a shelf first recorded 1650s; metaphoric sense of lay aside, dismiss is
from 1812. Related: Shelved; shelving.


shelve (v.2)

to slope gradually, 1610s, from Middle English shelven to slope, from shelfe grassy slope, a word
related to shelf (n.1). Related: Shelved; shelving.


Shema

from Hebrew shema hear!, imperative of shama to hear. First word of Deut. vi:4.


shemozzle (n.)

see schlemazel.


Shenandoah

originally a place name in Dutchess County, N.Y., from Oneida (Iroquoian) family name Skenondoah,
derived from oskenon:to deer. Later transferred to river and valley in Virginia.


shenanigan (n.)

1855, of uncertain origin. Earliest records of it are in San Francisco and Sacramento, California,
U.S. Suggestions include Spanish chanada, a shortened form of charranada trick, deceit; or, less
likely, German Schenigelei, peddler's argot for work, craft, or the related German slang verb
schin&auml;glen. Another guess centers on Irish sionnach fox.


shenanigans (n.)

see shenanigan.


shend (n.)

shame, disgrace (obsolete or dialectal), Old English scand ignominy, shame, confusion, disgrace;
scandal, disgraceful thing; wretch, impostor, infamous man; bad woman, from the source of Old
English scamu shame (see shame (n.)) + -&#254;a, with change of -m- to -n- before a dental (compare
Old Frisian skande, Dutch schande, Old High German scanda, German Schande disgrace). Also in early
Modern English as a verb, shend (Old English scendan) put to shame; blame, reproach; bring to ruin.
It was active in forming compounds, such as shendful (Old English scandful) shameful, shendship
disgrace; Old English scandhus house of ill-fame, scandlic shameful, scandlufiende loving
shamefully, scandword obscene language).


Sheol (n.)

1590s, from Hebrew, literally the underworld, Hades, of unknown origin. Used in R.V. in place of
Hell in many passages.


shepherd (n.)

Old English sceaphierde, from sceap sheep (see sheep) + hierde herder, from heord a herd (see herd
(n.)). Similar formation in Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schaphirde, Middle High German
schafhirte, German dialectal Schafhirt. Shepherds customarily were buried with a tuft of wool in
hand, to prove on Doomsday their occupation and be excused for often missing Sunday church.
Shepherd's pie is recorded from 1877.


shepherd (v.)

1790, to herd sheep, from shepherd (n.). The metaphoric sense of watch over or guide is first
recorded 1820. Related: Shepherded; shepherding.


shepherdess (n.)

late 14c., from shepherd + -ess.


Sheraton

severe style of late 18c. English furniture, 1883, from name of cabinetmaker Thomas Sheraton
(1751-1806). The family name is from a place in Durham, late Old English Scurufatun (c.1040),
probably farmstead of a man called Skurfa (an old Scandinavian personal name). The hotel chain dates
from 1937 and has no obvious direct connection.


sherbet (n.)

c.1600, zerbet, drink made from diluted fruit juice and sugar, and cooled with fresh snow when
possible, from Turkish serbet, from Persian sharbat, from Arabic sharba(t) a drink, from shariba he
drank. Formerly also sherbert. Related to syrup, and compare sorbet.


sheriff (n.)

late Old English scirgerefa representative of royal authority in a shire, from scir (see shire) +
gerefa chief, official, reeve (see reeve). As an American county official, attested from 1660s;
sheriff's sale first recorded 1798. Sheriff's tooth (late 14c.) was a common name for the annual tax
levied to pay for the sheriff's victuals during court sessions.


Sherlock

masc. proper name, literally fair-haired, from Old English scir bright + locc lock of hair. Slang
for private detective, perceptive person (the latter often ironic) is attested from 1903, from A.C.
Doyle's fictional character Sherlock Holmes (full name in this sense used from 1896; Holmes debuted
in 1887 and was popular by 1892).


Sherman

type of U.S. medium tank used in World War II, 1942, named for U.S. Civil War Gen. William T.
Sherman (1820-1891). The surname is from Old English scearra shears + mann man; hence shearer of
woolen garments.


Sherpa

1847, from Tibetan, literally dweller in an eastern country.


sherry (n.)

kind of white wine, c.1600, mistaken singular from sherris (1530s), from Spanish (vino de) Xeres
(wine from) Xeres, modern Jerez (Roman (urbs) Caesaris) in Spain, near the port of Cadiz, where the
wine was made.


shet

1837 representing U.S. colloquial pronunciation of shut.


Shetland

group of islands north of Scotland, from Old Norse Hjaltland; in reference to a type of pony, 1801;
as a breed of sheep, 1794.


shewbread (n.)

1530, Tyndale's word (Exodus xxv:30), based on or influenced by German schaubrot (in Luther),
literally show-bread, translating Latin panes propositiones, from Greek artai enopioi, from Hebrew
lechem panim, the 12 loaves placed every Sabbath before the Lord on a table beside the altar of
incense, from lechem bread + panim face, presence. Old English translations used offring-hlafas.


shewel (n.)

something hung up to keep wild animals away, mid-13c., perhaps in Old English, from the same source
as shy (adj.); a derivative of the verb which in German became scheuen to scare.


Shia (n.)

also Shiah, 1620s, a collective name for one of the two great Muslim sects, from Arabic shi'ah
partisans, followers, sect, company, faction (from sha'a to follow). This is the proper use, but it
commonly is used in English to mean a Shiite. In Arabic, shi'ah is the name of the sect, shiya'iy is
a member of the sect.    The branch of Islam that recognizes Ali, Muhammad's son-in-law, as the
lawful successor of the Prophet; the minority who believed, after the death of the Prophet, that
spiritual and political authority followed his family line, as opposed to the Sunni, who took Abu
Bakr as the political leader of the community. The Arabic name is short for Shi'at Ali the party of
Ali.


shiatsu (n.)

1967, from Japanese, literally finger-pressure.


shibboleth (n.)

late 14c., the Hebrew word shibboleth, meaning flood, stream, also ear of corn; in Judges xii:4-6.
It was the password used by the Gileadites to distinguish their own men from fleeing Ephraimites,
because Ephraimites could not pronounce the -sh- sound. Hence the figurative sense of watchword
(first recorded 1630s), which evolved by 1862 to outmoded slogan still adhered to. A similar test-
word was cicera chick pease, used by the Italians to identify the French (who could not pronounce it
correctly) during the massacre called the Sicilian Vespers (1282).


shield (n.)

Old English scield, scild shield; protector, defense, literally board, from Proto-Germanic *skelduz
(cognates: Old Norse skj&ouml;ldr, Old Saxon skild, Middle Dutch scilt, Dutch schild, German Schild,
Gothic skildus), from *skel- divide, split, separate, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut (see scale
(n.1)). Perhaps the notion is of a flat piece of wood made by splitting a log. Shield volcano (1911)
translates German Schildvulkan (1910). Plate tectonics sense is from 1906, translating Suess (1888).


shield (v.)

Old English gescildan, from the root of shield (n.). Related: Shielded; shielding. Compare German
scilden.


shift (v.)

Old English sciftan, scyftan arrange, place, order, also divide, partition; distribute, allot,
share, from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (cognates: Old Norse skipta to divide, change, separate, Old
Frisian skifta to decide, determine, test, Dutch schiften to divide, turn, German schichten to
classify, Schicht shift). This is said to be related to the source of Old English sceadan divide,
separate, (see shed (v.)).    c.1200 as to dispose; make ready; set in order, control, also
intransitive, take care of oneself. From c.1300 as to go, move, depart; move (someone or something),
transport. Sense of to alter, to change appeared mid-13c. (compare shiftless). Meaning change the
gear setting of an engine is from 1910; to shift gears in the figurative sense is from 1961.
Related: Shifted; shifting.


shift (n.1)

c.1300, a movement, a beginning, from shift (v.). This is the word in to make shift make efforts
(mid-15c.). Sense of change, alteration is from 1560s. Sense of means to an end is from 1520s; hence
an expedient. Meaning mechanism for changing gear in a motor vehicle is recorded from 1914.
Typewriter shift key is from 1893; shift-lock is from 1899.    Meaning period of working time
(originally in a mine) is attested from 1809, with older sense relay of horses (1708); perhaps with
sense influenced by a North Sea Germanic cognate word (such as North Frisian skeft division,
stratum, skaft one of successive parties of workmen). Similar double senses of division and relay of
workers exist in Swedish skift, German schicht.


shift (n.2)

body garment, underclothing, 1590s, originally used alike of men's and women's pieces, probably from
shift (n.1), which was commonly used in reference to a change of clothes. In 17c., it began to be
used as a euphemism for smock, and was itself displaced, for similar reasons of delicacy, in 19c. by
chemise.


shifter (n.)

1550s, one who shifts in any way; agent noun from shift (v.). As a mechanical contrivance, from
1869; specifically of the gear-changing mechanism in a motor-vehicle, from 1910.


shiftless (adj.)

wanting in resources or energy and ability to shift for oneself, 1580s, from shift (n.1) in the
sense resources + -less. Related: Shiftlessly; shiftlessness.


shifty (adj.)

1560s, able to manage for oneself, fertile in expedients, from shift (n.1) in secondary sense of
dodge, trick, artifice + -y (2). Meaning habitually using dishonest methods, characterized by
trickery first recorded 1837. In a sense prone to shifting, of the wind, used from 1884. Related:
Shiftily; shiftiness.


shih-tzu (n.)

also shih tzu, breed of small long-haired dog, 1921, from Chinese shizigou, from shi lion + zi son +
gou dog.


Shiism (n.)

1883, from Shia + -ism.


shiitake (n.)

1877, from Japanese, from shii, name of several types of evergreen trees, + take mushroom.


Shiite (n.)

1728, a member of the Shia sect of Islam, from Shia + -ite (1), Latin-derived suffix denoting
follower.


Shikoku

Japanese island, literally four provinces, from shi four + koku province.


shiksa (n.)

gentile girl, in Jewish culture, dismissive or disparaging, 1892, from Yiddish shikse, from Hebrew
siqsa, from sheqes a detested thing + fem. suffix -a.


shill (n.)

one who acts as a decoy for a gambler, auctioneer, etc., 1916, probably originally circus or
carnival argot, probably a shortened form of shillaber (1913) with the same meaning, origin unknown.
The verb is attested from 1914. Related: Shilled; shilling.


shillelagh (n.)

cudgel, 1772, earlier, oak wood used to make cudgels (1670s), from Shillelagh, town and barony,
famous for its oaks, in County Wicklow, Ireland. The name is literally seeds (or descendants) of
Elach, from Irish siol seed.


shilling (n.)

Old English scilling, a coin consisting of a varying number of pence (on the continent, a common
scale was 12 pennies to a shilling, 20 shillings to a pound), from Proto-Germanic *skillingoz-
(cognates: Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish, Old Frisian, Old High German skilling, Old Norse skillingr,
Dutch schelling, German Schilling, Gothic skilliggs).    Some etymologists trace this to the root
*skell- to resound, to ring, and others to the root *(s)kel- (1) to cut (perhaps via sense of shield
from resemblance or as a device on coins; see shield (n.)). The ending may represent the diminutive
suffix -ling, or Germanic -ing fractional part (compare farthing). Old Church Slavonic skulezi,
Polish szel&#261;g, Spanish escalin, French schelling, Italian scellino are loan-words from
Germanic.


shilly-shally (v.)

to vacillate, 1782, from adverbial expression to stand shilly-shally (1703), earlier shill I, shall
I (1700), a fanciful reduplication of shall I? (compare wishy-washy, dilly-dally, etc.). From 1734
as an adjective, by 1755 as a noun. Related: Shilly-shallying (1816).


Shiloh

village on the west bank of the Jordan River, perhaps from an alteration of Hebrew shalo to be
peaceful. The American Civil War battle (April 6-7, 1862) was so called for being fought around the
Shiloh church in Tennessee, which was destroyed in the battle.


shim (n.)

1723, a Kentish word of unknown origin. Originally a piece of iron fitted to a plow for scraping
soil; meaning thin slip of wood to fill up a space or raise a level is from 1860.


shim (v.)

to wedge up a surface by means of a shim, 1877, from shim (n.). Related: Shimmed; shimming.


shimmer (n.)

a tremulous light, 1821, from shimmer (v.).


shimmer (v.)

Old English scimerian to glitter, shimmer, glisten, shine, related to (perhaps a frequentative of)
scimian to shine, from Proto-Germanic *skim- (cognates: Swedish skimra, Dutch schemeren to glitter,
German schimmern), from PIE root *skai- to gleam, to shine (see shine (v.). Related: Shimmered;
shimmering.


shimmy (v.)

do a suggestive dance, 1918, perhaps via phrase shake the shimmy, which is possibly from shimmy
(n.), a U.S. dialectal form of chemise (mistaken as a plural; compare shammy) first recorded 1837.
Or perhaps the verb is related to shimmer (v.) via a notion of glistening light. Transferred sense
of vibration of a motor vehicle is from 1925. Related: Shimmied; shimmying. As a noun, the name of a
popular, fast, suggestive pre-flapper dance, by 1919.


shin (n.)

Old English scinu shin, fore part of the lower leg, from Proto-Germanic *skino thin piece (cognates:
Dutch scheen, Old High German scina, German Schienbein shin, shinbones), from PIE root *skei- to
cut, split (see shed (v.)). Shin splints is attested from 1930.


shin (v.)

to climb by using arms and legs (originally a nautical word), 1829, from shin (n.). Related:
Shinned; shinning.


Shin Bet (n.)

Israeli security service, 1964, from Modern Hebrew shin + bet, names of the initial letters of
sherut bitahon (kelali) (general) security service.


shindig (n.)

dance, party, lively gathering, 1871, probably from shindy a spree, merrymaking (1821), also a game
like hockey; perhaps from shinty, name of a Scottish game akin to hockey (1771), earlier shinny (see
shinny (n.)).


shine (v.)

Old English scinan shed light, be radiant, be resplendent, iluminate, of persons, be conspicuous
(class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen), from Proto-Germanic *skinan
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German skinan, Old Norse and Old Frisian skina, Dutch schijnen,
German scheinen, Gothic skeinan to shine, appear), from PIE root *skai- (2) to gleam, shine, flicker
(cognates: Sanskrit chaya brilliance, luster; shadow, Greek skia shade, Old Church Slavonic sinati
to flash up, shine, Albanian he shadow). Transitive meaning to black (boots) is from 1610s. Related:
Shined (in the shoe polish sense), otherwise shone; shining.


shine (n.)

1520s, brightness, from shine (v.). Meaning polish given to a pair of boots is from 1871. Derogatory
meaning black person is from 1908 (perhaps from glossiness of skin or, on another guess, from
frequent employment as shoeshines). Phrase to take a shine to fancy is American English slang from
1839, perhaps from shine up to attempt to please as a suitor. Shiner is from late 14c. as something
that shines; sense of black eye first recorded 1904.


shingle (n.1)

thin piece of wood, c.1200, scincle, from Late Latin scindula (also the source of German Schindel),
altered (by influence of Greek schidax lath or schindalmos splinter) from Latin scandula roof tile,
from scindere to cleave, split, from PIE root *sked- to split. Meaning small signboard is first
attested 1842. Sense of woman's short haircut is from 1924; the verb meaning to cut the hair so as
to give the impression of overlapping shingles is from 1857.


shingle (n.2)

loose stones on a seashore, 1510s, probably related to Norwegian singl small stones, or North
Frisian singel gravel, both said to be echoic of the sound of water running over pebbles.


shingle (v.)

cover with shingles (of houses), 1560s, from shingle (n.). Related: Shingled; shingling.


shingles (n.)

inflammatory disease of the skin, late 14c., from Medieval Latin cingulus (loan-translation of Greek
zoster girdle), variant of Latin cingulum girdle, from cingere to gird (see cinch (n.)). The
inflammation often extends around the middle of the body, like a girdle.


shinny (v.)

to climb a rope, pole, etc., 1888, from use of shins and ankles to do so; see shin (n.). Earlier
simply shin (1829). Related: Shinnied; shinnying.


shinny (n.)

also shinney, primitive form of hockey, 1670s, perhaps from Gaelic sinteag a bound, a leap. OED
suggests origin from shin ye the cry used in the game.


Shinola (n.)

brand of shoe polish, by 1904, from shine + -ola.


shinplaster (n.)

also shin-plaster, piece of paper soaked in vinegar and used to treat sore legs, from shin (n.) +
plaster (n.). In U.S. history, jocularly or as a term of abuse for devalued low-denomination paper
currency (1824).


Shinto (n.)

native religious system of Japan, 1727, from Chinese shin tao way of the gods, from shin god, gods,
spirit + tao way, path, doctrine. Related: Shintoism.


shiny (adj.)

1580s, from shine (n.) + -y (2). As a noun meaning a shiny object (also money) from 1856. Related:
Shininess.


ship (n.)

Old English scip ship, boat, from Proto-Germanic *skipam (cognates: Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Gothic skip, Danish skib, Swedish skepp, Middle Dutch scip, Dutch schip, Old High German
skif, German Schiff), Germanic noun of obscure origin [Watkins]. Others suggest perhaps originally
tree cut out or hollowed out, and derive it from PIE root *skei- to cut, split.    Now a vessel of
considerable size, adapted to navigation; the Old English word was used for small craft as well, and
definitions changed over time; in 19c., distinct from a boat in having a bowsprit and three masts,
each with a lower, top, and topgallant mast. French esquif, Italian schifo are Germanic loan-words.
Phrase ships that pass in the night is from Longfellow's poem Elizabeth in Tales of a Wayside Inn
(1863). Figurative use of nautical runs a tight ship (i.e., one that does not leak) is attested from
1965.


ship (v.)

c.1300, to send or transport (merchandise, people) by ship; to board a ship; to travel by ship,
sail, set sail, also figurative, from ship (n.). Old English scipian is attested only in the senses
take ship, embark; be furnished with a ship. Transferred to other means of conveyance (railroad,
etc.) from 1857, originally American English. Related: Shipped; shipping.


shipboard (n.)

also ship-board, side of a ship, c.1200, from ship (n.) + board (n.2).


shipmate (n.)

1748, from ship (n.) + mate (n.1).


shipment (n.)

1802, act of shipping; 1861, that which is shipped; see ship (v.) + -ment.


shipping (n.)

c.1300, a ship, from ship (n.). Meaning act of sending (freight) by a ship, etc. is from late 15c.
As ships generally or collectively from 1590s.


shipshape (adj.)

also ship-shape, properly arranged, 1640s, originally according to the fashion of a (sailing) ship,
where neatness is a priority and the rigging must be serviceable and stowed properly; from ship (n.)
+ shape (n.).


shipwreck (n.)

mid-15c., from ship (n.) + wreck (n.). Earlier it meant things cast up from a shipwreck (c.1100).
The earlier word for shipwreck in the modern sense was Middle English schipbreke, 'ship-break,' from
a North Sea Germanic word; compare West Frisian skipbrek, Middle Dutch schipbroke, German
Schiffbruch, Old English scipgebroc. Old English scipbryce meant right to claim goods from a wrecked
ship.


shipwreck (v.)

1580s, cause to wreck; c.1600, to suffer shipwreck, from shipwreck (n.). Related: Shipwrecked.


shipwright (n.)

Old English scipwyrhta; see ship (n.) + wright (n.).


shipyard (n.)

c.1700, from ship (n.) + yard (n.1).


Shiraz (n.)

wine made in the district of Shiraz, city in Persia, 1630s. As the name for a red wine made from a
type of grape grown in the Rh&ocirc;ne valley of France, it is recorded from 1908, from French
syrah, the name apparently altered in English on mistaken notion that the grape was brought to
Europe from the Middle East by Crusaders. The place name is said to be from Elamite sher good + raz
grape.


shire (n.)

Old English scir administrative office, jurisdiction, stewardship, authority, also in particular use
district, province, country, from Proto-Germanic *skizo (cognates: Old High German scira care,
official charge). Ousted since 14c. by Anglo-French county. The gentrified sense is from The Shires
(1796), used by people in other parts of England of those counties that end in -shire; sense
transferred to hunting country of the Midlands (1860).


shirk (v.)

1630s, to practice fraud or trickery, also a noun (1630s, now obsolete) a needy, disreputable
parasite [OED], perhaps from German schurke scoundrel, rogue, knave, villain (see shark (n.)). Sense
of evade one's work or duty first recorded 1785, originally in slang. Related: Shirked; shirking.


shirker (n.)

1799, agent noun from shirk.


shirr (v.)

to gather (cloth) on parallel threads, 1860 (implied in shirring), back-formation from shirred
(1847), from shirr (n.) elastic webbing, of unknown origin.


shirt (n.)

Old English scyrte skirt, tunic, from Proto-Germanic *skurtjon a short garment (cognates: Old Norse
skyrta, Swedish skjorta skirt, kirtle; Middle Dutch scorte, Dutch schort apron; Middle High German
schurz, German Schurz apron), related to Old English  scort, sceort short, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to
cut (see shear (v.)).    Formerly of the chief garment worn by both sexes, but in modern use long
only of that for men; in reference to women's tops, reintroduced 1896. Bloody shirt, exposed as a
symbol of outrage, is attested from 1580s. To give (someone) the shirt off one's back is from 1771.
To lose one's shirt suffer total financial loss is from 1935. To keep one's shirt on be patient
(1904) is from the notion of (not) stripping down for a fight.


shirt-sleeves (n.)

1560s, from shirt (n.) + sleeve (n.). Usually with the notion of without a coat.


shirt-waist (n.)

1879, from shirt (n.) + waist (n.).


shirtless (adj.)

c.1600, from shirt + -less.


shirty (adj.)

ill-tempered, 1846, slang, probably from shirt (n.) + -y (2), on notion of being disheveled in
anger.


shish kebab (n.)

1914, from Armenian shish kabab, from Turkish siskebap, from sis skewer + kebap roast meat.


shit (v.)

Old English scitan, from Proto-Germanic *skit- (cognates: North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten,
German scheissen), from PIE *skei- to cut, split, divide, separate (see shed (v.)). The notion is of
separation from the body (compare Latin excrementum, from excernere to separate, Old English scearn
dung, muck, from scieran to cut, shear; see sharn). It is thus a cousin to science and conscience.
<b>Shit is not an acronym</b>. The notion that it is a recent word might be partly because it was
taboo from c.1600 and rarely appeared in print (neither Shakespeare nor the KJV has it), and even in
vulgar publications of the late 18c. it is disguised by dashes. It drew the wrath of censors as late
as 1922 (Ulysses and The Enormous Room), scandalized magazine subscribers in 1957 (a Hemingway story
in Atlantic Monthly) and was omitted from some dictionaries as recently as 1970 (Webster's New
World).    Extensive slang usage; meaning to lie, to tease is from 1934; that of to disrespect is
from 1903. Shite, now a jocular or slightly euphemistic and chiefly British variant of the noun,
formerly a dialectal variant, reflects the vowel in the Old English verb (compare German scheissen);
the modern verb has been influenced by the noun. Shat is a humorous past tense form, not
etymological, first recorded 18c. To shit bricks be very frightened attested by 1961. The connection
between fear and involuntary defecation has generated expressions since 14c., and probably also is
behind scared shitless (1936).


shit (n.)

Old English scitte purging, diarrhea, from source of shit (v.). Sense of excrement dates from 1580s
(Old English had scytel, Middle English shitel for dung, excrement; the usual 14c. noun seems to
have been turd). Use for obnoxious person is since at least 1508; meaning misfortune, trouble is
attested from 1937. Shit-faced drunk is 1960s student slang; shit list is from 1942. Up shit creek
in trouble is from 1937 (compare salt river). To not give a shit not care is from 1922. Pessimistic
expression Same shit different day attested from 1997. Shitticism is Robert Frost's word for
scatological writing.    The expression [the shit hits the fan] is related to, and may well derive
from, an old joke. A man in a crowded bar needed to defecate but couldn't find a bathroom, so he
went upstairs and used a hole in the floor. Returning, he found everyone had gone except the
bartender, who was cowering behind the bar. When the man asked what had happened, the bartender
replied, 'Where were you when the shit hit the fan?' [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989]


shite (n.)

colloquial modern alternative spelling of shit (n.), preserving the original vowel of the Old
English verb.


shithead (n.)

by 1961, from shit (n.) + head (n.).


shitten (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from shit (v.). From 1540s in transferred sense of very
unpleasant.


shitty (adj.)

1924, from shit (n.) + -y (2). Earlier was shitten.


shiv (n.)

a razor, 1915, variant of chive, thieves' cant word for knife (1670s), of unknown origin.


shiva (n.)

see shivah or siva.


shivah (n.)

seven days of mourning in Jewish religious custom, 1892, from Hebrew shibhah seven, short for
shibh'ath yeme ha'ebhel the seven days of mourning.


shivaree (n.)

1843, earlier sherrie-varrie (1805), alteration of charivari. Century Dictionary describes it as
vulgar, southern U.S.; OED describes it as U.S. and Cornwall.


shive (n.)

early 13c., slice of bread; thin piece cut off, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *scifa,
cognate with Old Saxon sciva, Middle Dutch schive, Dutch schijf, Old High German sciba, German
Scheibe; see skive (v.1). From 1869 as thin, flat cork for a bottle.


shiver (v.2)

to break in or into many small pieces, c.1200, from the source of shiver (n.). Chiefly in phrase
shiver me timbers (1835), a mock oath attributed in comic fiction to sailors [OED]. My timbers! as a
nautical oath (probably euphemistic) is attested from 1789 (see timber (n.)). Related: Shivered;
shivering.


shiver (v.1)

shake, c.1400, alteration of chiveren (c.1200), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old English ceafl
jaw, on notion of chattering teeth. Spelling change of ch- to sh- is probably from influence of
shake. Related: Shivered; shivering.


shiver (n.1)

small piece, splinter, fragment, chip, c.1200, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English word, related
to Middle Low German schever schiver splinter, Old High German scivero, from Proto-Germanic *skif-
split (cognates: Old High German skivaro splinter, German Schiefer splinter, slate), from PIE *skei-
to cut, split (see shed (v.)). Commonly in phrases to break to shivers break into bits (mid-15c.).
Also, shiver is still dialectal for a splinter in Norfolk and Lincolnshire.


shiver (n.2)

a tremulous, quivering motion, 1727, from shiver (v.1). The shivers in reference to fever chills is
from 1861.


shivery (adj.)

characterized by shaking, 1747, from shiver (v.1) + -y (2).


shmoo (n.)

(plural shmoon), comic strip creature, 1948; see schmuck. It was a U.S. fad for a couple of years
after its debut.


shoal (n.1)

place of shallow water, c.1300, from Old English schealde (adj.), from sceald shallow, from Proto-
Germanic *skala- (cognates: Swedish sk&auml;ll thin; Low German schol, Frisian skol not deep), of
uncertain origin. The terminal -d was dropped 16c.


shoal (n.2)

large number (especially of fish), 1570s, apparently identical with Old English scolu band, troop,
crowd of fish (see school (n.2)); but perhaps rather a 16c. adoption of cognate Middle Dutch schole.


shoal (v.)

assemble in a multitude, c.1600, from shoal (n.2). Related: Shoaled; shoaling.


shoat (n.)

also shote, a young weaned pig, early 15c., perhaps from a Low German word (compare West Flemish
schote pig under 1 year old), of unknown origin.


shock (n.1)

1560s, violent encounter of armed forces or a pair of warriors, a military term, from Middle French
choc violent attack, from Old French choquer strike against, probably from Frankish, from a Proto-
Germanic imitative base (compare Middle Dutch schokken to push, jolt, Old High German scoc jolt,
swing).    Meaning a sudden blow is from 1610s; meaning a sudden and disturbing impression on the
mind is from 1705. Sense of feeling of being (mentally) shocked is from 1876. Medical sense is
attested from 1804 (it also once meant seizure, stroke, 1794). Shock-absorber is attested from 1906
(short form shocks attested by 1961); shock wave is from 1907. Shock troops (1917) translates German
sto&szlig;truppen and preserves the word's original military sense. Shock therapy is from 1917;
shock treatment from 1938.


shock (n.2)

bundle of grain, early 14c., from Middle Low German schok shock of corn, originally group of sixty,
from Proto-Germanic *skukka- (cognates: Old Saxon skok, Dutch schok sixty pieces; shock of corn;
German schock sixty, Hocke heap of sheaves). In 16c.-17c. English the word sometimes meant 60-piece
lot, from trade with the Dutch.


shock (n.3)

thick mass of hair, 1819, from earlier shock (adj.) having thick hair (1680s), and a noun sense of
lap dog having long, shaggy hair (1630s), from shough (1590s), the name for this type of dog, which
was said to have been brought originally from Iceland; the word is perhaps from the source of shock
(n.2), or from an Old Norse variant of shag (n.). Shock-headed Peter was used in 19c. translations
for German Struwwelpeter.


shock (v.1)

to come into violent contact, strike against suddenly and violently, 1570s, now archaic or obsolete,
from shock (n.1). Meaning to give (something) an electric shock is from 1746; sense of to offend,
displease is first recorded 1690s.


shock (v.2)

arrange (grain) in a shock, mid-15c., from shock (n.2). Related: Shocked; shocking.


shocked (adj.)

1640s, shaken violently; 1840, scandalized, past participle adjective from shock (v.1).


shocker (n.)

something that shocks or excites, 1824, agent noun from shock (v.).


shocking (adj.)

1690s, offensive, present participle adjective from shock (v.1). From 1704 as causing a jolt of
indignation, horror, etc.; from 1798 as so bad as to be shocking. Related: Shockingly. Shocking pink
introduced February 1937 by Italian-born fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli.


shod (adj.)

wearing shoes, late 14c., from Middle English past participle of shoe (v.), surviving chiefly in
compounds, such as roughshod, slipshod, etc.


shoddy (adj.)

1862, having a delusive appearance of high quality, a Northern word from the American Civil War in
reference to the quality of government supplies for the armies, from earlier noun meaning rag-wool,
wool made of woolen waste and old rags (1832), perhaps a Yorkshire provincial word, of uncertain
origin.    Originally used for padding, English manufacturers began making coarse wearing clothes
from it, and when new it looked like broad-cloth but the gloss quickly wore off, giving the stuff a
bad reputation as a cheat. The 1860 U.S. census of manufactures notes import of more than 6 million
pounds of it, which was much used in the manufacture of army and navy cloths and blankets in the
United States according to an 1865 government report.    The Days of Shoddy, as the reader will
readily anticipate, are the opening months of the present war, at which time the opprobrious name
first came into general use as a designation for swindling and humbug of every character; and
nothing more need be said to indicate the scope of this novel. [Henry Morford, The Days of Shoddy: A
Novel of the Great Rebellion in 1861, Philadelphia, 1863]    Related: Shoddily; shoddiness.


shoe (n.)

Old English scoh shoe, from Proto-Germanic *skokhaz (cognates: Old Norse skor, Danish and Swedish
sko, Old Frisian skoch, Old Saxon skoh, Middle Dutch scoe, Dutch schoen, Old High German scuoh,
German Schuh, Gothic skoh). No known cognates outside Germanic, unless it somehow is connected with
PIE root *skeu- cover (cognates: second element in Latin ob-scurus).    Old plural form shoon lasted
until 16c. Meaning metal plate to protect a horse's hoof is attested from late 14c. Distinction
between shoe and boot (n.) is attested from c.1400. To stand in someone's shoes see things from his
or her point of view is attested from 1767. Old shoe as a type of something worthless is attested
from late 14c.    Shoes tied to the fender of a newlywed couple's car preserves the old custom
(mentioned from 1540s) of throwing an old shoe at or after someone to wish them luck. Perhaps the
association is with dirtiness, on the muck is luck theory.


shoe (v.)

Old English scogan to shoe, from the root of shoe (n.). In reference to horses from c.1200. Related:
Shoed; shoeing.


shoe-shine (adj.)

1911, from shoe (n.) + shine (n.). One who shines shoes for money was a shoeblacker (1755).


shoe-string (n.)

1610s, from shoe (n.) + string (n.). As figurative for a small amount it is recorded from 1882; as a
type of necktie, from 1903; as a style of cooked potatoes from 1906.


shoebox (n.)

1860, from shoe (n.) + box (n.). In reference to a type of building from 1968.


shoehorn (v.)

in the figurative sense of to put or thrust (something somewhere) by means of a 'tool,'  1859, from
shoehorn (n.). Earlier it meant to cuckold (mid-17c.), with a play on horn.


shoehorn (n.)

1580s, from shoe (n.) + horn (n.); earlier shoeing-horn (mid-15c.).


shoelace (n.)

1640s, from shoe (n.) + lace (n.).


shoeless (adj.)

1620s, from shoe (n.) + -less. Related: Shoelessly; shoelessness.


shoemaker (n.)

late 14c. (mid-14c. as a surname), from shoe (n.) + maker.


shofar (n.)

ram's horn blown on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, 1833, from Hebrew shophar ram's horn, related to
Arabic sawafiru ram's horns, Akkadian shapparu wild goat.


shogun (n.)

1610s, hereditary commander of a Japanese army, from Japanese (sei-i-tai) shogun (barbarian-
subduing) chief (late 12c.), sound-substitution for Chinese chiang chiin, literally lead army.


shogunate (n.)

1871, a hybrid, from Japanese shogun + Latinate suffix -ate (1).


shoo (v.)

1620s, to drive away by calling 'shoo,'  from the exclamation (late 15c.), perhaps instinctive,
compare German schu, Italian scioia. Related: Shooed; shooing.


shoo-fly (interj.)

admonition to a pest, by 1867 (in baseball slang), from shoo (v.) + fly (n.). Popularized by a Dan
Bryant minstrel song c.1870, which launched it as a catch-phrase that, according to H.L. Mencken,
afflicted the American people for at least two years. Shoo-fly pie is attested from 1935.


shoo-in (n.)

easy winner (especially in politics), 1939, from earlier sense horse that wins a race by pre-
arrangement (1928); the verb phrase shoo in in this sense is from 1908; from shoo (v.) + in (adv.).


shook (adj.)

disturbed, 1891, past participle adjective from shake (v.). Shook up excited is 1897 slang, revived
1957 by Elvis Presley.


shoot (n.2)

1530s, an act of shooting; 1852 as a shooting match or party, from shoot (v.).


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


shoot (n.1)

young branch of a tree or plant, mid-15c., from shoot (v.). Also heavy, sudden rush of water
(1610s); artificial channel for water running down (1707); conduit for coal, etc. (1844).


shoot-out (n.)

1953; expression shoot it out is from 1912; see shoot (v.) + out (adv.).


shooter (n.)

Old English sceotere one who shoots, agent noun from shoot (v.). As a type of gun from 1812; as a
small alcoholic drink, 1971. Shootee is attested from 1837.


shooting (n.)

Old English scotung, verbal noun from shoot (v.). Sports sense from 1885; film camera sense by 1920.
Shooting gallery is from 1836; shooting match is from 1750. Shooting star first recorded 1590s
(shoot (v.) with reference to meteors is from late 13c.).


shootist (n.)

1864, from shoot (v.) + -ist.


shop (n.)

c.1300, booth or shed for trade or work, perhaps from Old English scoppa, a rare word of uncertain
meaning, apparently related to scypen cowshed, from Proto-Germanic *skoppan small additional
structure (cognates: Old High German scopf building without walls, porch, German dialectal Scopf
porch, cart-shed, barn, German Schuppen a shed), from root *skupp-. Or the Middle English word was
acquired from Old French eschoppe booth, stall (Modern French &#233;choppe), which is a Germanic
loan-word from the same root.    Meaning building or room set aside for sale of merchandise is from
mid-14c. Meaning schoolroom equipped for teaching vocational arts is from 1914, American English.
Sense of matters pertaining to one's trade is from 1814 (as in talk shop (v.), 1860).


shop (v.)

1680s, to bring something to a shop, to expose for sale, from shop (n.). The meaning to visit shops
for the purpose of examining or purchasing goods is first attested 1764. Related: Shopped; shopping.
Shop around is from 1922. Shopping cart is recorded from 1956; shopping list first attested 1913;
transferred and figurative use is from 1959.


shop-window (n.)

mid-15c., from shop (n.) + window (n.).


shop-worn (adj.)

shabby from handling while on display, 1838, from shop (n.) + worn (adj.).


shopaholic (n.)

1984, from shop (v.) + -aholic.


shopkeeper (n.)

1520s, from shop (n.) + keeper.


shoplift (v.)

also shop-lift, 1820, back-formation from shoplifting. Related: Shop-lifted.


shoplifter (n.)

1670s, from shop (n.) + agent noun of lift (v.). Also in same sense shop-lift (1670s); shop-thief.


shoplifting (n.)

1690s, stealing of goods from a shop; see shoplifter.


shoppe (n.)

one of several Middle English variations of shop (n.). It appears in Chaucer. Noted by 1918 as an
antiquarian affectation in U.S. commercial establishments.    YE EAT SHOPPE    I admit that the name
is against it. As a matter of fact, 732 Eighth Avenue is nothing more nor less than a good old-
fashioned midnight lunch-room camouflaged by a flossy title. [Helen Worden Erskine, The Real New
York, 1933]


shopper (n.)

agent noun from shop (v.).


shopping (n.)

1764, act or practice of visiting shops, verbal noun from shop (v.). Meaning goods that have been
purchased is from 1934. Shopping bag attested from 1886; shopping list from 1913.


shore (n.)

land bordering a large body of water, c.1300, from an Old English word or from Middle Low German
schor shore, coast, headland, or Middle Dutch scorre land washed by the sea, all probably from
Proto-Germanic *skur-o- cut, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    According to
etymologists originally with a sense of division between land and water. But if the word began on
the North Sea coast of the continent, it might as well have meant originally land 'cut off' from the
mainland by tidal marshes (compare Old Norse skerg an isolated rock in the sea, related to sker to
cut, shear). Old English words for coast, shore were strand (n.), waro&thorn;, ofer. Few Indo-
European languages have such a single comprehensive word for land bordering water (Homer uses one
word for sandy beaches, another for rocky headlands). General application to country near a seacoast
is attested from 1610s.


shore (v.)

mid-14c., to prop, support with a prop; of obscure etymology though widespread in Germanic (Middle
Dutch schooren to prop up, support, Old Norse skor&eth;a (n.) a piece of timber set up as a
support). Related: Shored; shoring. Also as a noun, post or beam for temporary support of something
(mid-15c.), especially an oblique timber to brace the side of a building or excavation.


shoreline (n.)

also shore-line, 1852 in the geographical sense, from shore (n.) + line (n.).


shorn (adj.)

shaven, late Old English scoren, past participle adjective from shear (v.).


short (adj.)

Old English sceort, scort short, not long, not tall; brief, probably from Proto-Germanic *skurta-
(cognates: Old Norse skorta to be short of, skort shortness; Old High German scurz short), from PIE
root *(s)ker- (1) to cut, with notion of something cut off (cognates: Sanskrit krdhuh shortened,
maimed, small; Latin curtus short, cordus late-born, originally stunted in growth; Old Church
Slavonic kratuku, Russian korotkij short; Lithuanian skurstu to be stunted, skardus steep; Old Irish
cert small, Middle Irish corr stunted, dwarfish).    Meaning having an insufficient quantity is from
1690s. Meaning rude is attested from late 14c. Meaning easily provoked is from 1590s; perhaps the
notion is of being not long in tolerating. Short fuse in figurative sense of quick temper first
attested 1968. To fall short is from archery. Short run relatively brief period of time is from
1879. Short story first recorded 1877. To make short work of dispose of quickly is first attested
1570s. Phrase short and sweet is from 1530s. To be short by the knees (1733) was to be kneeling; to
be short by the head (1540s) was to be beheaded.


short (n.)

1580s, the short the result, the total, from short (adj.). Meaning electrical short circuit first
recorded 1906 (see short circuit). Meaning contraction of a name or phrase is from 1873 (as in for
short). Slang meaning car is attested from 1897; originally street car, so called because street
cars (or the rides taken in them) were shorter than railroad cars.


short (v.)

Old English sceortian to grow short, become short; run short, fail, from the source of short (adj.).
Transitive meaning make short is from late 12c. Meaning to short-circuit is by 1904. Related:
Shorted; shorting.


short circuit (n.)

also short-circuit, 1854, in electricity, from short (adj.) + circuit (n.). As a verb, introduce a
shunt of low resistance, from 1867; intransitive sense from 1902; in the figurative sense is
recorded by 1899. Related: short-circuited; short-circuiting.


short-change (v.)

also shortchange, to cheat by giving too little change to, 1903, from adjectival expression short-
change (with man, trick, etc.), 1901, from short (adj.) + change (n.).


short-lived (adj.)

1580s, from short (adj.) + past tense of live (v.).


short-order (adj.)

of restaurants, from 1897, from adverbial expression in short order rapidly, with no fuss, from
short (adj.) + order (n.).


short-sighted (adj.)

also shortsighted, 1640s, of eyesight, myopic; 1620s in the sense lacking foresight; see short
(adj.) + sight (n.). Related: Shortsightedly; shortsightedness.


short-sleeve (n.)

1630s, from short (adj.) + sleeve. First recorded in an ordinance of Massachusetts Bay colony,
forbidding short sleeves, whereby the nakedness of the arme may be discovered.


short-term (adj.)

1901, from short (adj.) + term (n.).


short-timer (n.)

one whose term or enlistment is about to expire, 1906, from short (adj.) + time (n.) + agent noun
ending -er (1).


short-wave (adj.)

in reference to radio wavelength less than c.100 meters, 1907, from short (adj.) + wave (n.).


shortage (n.)

1862, American English, from short + -age.


shortbread (n.)

also short-bread, 1755, from short (see shortening) + bread (n.).


shortcake (n.)

also short-cake, 1590s, from short (see shortening) + cake (n.).


shortcoming (n.)

1670s, from the phrase to come short be inadequate (1570s); see short (adj.). Related: Shortcomings.


shortcut (n.)

also short-cut, path not as long as the ordinary way, 1610s, from short (adj.) + cut (n.).
Figurative use is attested earlier (1580s).


shorten (v.)

1510s, make shorter; 1560s, grow shorter, from short (adj.) + -en (1); the earlier form of the verb
was simply short, from Old English sceortian to grow short, become short; run short, fail, gescyrtan
to make short.


shortening (n.)

1540s, action of making short, verbal noun from shorten. Meaning butter or other fat used in baking
(1796) is from shorten in the sense make crumbly (1733), from short (adj.) in the secondary sense of
easily crumbled (early 15c.), which perhaps arose via the notion of having short fibers. This is the
short in shortbread and shortcake.


shortfall (n.)

also short-fall, 1895; see short (adj.) + fall (v.).


shorthand (n.)

method of rapid writing, 1636, from short (adj.) in the rapid sense + hand (n.) handwriting.  Short-
handed having too few 'hands'  is from 1794; the ice hockey sense is recorded from 1939.


shortlist (v.)

to place (someone) on the 'short list'  for advancement or preferment, 1955, from short list (n.) in
this sense, which is attested by 1927.


shortly (adv.)

Old English scortlice briefly, also, in late Old English, in short time; from short (adj.) + -ly
(2).


shortness (n.)

Old English scortnes; see short (adj.) + -ness. Shortness of breath is from 1570s.


shorts (n.)

short pants, 1826, from short (adj.). Short-shorts is attested from 1946, originally men's briefs.


shortstop (n.)

1837, from short (adj.) + stop (n.). In cricket, there also is a longstop.


shorty (n.)

short person, 1888, from short (adj.) + -y (3).


Shoshone

Uto-Aztecan people of the Great Basin; the name is of unknown origin, first applied 19c. to eastern
Shoshonis of Wyoming. Related: Shoshonean.


shot (n.)

Old English scot, sceot a shot, a shooting, an act of shooting; that which is discharged in
shooting, what is shot forth; darting, rapid motion, from Proto-Germanic *skutan (cognates: Old
Norse skutr, Old Frisian skete, Middle Dutch scote, German Schu&szlig; a shot), related to sceotan
to shoot (see shoot (v.)).    Meaning discharge of a bow, missile, also is from related Old English
gesceot. Extended to other projectiles in Middle English, and to sports (hockey, basketball, etc.)
1868. Another original meaning, payment (perhaps literally money thrown down) is preserved in scot-
free. Throwing down might also have led to the meaning a drink, first attested 1670s, the more
precise meaning small drink of straight liquor by 1928 (shot glass by 1955). Camera view sense is
from 1958. Sense of hypodermic injection first attested 1904; figurative phrase shot in the arm
stimulant first recorded 1922. Meaning try, attempt is from 1756; sense of remark meant to wound is
recorded from 1841. Meaning an expert in shooting is from 1780. To call the shots control events,
make decisions is American English, 1922, perhaps from sport shooting. Shot in the dark uninformed
guess is from 1885. Big shot important person is from 1861.


shot (adj.)

early 15c., past participle adjective from from shoot (v.). Meaning wounded or killed by a bullet or
other projectile is from 1837. Figurative sense ruined, worn out is from 1833.


shotgun (n.)

1821, American English, from shot (n.) in the sense of lead in small pellets (1770) + gun (n.). As
distinguished from a rifle, which fires bullets. Shotgun wedding first attested 1903, American
English. To ride shotgun is 1963, from custom of having an armed man beside the driver on the
stagecoach in Old West movies to ward off trouble.


shotten (adj.)

having shot its spawn, and accordingly of inferior value, mid-15c., past participle adjective from
shoot (v.). Originally of fish; applied to persons, with sense of exhausted by sickness, from 1590s.


should

c.1200, from Old English sceolde, past tense of sceal (see shall). Preserves the original notion of
obligation that has all but dropped from shall.


shoulda

verbal phrase, 1902, representing casual (American) pronunciation of should have.


shoulder (n.)

Old English sculdor shoulder, from West Germanic *skuldro (cognates: Middle Dutch scouder, Dutch
schouder, Old Frisian skoldere, Middle Low German scholder, Old High German scultra, German
Schulter), of unknown origin, perhaps related to shield (n.). Meaning edge of the road is attested
from 1933. Cold shoulder (Neh. ix:29) translates Latin humerum recedentum dare in Vulgate (but see
cold shoulder). Shoulder-length, of hair, is from 1951.


shoulder (v.)

c.1300, to push with the shoulder, from shoulder (n.). Meaning take a burden first recorded 1580s.
The military sense is from 1590s. Related: Shouldered; shouldering.


shout (v.)

c.1300, schowten to call or cry out loudly, of unknown origin; perhaps from the root of shoot (v.)
on the notion of throw the voice out loudly, or related to Old Norse skuta a taunt (compare scout
(v.2)). Related: Shouted; shouting.


shout (n.)

late 14c., from shout (v.).


shove (v.)

Old English scufan push away, thrust, push with violence (class II strong verb; past tense sceaf,
past participle scoven), from Proto-Germanic *skeub-, *skub- (cognates: Old Norse skufa, Old Frisian
skuva, Dutch schuiven, Old High German scioban, German schieben to push, thrust, Gothic af-skiuban),
from PIE root *skeubh- to shove (cognates: scuffle, shuffle, shovel; likely cognates outside
Germanic include Lithuanian skubti to make haste, skubinti to hasten). Related: Shoved; shoving.
Replaced by push in all but colloquial and nautical usage. Shove off leave (1844) is from boating.
Shove the queer (1859) was an old expression for to counterfeit money. Shove it had an earlier sense
of depart before it became a rude synonym for stick it (by 1941) with implied destination.


shove (n.)

c.1300; see shove (v.).


shovel (n.)

Old English scofl, sceofol shovel, related to scufan (see shove (v.)), from Proto-Germanic *skublo
(cognates: Old Saxon skufla, Swedish skovel, Middle Low German schufle, Middle Dutch shuffel, Dutch
schoffel, Old High German scuvala, German Schaufel). Shovel-ready, with reference to construction
projects, is attested by 2006.


shovel (v.)

mid-15c., from shovel (n.). Related: Shoveled; shoveling. Compare German schaufeln, verb from noun.


shovelful (n.)

1530s, from shovel (n.) + -ful.


show (v.)

Old English sceawian to look at, see, gaze, behold, observe; inspect, examine; look for, choose,
from Proto-Germanic *skauwojan (cognates: Old Saxon skauwon to look at, Old Frisian skawia, Dutch
schouwen, Old High German scouwon to look at; Dutch schoon, Gothic skaunjai beautiful, originally
conspicuous), from Proto-Germanic root *skau- behold, look at, from PIE *skou-, variant of root
*skeue- to pay attention, perceive (see caveat).    Causal meaning let be seen; put in sight, make
known evolved c.1200 for unknown reasons and is unique to English (German schauen still means look
at). Spelling shew, popular 18c. and surviving into early 19c., represents obsolete pronunciation
(rhymes with view). Horse racing sense is from 1903, perhaps from an earlier sense in card-playing.


show (n.)

c.1300, act of exhibiting to view, from show (v.). Sense of appearance put on with intention to
deceive is recorded from 1520s. Meaning display, spectacle is first recorded 1560s; that of
ostentatious display is from 1713 (showy is from 1712). Sense of entertainment program on radio or
TV is first recorded 1932. Meaning third place in a horse race is from 1925, American English (see
the verb).   Show of hands is attested from 1789; Phrase for show for appearance's sake is from
c.1700. Show business is attested from 1850; shortened form show biz used in Billboard from 1942.
Actor's creed the show must go on is attested from 1890. Show-stopper is from 1926; show trial first
recorded 1937.


show up (v.)

1826, to disgrace through exposure, see show (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning to put in an appearance, be
present is from 1888.


show-and-tell (n.)

elementary school teaching tool, 1948, American English.


show-down (n.)

1904, from poker players' slang term for the act of laying down the hands face-up (1892); see show
(v.) + down (adv).


show-off (n.)

1776, a display; see show (v.) + off (adv.). From 1801 as a deliberate and ostentatious display; in
reference to the person who makes such a display, attested from 1924. The verbal phrase is first
recorded 1793 as make a conspicuous and obvious display. Noun showing-off is from 1874.


show-place (n.)

one much-visited for beauty or fineness, 1794, from show (v.) + place (n.).


showboat (n.)

also show-boat, 1838, river boat on which theatrical performances are given, from show (n.) + boat
(n.). The verb meaning to show off is attested from 1951.


showcase (n.)

glass case for exhibiting valuable things, 1835, from show (v.) + case (n.2). In the extended sense,
it is attested from 1937. The verb is first recorded 1945. Related: Showcased; showcasing.


showdown (n.)

also show-down, 1873 in card-playing (especially poker), from show (v.) + down (adv.). Figurative
sense of final confrontation is from 1904.


shower (n.1)

Old English scur a short fall of rain, storm, tempest; fall of missiles or blows; struggle,
commotion; breeze, from Proto-Germanic *skuraz (cognates: Old Norse skur, Old Saxon and Old Frisian
scur fit of illness; Old High German scur, German Schauer shower, downpour; Gothic skura, in skura
windis windstorm), from PIE root *kew-(e)ro- north, north wind (cognates: Latin caurus northwest
wind; Old Church Slavonic severu north, north wind; Lithuanian &#353;iaurus raging, stormy,
&#353;iaurys north wind, &#353;iaure north).    Of blood, tears, etc., from c.1400. Of meteors from
1835. Sense of bath in which water is poured from above first recorded 1851 (short for shower-bath,
itself attested from 1803). Meaning large number of gifts bestowed on a bride (1904, American
English colloquial) later was extended to the party at which it happens (1926). Shower curtain
attested from 1914.


shower (v.)

1570s, come down in showers; 1580s, to discharge a shower, from shower (n.1). Intransitive sense
from 1930. Related: Showered; showering.


shower (n.2)

one who shows, Old English sceawere spectator, watchtower, mirror, agent noun; see show (v.).


showgirl (n.)

actress whose role is decorative rather than histrionic [OED], 1836, from show (v.) + girl.


showman (n.)

one who presents shows, 1734, from see show (n.) + man (n.).


showmanship (n.)

1859, from showman one who presents shows + -ship.


showroom (n.)

room for displaying furniture for sale, 1610s, from show (v.) + room (n.).


showy (adj.)

1712, from show (n.) + -y (2). Related: Showiness; showiness. Originally in a positive sense.


shrank

past tense of shrink (v.).


shrapnel (n.)

1806, from Gen. Henry Shrapnel (1761-1842), who invented a type of exploding, fragmenting shell when
he was a lieutenant in the Royal Artillery during the Peninsular War. The invention consisted of a
hollow cannon ball, filled with shot, which burst in mid-air; his name for it was spherical case
ammunition. Sense of shell fragments is first recorded 1940. The surname is attested from 13c., and
is believed to be a metathesized form of Charbonnel, a diminutive form of Old French charbon
charcoal, in reference to complexion, hair color, or some other quality.


shred (v.)

Old English screadian to peel, prune, cut off, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Middle Dutch
scroden, Dutch schroeien, Old High German scrotan, German schroten to shred), from root of shred
(n.). Meaning cut or tear into shreds is from 1610s. Related: Shredded; shredding.


shred (n.)

Old English screade piece cut off, cutting, scrap, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Old
Frisian skred a cutting, clipping, Middle Dutch schroode shred, Middle Low German schrot piece cut
off, Old High German scrot, scrap, shred, a cutting, piece cut off, German Schrot log, block, small
shot, Old Norse skrydda shriveled skin), from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool, extension of root
*(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).


shredded (adj.)

1570s, past participle adjective from shred (v.). Shredded wheat is recorded from 1885.


shredder (n.)

1570s, agent noun from shred (v.).  In the paper disposal sense from 1950.


shrew (n.)

small insectivorous mammal, Old English screawa shrew-mouse, unknown outside English, and the
absence of evidence for the word between the OE. period and the 16th c is remarkable [OED]. Perhaps
from Proto-Germanic *skraw-, from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool (see shred (n.)), in reference to
the shrew's pointed snout. Alternative Old English word for it was scirfemus, from sceorfan to gnaw.
The meaning peevish, malignant, clamorous, spiteful, vexatious, turbulent woman [Johnson] is late
14c., from earlier sense of spiteful person (male or female), mid-13c., traditionally said to derive
from some supposed malignant influence of the animal, which was once believed to have a venomous
bite and was held in superstitious dread (compare beshrew). Paired with sheep from 1560s as the
contrasting types of wives.


shrewd (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, evil, from shrewe wicked man (see shrew). Compare crabbed from crab (n.), dogged
from dog (n.), wicked from witch (n.). The sense of cunning is first recorded 1510s. Related:
Shrewdly; shrewdness. Strutt's Sports and Pastimes of the People of England (1801) has a shrewdness
of apes for a company or group of them. Shrewdie cunning person is from 1916.


shrewish (adj.)

late 14c., wicked, malignant, from shrew + -ish. Of women, malignant and scolding, from 1560s.
Related: Shrewishly; shrewishness.


Shrewsbury

one of the most etymologically complex of English place names, it illustrates the changes wrought in
Old English words by Anglo-French scribes who could not pronounce them. Recorded 1016 as
Scrobbesbyrig, it originally may have meant the fortified place in (a district called) The Scrub.
The initial consonant cluster was impossible for the scribes, who simplified it to sr-, then added a
vowel (sar-) to make it easier still.    The name was also changed by Anglo-French loss or
metathesis of liquids in words containing -l-, -n-, or -r- (also evident in the derivatives of Old
French Berengier bear-spear -- Old High German Beringar -- name of one of the paladins in the
Charlemagne romances and a common given name in England 12c. and 13c., which has come down in
surnames as Berringer, Bellanger, Benger, etc.). Thus Sarop- became Salop- and in the 12c. and 13c.
the overwhelming spelling in government records was Salopesberie, which accounts for the
abbreviation Salop for the modern county.    During all this, the Anglo-Saxon inhabitants (as
opposed to the French scribes) still pronounced it properly, and regular sound evolutions probably
produced a pronunciation something like Shrobesbury (which turns up on a 1327 patent roll). After a
predictable -b- to -v- (a vowel in the Middle Ages) to -u- shift, the modern spelling begins to
emerge 14c. and is fully established 15c.   Shrewsbury clock, for some reason, became proverbial for
exactness, and thus, naturally, proverbial as indicating exaggeration of accuracy (1590s).


shriek (v.)

16c. variant of scrycke (c.1200), from Old Norse skr&aelig;kja to screech (see screech), probably of
imitative origin. Related: Shrieked; shrieking. The noun is attested from 1580s, from the verb.


shrift (n.)

Old English scrift confession to priest, followed by penance and absolution, verbal noun from
scrifan to impose penance, from an early Germanic borrowing of Latin scribere to write (see script
(n.)) that produced nouns for penance, confession in Old English and Scandinavian (such as Old Norse
skrjpt penance, confession), but elsewhere in Germanic is used in senses writing, scripture,
alphabet letter; see shrive. Short shrift originally was the brief time for a condemned criminal to
confess before execution (1590s); figurative extension to little or no consideration is first
attested 1814.


shrike (n.)

1540s, apparently from a survival of Old English scric a shrike or thrush, literally bird with a
shrill call, probably echoic of its cry and related to shriek (compare Old Norse skrikja shrieker,
shrike, German schrik moor hen, Swedish skrika jay).


shrill (adj.)

late 14c., schrylle high-pitched, piercing (of the voice), probably related to Old English
scralletan to sound loudly and of imitative origin (compare Low German schrell, German schrill
piercing, shrill). Related: Shrillness; shrilly (adv.).


shrill (v.)

to sound shrilly, c.1300, imitative (see shrill (adj.). Related: Shrilled; shrilling.


shrimp (n.)

early 14c., slender, edible marine crustacean, probably from Old Norse skreppa thin person, from
Proto-Germanic *skrimp- (see scrimp). Related to Old English scrimman to shrink; the connecting
notion is probably thinness (compare Danish dialectal skrimpe thin cattle). The meaning puny person
in English is attested from late 14c.; an especially puny one might be a shrimplet (1680s).


shrimp (v.)

fish for shrimp, 1801 (implied in shrimping ), from shrimp (n.). Related: Shrimper (1808).


shrine (n.)

Old English scrin ark (of the covenant); chest, coffer; case for relics, from Latin scrinium case or
box for keeping papers, of unknown origin. From late 14c. as a tomb of a saint (usually elaborate
and large). A widespread word, compare Dutch schrijn, German Schrein, French &#233;crin, Russian
skrynya, Lithuanian skrine.


Shriner (n.)

1882, a member of the Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine (established 1872).


shrink (v.)

Old English scrincan to draw in the limbs, contract, shrivel up; wither, pine away (class III strong
verb; past tense scranc, past participle scruncen), from Proto-Germanic *skrink- (cognates: Middle
Dutch schrinken), probably from PIE root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.1)).    Originally
with causal shrench (compare drink/drench). Sense of become reduced in size recorded from late 13c.
The meaning draw back, recoil (early 14c.) perhaps was suggested by the behavior of snails.
Transitive sense, cause to shrink is from late 14c. Shrink-wrap is attested from 1961 (shrinking-
wrap from 1959). Shrinking violet shy person attested from 1882.


shrink (n.)

an act of shrinking, 1580s, from shrink (v.). Slang meaning psychiatrist, (1966) is from head-
shrinker.


shrinkage (n.)

1713, act or fact of shrinking, from shrink (v.) + -age. Meaning amount by which something has
shrunk is from 1862.


shrive (v.)

Old English scrifan assign, prescribe, ordain, decree; impose penance, hear confession; have regard
for, care for, apparently originally to write (strong, past tense scraf, past participle scrifen),
from Proto-Germanic *skriban (cognates: Old Saxon scriban, Old Frisian skriva write; impose penance;
Old Dutch scrivan, Dutch schrijven, German schreiben to write, draw, paint; Danish skrifte confess),
an early borrowing from Latin scribere to write (see script (n.)), which in Old English and
Scandinavian developed further to confess, hear confession.


shrivel (v.)

1560s (implied in shriveled), of unknown origin, not found in Middle English; perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Swedish skryvla to wrinkle, to shrivel), perhaps ultimately connected
with shrimp (n.) and shrink (v.). Related: Shriveled; shriveling.


shriven

past participle of shrive (v.).


shriver (n.)

confessor, mid-14c., agent noun from shrive (v.).


Shropshire

shortened form of the old spelling of Shrewsbury + shire.


shroud (n.)

Old English scrud a garment, clothing, dress, from West Germanic *skruthan, from Proto-Germanic
*skrud- cut (cognates: Old Norse skru&eth; shrouds of a ship, tackle, gear; furniture of a church,
Danish, Swedish skrud dress, attire), from PIE *skreu- to cut (see shred (n.)).    Specific meaning
winding-sheet, cloth or sheet for burial, to which the word now is restricted, first attested 1560s.
Sense of strong rope supporting the mast of a ship (mid-15c.) is from the notion of clothing a spar
or mast; one without rigging was said to be naked.


shroud (v.)

c.1300, to clothe, to cover, protect, from Old English scrydan, scridan to clothe, dress; see shroud
(n.). Meaning to hide from view, conceal (transitive) is attested from early 15c. Related: Shrouded;
shrouding.


shrove (n.)

shrift, shriving, 1570s, shortened from Shrovetide (early 15c.), from schrof-, related to schrifen
(see shrive). Shrove Tuesday (c.1500) is from practice of celebration and merrymaking before going
to confession at the beginning of Lent.


shrub (n.)

Old English scrybb brushwood, shrubbery, a rare and late word (but preserved also, perhaps, in
Shrewsbury), possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Danish skrub brushwood,
Norwegian skrubba dwarf tree). Presumably related to North Frisian skrobb broom plant, brushwood;
West Flemish schrobbe climbing wild pea, with a base notion of rough plant, from PIE *(s)kerb-,
extended form of root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).


shrubbery (n.)

1748, place where shrubs are planted, from shrub + -ery. As shrubs collectively, from 1777.


shrug (n.)

a shoulder motion meant to express indifference, want of an answer, etc., 1590s, from shrug (v.).


shrug (v.)

c.1400, schurgyng, of uncertain origin. Perhaps connected to Danish skrugge to stoop, crouch.
Related: Shrugged; shrugging. To shrug (something) off dismiss is recorded from 1909.


shrunken (adj.)

Old English gescruncan, past participle adjective from shrink (v.).


shtetl (n.)

Jewish small town or village in Eastern Europe, 1949, from Yiddish, literally little town, from
diminutive of German Stadt city, town, from Old High German stat place, from PIE root *sta- to stand
(see stet).


shtick (n.)

also schtick, 1959, from Yiddish shtik an act, gimmick, literally a piece, slice, from Middle High
German st&uuml;cke piece, play, from Old High German stucki (see stock (n.1)).


shtoom (adj.)

speechless, silent, from Yiddish, from German stumm silent, mute (see stammer (v.)).


shtup (v.)

annoy, 1952; have sexual intercourse with, 1967; from Yiddish, literally push, shove, related to
dialectal German stupfen to nudge, jog.


shuck (v.)

to remove the shucks from, 1819, from or related to shuck (n.). Related: Shucked; shucking.    Many
extended senses are from the notion of stripping an ear of corn, or from the capers associated with
husking frolics; such as to strip (off) one's clothes (1848) and to deceive, swindle, cheat, fool
(1959); phrase shucking and jiving fooling, deceiving is suggested from 1966, in U.S. black English,
but compare shuck (v.) a slang term among cool musicians for to improvise chords, especially to a
piece of music one does not know (1957), and shuck (n.) a theft or fraud, in use by 1950s among U.S.
blacks.    [B]lack senses probably fr[om] the fact that black slaves sang and shouted gleefully
during corn-shucking season, and this behavior, along with lying and teasing, became a part of the
protective and evasive behavior normally adopted towards white people in traditional race relations;
the sense of swindle is perhaps related to the mid-1800s term to be shucked out, be defeated, be
denied victory, which suggests that the notion of stripping someone as an ear of corn is stripped
may be basic in the semantics. [Dictionary of American Slang]


shuck (n.)

husk, pod, shell, 1670s, of unknown origin. Compare shuck (v.). Later used in reference to the
shells of oysters and clams (1872). Figurative as a type of something worthless from 1836.


shucks (interj.)

expression of indifference, 1847, from shuck (n.) in the secondary sense something valueless (i.e.
not worth shucks, attested in a separate source from 1847).


shudder (v.)

early 14c., possibly from Middle Dutch schuderen to shudder, or Middle Low German schoderen, both
frequentative forms from Proto-Germanic *skuth- to shake. Related: Shuddered; shuddering.


shudder (n.)

c.1600, from shudder (v.).


shuffle (v.)

1530s, put together hastily, probably from Middle English shovelen to move with dragging feet,
itself probably a frequentative form of shoven (see shove (v.)). Or perhaps from Low German
schuffeln to walk clumsily, deal dishonestly.    Of playing cards, first recorded 1560s. Meaning
walk slowly without lifting the feet is from 1570s. Meaning push along gradually is from 1560s.
Meaning move from one place to another is from 1690s. Meaning do a shuffle dance is from 1818.
Related: Shuffled; shuffling. Shuffle off get rid of, dispose of is from Shakespeare (1601).


shuffle (n.)

1620s, an evasion, trick; 1640s, a wavering or undecided course of behavior meant to deceive; from
shuffle (v.). Meaning a slow, heavy, irregular manner of moving is from 1847; that of a dance in
which the feet are shuffled is from 1640s. Meaning a change in the order of playing-cards is from
1650s. Phrase lost in the shuffle is from 1930.


shuffleboard (n.)

1530s, shovillaborde shovel board, an unexplained alteration of shove-board (1520s), from shove (v.)
+ board (n.1). Originally a tabletop game (c.1600), the large-scale version (1877) was invented for
play on ocean liners.


shuffler (n.)

shifty person, 1620s, agent noun from shuffle (v.).


shufty (n.)

also shufti a look, a glance, 1943, from Arabic shufti have you seen?


shul (n.)

synagogue, 1874, from Yiddish shul, from German Schule (see school (n.1)).


shun (v.)

Old English scunian to shun, avoid; abhor; desist, abstain; to hide, seek safety by concealment, of
uncertain origin; not found in any other language. Perhaps ultimately from PIE root *skeu- to cover,
to hide. Related: Shunned; shunning. A shun-pike (American English, 1911) was a road constructed to
avoid tolls.


shunt (v.)

early 13c., to shy, start, perhaps from shunen to shun (see shun), and altered by influence of shot
or shut. Meaning to turn aside is from late 14c.; that of move out of the way is from 1706. Adopted
by railways from 1842. Related: Shunted; shunting.


shunt (n.)

1838, in railway use, from shunt (v.). By technicians in the sense of electrical conductor from
1863. Medical use dates from 1923.


shush (v.)

1921, imitative of the command to be quiet (1904), an expansion of sh. Related: Shushed; shushing.


shut (v.)

Old English scyttan to put (a bolt) in place so as to fasten a door or gate, bolt, shut to;
discharge, pay off, from West Germanic *skutjan (cognates: Old Frisian schetta, Middle Dutch
schutten to shut, shut up, obstruct), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).
Related: Shutting.    Meaning to close by folding or bringing together is from mid-14c. Meaning
prevent ingress and egress is from mid-14c. Sense of to set (someone) free (from) (c.1500) is
obsolete except in dialectal phrases such as to get shut of. To shut (one's) mouth desist from
speaking is recorded from mid-14c.


shut up (v.)

c.1400, keep from view or use, from shut (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning cause to stop talking is from
1814; intransitive meaning cease from speaking is from 1840.


shut-eye (n.)

colloquial for sleep, 1899, from shut (v.) + eye (n.). Hans Christian Andersen's Ole Shut-eye, about
a being who makes children sleepy, came out 1842; The Shut-Eye Train popular children's poem by
Eugene Field, is from 1896.


shut-in (n.)

person confined from normal social intercourse, 1904, from the verbal phrase, from shut (v.) + in
(adv.).


shutdown (n.)

also shut-down, 1884, of factories, etc.; 1911 of machines; from shut (v.) + down (adv.).


shute (n.)

1790, channel, trough, dialectal combination of chute and shoot (n.1).


shutout (n.)

also shut-out, 1889 in baseball sense, from verbal phrase shut out exclude from a situation (late
14c.; from 1881 in the sports score sense), from shut (v.) + out (adv.). Middle English had a verb
outshut to shut out, exclude, mid-15c.


shutter (v.)

1826, from shutter (n.). Related: Shuttered; shuttering.


shutter (n.)

1540s, one who shuts (see shut (v.)); meaning movable wooden or iron screen for a window is from
1680s. Photographic sense of device for opening and closing the aperture of a lens is from 1862.


shutter-bug (n.)

enthusiastic amateur photographer, 1940, from shutter (n.) + bug (n.) in the enthusiast sense.


shuttle (n.)

Old English scytel a dart, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *skutilaz (cognates: Old Norse skutill
harpoon), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see shoot (v.)). The original
sense in English is obsolete; the weaving instrument so called (mid-14c.) from being shot across the
threads. Sense of train that runs back and forth is first recorded 1895, from image of the weaver's
instrument's back-and-forth movement over the warp; extended to aircraft 1942, to spacecraft 1969.
In some other languages, the weaving instrument takes its name from its resemblance to a boat (Latin
navicula, French navette, German weberschiff).


shuttle (v.)

1550s, move rapidly to and fro, from shuttle (n.); sense of transport via a shuttle service is
recorded from 1930. Related: Shuttled; shuttling.


shuttlecock (n.)

1570s, from shuttle (v.) + cock (n.2).


shy (adj.)

late Old English sceoh timid, easily startled, from Proto-Germanic *skeukh(w)az afraid (cognates:
Middle Low German sch&uuml;we, Dutch schuw, German scheu shy; Old High German sciuhen, German
scheuchen to scare away). Uncertain cognates outside Germanic, unless in Old Church Slavonic shchuti
to hunt, incite. Italian schivare to avoid, Old French eschiver to shun are Germanic loan-words.
Meaning lacking, short of is from 1895, American English gambling slang. Related: Shyly; shyness.


shy (v.1)

to throw (a missile) with a jerk or toss, 1787, colloquial, of unknown origin and uncertain
connection to shy (adj.). Related: Shied; shying.


shy (v.2)

to recoil, 1640s, from shy (adj.). Related: Shied; shying.


Shylock (n.)

usurer, merciless creditor, 1786, from Jewish money-lender character in Shakespeare's The Merchant
of Venice (c.1596).


shyster (n.)

unscrupulous lawyer, 1843, U.S. slang, probably altered from German Scheisser incompetent worthless
person, from Scheisse shit (n.), from Old High German skizzan to defecate (see shit (v.)).


si

yes in Italian, Spanish, Portuguese; from Latin sic so (see sic).


sialo-

before vowels sial-, word-forming element meaning saliva, from comb. form of Greek sialon saliva.


Siam

name of Thailand before 1939 and from 1945-48, from Thai sayam, from Sanskrit syama dark, in
reference to the relative skin color of the people.


Siamese (adj.)

of or pertaining to Siam, 1690s; see Siam + -ese. Also from 1690s as a noun meaning native of Siam.
the original Siamese twins (exhibited from 1829) were Chang and Eng (1814-1874), Thai-Chinese
natives of Siam who settled in the U.S. Hence Siamesed (adj.) joined in the manner of Siamese twins
(1830). Siamese cat is attested from 1871.


sib (n.)

short for sibling, attested from 1957.


Siberia

region in northwestern Asia, the name said to come from Sibir, ancient Tatar fortress at the
confluence of the Tobol and Irtysh rivers. As a typical place of miserable banishment, it is
attested from 1841. Related: Siberian.


sibilant (adj.)

1660s, from Latin sibilantem (nominative sibilans), present participle of sibilare to hiss, whistle,
possibly of imitative origin (compare Greek sizein to hiss, Lettish sikt to hiss, Old Church
Slavonic svistati to hiss, whistle). Related: Sibilance; sibilation (1620s).


sibilant (n.)

speech sound having a hissing effect, 1772, from sibilant (adj.).


sibilate (v.)

1650s, from Latin sibilatus, past participle of sibilare to hiss, whistle (see sibilant (adj.)).
Related: Sibilated; sibilating.


sibling (n.)

brother or sister, 1903, modern revival (in anthropology) of Old English sibling relative, kinsman,
from sibb kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness, from Proto-Germanic *sibja-
blood relation, relative, properly one's own (cognates: Old Saxon sibba, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
sibbe, Old High German sippa, German Sippe, Gothic sibja kin, kindred), from PIE s(w)e-bh(o)-
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic sobistvo, Russian sob character, individuality), an enlargement of
the root *swe- self (see idiom). Related to the second element in gossip.  The word 'sib' or
'sibling' is coming into use in genetics in the English-speaking world, as an equivalent of the
convenient German term 'Geschwister' [E.&amp;C.; Paul, Human Heredity, 1930]    In Old English, sibb
and its compounds covered grounds of brotherly love, familial affection which tended later to lump
into love (n.), as in sibsumnes peace, concord, brotherly love, sibbian (v.) bring together,
reconcile, sibbecoss kiss of peace. Sibship, however, is a modern formation (1908). Sib persisted
through Middle English as a noun, adjective, and verb expressing kinship and relationship.


sibyl (n.)

woman supposed to possess powers of prophecy, female soothsayer, c.1200, from Old French sibile,
from Latin Sibylla, from Greek Sibylla, name for any of several prophetesses consulted by ancient
Greeks and Romans, of uncertain origin. Said to be from Doric Siobolla, from Attic Theoboule divine
wish.


sibylline (adj.)

1570s, from Latin sibyllinus, from sibylla (see sibyl).


sic (adv.)

insertion in printed quotation to call attention to error in the original; Latin, literally so,
thus, in this way, related to or emphatic of si if, from PIE root *so- this, that (cognates: Old
English sio she). Used regularly in English articles from 1876, perhaps by influence of similar use
in French (1872).    [I]t amounts to Yes, he did say that, or Yes, I do mean that, in spite of your
natural doubts. It should be used only when doubt is natural; but reviewers &amp; controversialists
are tempted to pretend that it is, because (sic) provides them with a neat &amp; compendious form of
sneer. [Fowler]   Sic passim is generally so throughout.


sic (v.)

to set upon, attack; see sick (v.).


sic transit gloria mundi

c.1600, Latin, literally thus passes the glory of the world; perhaps an alteration of a passage in
Thomas &Aacute; Kempis' Imitatio Christi (1471).


siccative (adj.)

1540s, from Late Latin siccativus drying, siccative, from Latin siccatus, past participle of siccare
to dry, make dry; dry up, from siccus dry, thirsty; without rain, from PIE root *seikw- to flow out
(cognates: Avestan hiku- dry, Greek iskhnos dry, withered, Lithuanian seklus shallow, Middle Irish
sesc dry, Sanskrit sincati makes dry). The noun is first recorded 1825.


sice (n.)

a roll of 6 in dice, late 14c., from Old French sis, from Latin sex (see six).


Sicily

island off the southwest tip of Italy, from Latin Sicilia, from Greek Sikelia, from Sikeloi (plural)
Sicilians, from the name of an ancient people living along the Tiber, whence part of them emigrated
to the island that was thereafter named for them. The Greeks distinguished Sikeliotes a Greek
colonist in Sicily from Sikelos a native Sicilian. Related: Sicilian.


sick (v.)

to chase, set upon (as in command sick him!), 1845, dialectal variant of seek. Used as an imperative
to incite a dog to attack a person or animal; hence cause to pursue. Related: Sicked; sicking.


sick (adj.)

unwell, Old English seoc ill, diseased, feeble, weak; corrupt; sad, troubled, deeply affected, from
Proto-Germanic *seukaz, of uncertain origin. The general Germanic word (Old Norse sjukr, Danish syg,
Old Saxon siok, Old Frisian siak, Middle Dutch siec, Dutch ziek, Old High German sioh, Gothic siuks
sick, ill), but in German and Dutch displaced by krank weak, slim, probably originally with a sense
of twisted, bent (see crank (n.)).    Restricted meaning having an inclination to vomit, affected
with nausea is from 1610s; sense of tired or weary (of something), disgusted from satiety is from
1590s; phrase sick and tired of is attested from 1783. Meaning mentally twisted in modern colloquial
use is from 1955, a revival of the word in this sense from 1550s (sense of spiritually or morally
corrupt was in Old English, which also had seocmod infirm of mind); sick joke is from 1958.


sick (n.)

those who are sick, Old English seoce, from sick (adj).


sick-bay (n.)

forepart of a ship's main deck used as a hospital, 1580s, from sick (adj.) + bay (n.2), from the
notion of a recessed space.


sicken (v.)

c.1200, to become ill, from sick (adj.) + -en (1). Transitive sense of to make sick is recorded from
1610s. Related: Sickened; sickening. The earlier verb was simply sick (Old English seocan) to be
ill, fall ill.


sickening (adj.)

falling sick, 1725; causing revulsion, disgust, or nausea, 1789, present participle adjective from
sicken. Related: Sickeningly.


sickish (adj.)

1580s, from sick (adj.) + -ish.


sickle (n.)

Old English sicol, probably a West Germanic borrowing (Middle Dutch sickele, Dutch sikkel, Old High
German sihhila, German Sichel) from Vulgar Latin *sicila, from Latin secula sickle (source also of
Italian segolo hatchet), from PIE root *sek- to cut (see section (n.)). Applied to curved or
crescent-shaped things from mid-15c. Sickle-cell anemia is first recorded 1922.


sickly (adj.)

late 14c., ill, invalid, habitually ailing, from sick (adj.) + -ly (1). Meaning causing sickness in
any sense is from c.1600. Related: Sickliness.


sickness (n.)

Old English seocnes sickness, disease; a disease; see sick (adj.) and -ness.


sicko (n.)

1977, from sick (adj.) in the mental sense + ending as in weirdo. Sickie a pervert is attested from
1972; sicknik (1959) pervert, obscene comedian (applied to Lenny Bruce) has fad ending -nik.


siddha (n.)

in Indian religion, one who has attained perfection and bliss, 1846, from Sanskrit siddhah
accomplished, achieved, successful, possessing supernatural power, sorcerer, saint, related to
sidhyati reaches his goal, succeeds, sadhuh right, skilled, excellent, a holy man.


side (n.)

Old English side flanks of a person, the long part or aspect of anything, from Proto-Germanic
*sithon (cognates: Old Saxon sida, Old Norse si&eth;a, Danish side, Swedish sida, Middle Dutch side,
Dutch zidje, Old High German sita, German Seite), from adjective *sithas long (source of Old English
sid long, broad, spacious, Old Norse si&eth;r long, hanging down), from PIE root *se- long, late
(see soiree).    Original sense preserved in countryside. Figurative sense of position or attitude
of a person or set of persons in relation to another (as in choosing sides) first recorded mid-13c.
Meaning one of the parties in a transaction is from late 14c.; sense in a sporting contest or game
is from 1690s. Meaning music on one side of a phonograph record is first attested 1936. Phrase side
by side close together and abreast is recorded from c.1200. Side-splitting affecting with compulsive
laughter is attested by 1825.


side (v.)

late 15c., to cut into sides (of meat), from side (n.). Meaning to support one of the parties in a
discussion, dispute, etc., is first attested 1590s, from side (n.) in the figurative sense; earlier
to hold sides (late 15c.). Related: Sided; siding.


side (adj.)

late 14c., from side (n.).


side effect (n.)

also side-effect, 1884, from side (adj.) + effect (n.). Medical use, with reference to drugs, is
recorded from 1939.


side-dish (n.)

1725, from side (adj.) + dish (n.). Restaurant phrase on the side apart from the main dish is
attested from 1884, American English.


side-door (n.)

1530s, from side (n.) + door.


side-saddle (n.)

saddle made for the occupant to ride on with both feet on the same side of the horse, used chiefly
by women, late 15c., from side (adj.) + saddle (n.).


side-swipe (v.)

also sideswipe, to strike with a glancing blow, 1904, from side (adj.) + swipe (v.). Related: Side-
swiped; side-swiping. The noun is first recorded 1917.


side-table (n.)

late 14c., from side (n.) + table (n.).


side-way (n.)

also sideway, 1550s, lateral space for passage or movement, from side (n.) + way (n.).


sidearm (adj.)

also side-arm, 1908, from side (adj.) + arm (n.1).


sidearms (n.)

also side-arms, 1760, from side (adj.) + plural of arm (n.2).


sidebar (n.)

secondary article accompanying a larger one in a newspaper, 1948, from side (adj.) + bar (n.1).


sideboard (n.)

table placed near the side of a room or hall (especially one where food is served), c.1300, from
side (adj.) + board (n.1).


sideburns (n.)

1880, American English, alteration of burnsides (q.v).


sidekick (n.)

also side-kick, companion or close associate, 1901, also side-kicker (1903), American English, of
unknown origin. Earlier terms were side-pal (1886), side-partner (1886).


sidelight (n.)

also side-light, c.1600, light coming from the side, from side (adj.) + light (n.). Figurative
meaning incidental information on a subject is attested from 1862.


sideline (n.)

also side-line, line on the side of a fish, 1768; lines marking the limits of playing area (on a
football field, etc.), 1862, from side (adj.) + line (q.v.). Meaning course of business aside from
one's regular occupation is from 1890. Railway sense is from 1890. The figurative sense of position
removed from active participation is attested from 1934 (from the railway sense or from sports,
because players who are not in the game stand along the sidelines). The verb meaning put out of play
is from 1945. Related: Sidelined; sidelining.


sidelong (adv.)

towartd the side, 1570s, alteration of Middle English sidlyng (see sidle), probably by influence of
side (n.) + long (adj.). As an adjective from 1590s.


sideman (n.)

supporting musician, 1936, from side (adj.) + man (n.). Earlier it meant assistant to a church
warden (1560s).


sidenote (n.)

1776, from side (adj.) + note (n.).


sidereal (adj.)

also siderial, 1630s, star-like; 1640s, of or pertaining to the stars, earlier sideral (1590s), from
French sidereal (16c.), from Latin sidereus starry, astral, of the constellations, from sidus
(genitive sideris) star, group of stars, constellation, probably from PIE root *sweid- to shine
(cognates: Lithuanian svidus shining, bright). Sidereal time is measured by the apparent diurnal
motion of the fixed stars. The sidereal day begins and ends with the passage of the vernal equinox
over the meridian and is about four minutes shorter than the solar day, measured by the passage of
the sun over the meridian.


sideshow (n.)

also side-show, 1855, minor exhibition alongside or near a principal one, apparently a coinage of
P.T. Barnum's, from side (adj.) + show (n.). Hence, any diversion or distracting event.


sidestep (n.)

also side-step, 1757, a stepping to the side (originally in military drill), from side (adj.) + step
(n.). The verb is recorded from 1895; the figurative sense is attested from 1900.


sidetrack (n.)

also side-track, railway siding, 1835, from side (adj.) + track (n.). The verb meaning to move (a
train car) onto a sidetrack is from 1874; figurative sense of to divert from the main purpose is
attested from 1881. Related: Sidetracked.


sidewalk (n.)

path for pedestrians on the side of a street, 1739, from side (adj.) + walk (n.). The use of
sidewalk for pavement as one of the characteristic differences between American and British English
has been noted since at least 1902.


sideways (adv.)

1570s, from side (n.) + way (n.), with adverbial genitive. To look sideways cast scornful glances is
recorded from 1844.


sidewinder (n.)

small horned rattlesnake of southwestern U.S., 1875, American English, from side (adj.) + agent noun
of wind (v.), so called in reference to its peculiar lateral progressive motion. Also sidewiper
(1888).


Sidhe

the hills of the fairies, 1793; but in Yeats, the fairie folk (1899), elipsis of Irish (aos) sidhe
people of the faerie mound (compare second element in banshee).


siding (n.)

c.1600, a taking of sides in a conflict or debate, verbal noun from side. First attested 1825 in the
railroad sense; 1829, American English, in the architectural sense of boarding on the sides of a
building.


sidle (v.)

to move or go sideways, 1690s, back-formation from obsolete Middle English sidlyng (adv.) obliquely,
sideways; aslant; laterally (early 14c., perhaps in Old English), from side (n.) + adverbial suffix
-ling; altered on analogy of verbs ending in -le. Related: Sidled; sidling. Old English had
sidlingweg (n.) sidelong-way, oblique road.


Sidon

ancient Phoenician city, from Greek Sidon, from Phoenician Tzidhon, literally fishing place, from
tzud to hunt, to capture. Related: Sidonian.


SIDS (n.)

1970, acronym for Sudden Infant Death Syndrome.


Sieg Heil (interj.)

Nazi salute, German, literally hail victory; from German Sieg victory, from Old High German sigu
(see Siegfried), second element from Proto-Germanic *hailitho (see health).


siege (n.)

early 13c., a seat (as in Siege Perilous, early 13c., the vacant seat at Arthur's Round Table,
according to prophecy to be occupied safely only by the knight destined to find the Holy Grail),
from Old French sege seat, throne, from Vulgar Latin *sedicum seat, from Latin sedere sit (see
sedentary). The military sense is attested from c.1300; the notion is of an army sitting down before
a fortress.


Siegfried

masc. proper name, German Siegfried, first element from Old High German sigu victory,  from Proto-
Germanic *sigiz- victory (cognates: Old Frisian si, Old Saxon sigi, Middle Dutch seghe, Dutch zege,
German Sieg, Old Norse sigr, Danish seier, Gothic sigis, Old English sige victory, success,
triumph), from PIE root *segh- to have, to hold (cognates: Sanskrit saha- victory, sahate overcomes,
masters; see scheme (n.)).    Second element from Old High German frithu peace, from PIE *pri-tu-,
from root *pri- to love (see free (adj.)). Siegfried Line, World War I German fortifications in
France, is from German Siegfriedlinie, named for the hero in Wagner's Ring cycle.


Sienna

city in central Italy, probably from Senones, the name of a Gaulish people who settled there in
ancient times. Related: Sienese. The brownish-ochre color (1760) is from Italian terra di Sienna
earth of Siena, where the coloring material first was produced.


sierra (n.)

a range of hills, 1610s, from Spanish sierra jagged mountain range, literally saw, from Latin serra
a saw (compare serrated), which is of unknown origin.


Sierra Leone

West African nation, literally lion mountains, from Spanish sierra mountain range (see sierra) +
leon lion (see lion). Attested from mid-15c. in Portuguese explorers' accounts, and a very early
explanation of the name derives it from the roaring of thunder in the mountains. Related: Sierra
Leonean.


siesta (n.)

mid-day nap, 1650s, from Spanish siesta, from Latin sexta (hora) sixth (hour), the noon of the Roman
day (coming six hours after sunrise), from sexta, fem. of sextus sixth (see Sextus).


sieve (n.)

Old English sife sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib (cognates: Middle Dutch seve, Dutch zeef, Old High
German sib, German Sieb), from PIE *seib- to pour out, sieve, drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related
to sift. The Sieve of Eratosthenes (1803) is a contrivance for finding prime numbers. Sieve and
shears formerly were used in divinations.


sieve (v.)

late 15c., from sieve (n.). Related: Sieved; sieving.


sift (v.)

Old English siftan pass (something) through a sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib- (cognates: Dutch
ziften, Middle Low German sichten, German sichten to sift; see sieve (n.)). Intransitive sense to
pass loosely or fall scatteredly is from 1590s. Metaphoric sense of look carefully through first
recorded 1530s. Related: Sifted; sifting.


sifter (n.)

1570s, agent noun from sift (v.).


sig (n.)

abbreviation of signature, 1866.


sigh (v.)

mid-13c., probably a Middle English back-formation from sighte, past tense of Old English sican to
sigh, perhaps echoic of the sound of sighing. Related: Sighed; sighing.


sigh (n.)

early 14c., from sigh (v.).


sight (n.)

Old English sih&eth;, gesiht, gesih&eth; thing seen; faculty of sight; aspect; vision; apparition,
from Proto-Germanic *sekh(w)- (cognates: Danish sigte, Swedish sigt, Middle Dutch sicht, Dutch
zicht, Old High German siht, German Sicht, Gesicht), stem that also yielded Old English seon (see
see (v.)), with noun suffix -th (2), later -t.  Verily, truth is sight. Therefore if two people
should come disputing, saying, 'I have seen,' 'I have heard,' we should trust the one who says 'I
have seen.' [Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 5.14.4]  Meaning perception or apprehension by means of the
eyes is from early 13c. Meaning device on a firearm to assist in aiming is from 1580s. A show of
something, hence, colloquially, a great many; a lot (late 14c.). Sight for sore eyes welcome visitor
is attested from 1738; sight unseen without previous inspection is from 1892. Sight gag first
attested 1944. Middle English had sighty (late 14c.) visible, conspicuous; bright, shining;
attractive, handsome; c.1400 as keen-sighted; mid-15c. as discerning (compare German sichtig
visible).


sight (v.)

1550s, look at, view, inspect, from sight (n.). From c.1600 as get sight of, 1842 as take aim along
the sight of a firearm.  Related: Sighted; sighting.


sighting (n.)

instance of catching sight, 1853, verbal noun from sight (v.).


sightless (adj.)

late 13c., from sight (n.) + -less. Related: Sightlessly; sightlessness.


sights (n)

features of a place that are deemed worth seeing, 1630s, plural of sight (n.).


sightseeing (n.)

also sight-seeing, 1821, from sight (see sights) + present participle of see (v.). Sight-see (v.) is
from 1824. Sight-seer first recorded 1821.


sigil (n.)

a sign, mark, or seal, mid-15c., from Late Latin sigillum, from Latin sigilla (neuter plural)
statuettes, little images, seal, diminutive of signum sign (see sign (n.)). In astrology, an occult
device supposed to have great power (1650s).    When my mistress died, she had under her arm-hole a
small scarlet bag full of many things, which, one that was there delivered unto me. There was in
this bag several sigils, some of Jupiter in Trine, others of the nature of Venus, some of iron, and
one of gold, of pure angel-gold, of the bigness of a thirty-three shilling piece of King James's
coin. [The Antiquarian Repertory, London, 1780]


Sigismund

masc. proper name, from German, literally protection through victory, from Old High German sigu
victory (see Siegfried) + munt hand, protection, from PIE *man- hand (see manual (adj.)).


sigma

18th letter of the Greek alphabet, corresponding to Latin S, a metathesis of Hebrew samekh. In
uncial writing, shaped like an S or a C.


sigmatism (n.)

1888, difficulty in pronouncing 'S,' from comb. form of sigma + -ism. As use or recurrence of 'S'
from 1889.


sigmoid (adj.)

shaped like a C (1660s) or shaped like an S (1786), from sigma (q.v.) + -oid. Especially of the
flexure of the colon (1891).


sigmoidoscopy (n.)

1896, from sigmoid + -scopy, with connective -o-.


sign (n.)

early 13c., gesture or motion of the hand, especially one meant to communicate something, from Old
French signe sign, mark, from Latin signum identifying mark, token, indication, symbol; proof;
military standard, ensign; a signal, an omen; sign in the heavens, constellation, according to
Watkins, literally standard that one follows, from PIE *sekw-no-, from root *sekw- (1) to follow
(see sequel).    Ousted native token. Meaning a mark or device having some special importance is
recorded from late 13c.; that of a miracle is from c.1300. Zodiacal sense in English is from mid-
14c. Sense of characteristic device attached to the front of an inn, shop, etc., to distinguish it
from others is first recorded mid-15c. Meaning token or signal of some condition (late 13c.) is
behind sign of the times (1520s). In some uses, the word probably is a shortening of ensign. Sign
language is recorded from 1847; earlier hand-language (1670s).


sign (v.)

c.1300, to make the sign of the cross, from Old French signier to make a sign (to someone); to mark,
from Latin signare to set a mark upon, mark out, designate; mark with a stamp; distinguish, adorn;
figuratively to point out, signify, indicate, from signum (see sign (n.)). Sense of to mark, stamp
is attested from mid-14c.; that of to affix one's name is from late 15c. Meaning to communicate by
hand signs is recorded from 1700. Related: Signed; signing.


sign-in (n.)

1968, from the verbal phrase; see sign (v.) + in (adv.).


sign-up (n.)

number who have signed up, 1926, from the verbal phrase; see sign (v.) + up (adv.).


signage (n.)

1972, in reference to signs on roads or outside stores, from sign (n.) + -age. Earlier in legal
language with reference to affixing signatures.


signal (n.)

late 14c., visible sign, indication, from Old French signal, seignal seal, imprint, sign, mark, from
Medieval Latin signale a signal, from Late Latin signalis (adj.) used as a signal, pertaining to a
sign, from Latin signum signal, sign (see sign (n.)). Restricted sense agreed-upon sign (to commence
or desist, etc.) is from 1590s. Meaning modulation of an electric current is from 1855.


signal (v.)

1805, to make signals to, from signal (n.). Related: Signaled; signaling. Earlier verb was signalize
(1650s).


signal (adj.)

remarkable, striking, notable (serving as a sign), 1640s, from French signal&eacute;, past
participle of signaler to distinguish, signal (see signal (n.)).


signatory (adj.)

1640s, used in sealing, from Latin signatorius of sealing, from signatus, past participle of signare
to sign (see sign (v.)). Noun sense of one who signs (a treaty, etc.) first recorded 1866.


signature (n.)

1530s, a kind of document in Scottish law, from Middle French signature (16c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin signatura signature, a rescript, in classical Latin the matrix of a seal, from
signatus, past participle of signare to mark with a stamp, sign (see sign (v.)).    Meaning one's
own name written in one's own hand is from 1570s, replacing sign-manual (early 15c.) in this sense.
Musical sense of signs placed it the beginning of a staff to indicate the key and rhythm is from
1806. Meaning a distinguishing mark of any kind is from 1620s.


signboard (n.)

also sign-board, 1630s, from sign (n.) + board (n.1).


signee (n.)

1953, from sign (v.) + -ee.


signer (n.)

1610s, agent noun from sign (v.). In American history, with reference to the Declaration of
Independence, by 1865.


signet (n.)

late 14c., small seal (especially one on a finger ring), from Old French signet a small seal,
diminutive of signe sign (see sign (n.)).


significance (n.)

c.1400, meaning, from Old French significance or directly from Latin significantia meaning, force,
energy, from significans, present participle of significare to mean, import, signify (see signify).
The earlier word was signifiance (mid-13c.). Meaning importance is from 1725. Related: Significancy.


significant (adj.)

1570s, having a meaning, from Latin significantem (nominative significans, present participle of
significare make known, indicate (see signify). Earlier in the same sense was significative
(c.1400). Often having a special or secret meaning, hence important (1761). Related: Significantly.
Significant figure is from 1680s. Significant other (n.) attested by 1961, in psychology, the most
influential other person in the patient's world.


signification (n.)

early 14c., symbolization, representation, from Old French significacion and directly from Latin
significationem (nominative significatio) a signifying, indication, expression, sign, token,
meaning, emphasis, noun of action from past participle stem of significare make known, indicate (see
signify). From late 14c. as meaning (of a word, etc.).


signifier (n.)

1530s, agent noun from signify. In U.S. black use by 1962.


signify (v.)

late 13c., be a sign of, indicate, mean, from Old French signifier (12c.), from Latin significare to
make signs, show by signs, point out, express; mean, signify; foreshadow, portend, from significus
(adj.), from signum sign (see sign (n.)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Intransitive
sense of to be of importance is attested from 1660s. Meaning engage in mock-hostile banter is
American English black slang first recorded 1932.    ...'signifying,' which in Harlemese means
making a series of oblique remarks apparently addressed to no one in particular, but unmistakable in
intention in such a close-knit circle. [Down Beat, March 7, 1968]


signor (n.)

an Italian lord or gentleman, 1570s, from Italian signore, from Latin seniorem, accusative of senior
(see senior (adj.)). Feminine form signora is from 1630s; diminutive signorina is first recorded
1820.


signpost (n.)

also sign-post, 1610s, sign on a post, usually indicating an inn or shop, from sign (n.) + post
(n.1). Meaning guide- or direction-post along a road is attested from 1863. Figurative sense is from
1889.


sike (n.)

also syke, small stream, a Scottish and Northern word, from Old English sic or cognate Old Norse sik
a ditch, trench.


Sikh (n.)

1781, member of a politico-religious community established c.1500 in Punjab by Nanak Shah, from
Hindi sikh disciple, from Sanskrit siksati studies, learns, related to saknoti he is able, he is
strong (see Shakti).


Sikhism (n.)

tenets of the Sikhs, 1849, from Sikh + -ism.


silage (n.)

fodder packed in a silo, 1884, alteration (probably by influence of silo) of ensilage (1881), from
French ensilage, from ensiler put in a silo, from Spanish ensilar (see silo).


Silas

masc. proper name, from Late Latin, from Greek Silas, contraction of Silouanos, transliteration of
Latin Silvanus, a name that literally means living in the woods, from silva wood (see sylvan).


silence (n.)

c.1200, muteness, state of being silent, from Old French silence state of being silent; absence of
sound, from Latin silentium a being silent, from silens, present participle of silere be quiet or
still, of unknown origin. Meaning absence of sound in English is from late 14c.


silence (v.)

1560s, intransitive, become still or silent; 1590s, transitive, make silent, from silence (n.).
Related: Silenced; silencing.


silencer (n.)

c.1600, person who silences, agent noun from silence (v.). Meaning mechanism that stifles the sound
of a motor or firearm is from 1898.


silent (adj.)

c.1500, without speech, silent, not speaking, from Latin silentem (nominative silens) still, calm,
quiet, present participle of silere be quiet or still (see silence (n.)). Meaning free from noise or
sound is from 1580s.    Of letters, c.1600; of films, 1914. In the looser sense of few words, from
1840. Phrase strong, silent (type) is attested from 1905. Silent majority in the political sense of
mass of people whose moderate views are not publicly expressed and thus overlooked is first attested
1955 in a British context and was used by John F. Kennedy but is most associated in U.S. with the
rhetoric of the Nixon administration (1969-74).    It is time for America's silent majority to stand
up for its rights, and let us remember the American majority includes every minority. America's
silent majority is bewildered by irrational protest. [Spiro T. Agnew, May 9, 1969]    In Victorian
use, the phrase meant the dead (1874; compare Roman use of the noun plural of silent to mean the
dead). Silence is golden (1831) is Carlyle's translation [Sartor Resartus] of part of the Swiss
Inscription Sprechen ist silbern, Schweigen ist golden. In one 14c. text Latin one who is silent is
translated by a beere stille.


silently (adv.)

1560s, from silent (adj.) + -ly (2).


Silenus

1710, from Greek Seilenos, foster-father of Bacchus and leader of the satyrs; the name is of unknown
origin (Klein compares Thracian zilai wine).


Silesia

former eastern German province, now southwestern Poland, from Latinized form of German Schliesen
(Polish &#346;l&#261;sk), from the name of a river and a mountain there, from Silingi or Silingae,
name of a Vandalic (Germanic) people who supposedly had a religious center at the mountain. Related:
Silesian. In reference to cloth imported from there from 1670s, especially a thin cotton cloth,
commonly twilled, used for linings for women's dresses and men's garments.


silhouette (n.)

1798, from French silhouette, in reference to &Eacute;tienne de Silhouette (1709-1767), French
minister of finance in 1759. Usually said to be so called because it was an inexpensive way of
making a likeness of someone, a derisive reference to Silhouette's petty economies to finance the
Seven Years' War, which were unpopular among the nobility. But other theories are that it refers to
his brief tenure in office, or the story that he decorated his chateau with such portraits.
Silhouette portraits were so called simply because they came into fashion in the year (1759) in
which M. de Silhouette was minister. [A. Brachet, An Etymological Dictionary of the French Language,
transl. G.W. Kitchin, 1882]    Used of any sort of dark outline or shadow in profile from 1843. The
verb is recorded from 1876, from the noun. The family name is a Frenchified form of a Basque
surname; Arnaud de Silhouette, the finance minister's father, was from Biarritz in the French Basque
country; the southern Basque form of the name would be Zuloeta or Zulueta, which contains the suffix
-eta abundance of and zulo hole (possibly here meaning cave).


silica (n.)

hard silicon dioxide, 1801, Modern Latin, from Latin silex (genitive silicis) flint, pebble, on
model of alumina, soda.


silicate (n.)

1811, from silica + -ate (3).


silicon (n.)

nonmetallic element, 1817, coined by British chemist Thomas Thomson from silica (silicon dioxide),
from which it was isolated. The name is patterned on carbon, etc. Silicon chip first attested 1965;
Silicon Valley for the Santa Clara Valley south of San Francisco, U.S., first attested 1974, from
the concentration of manufacturers of silicon chips used in computers, watches, etc.


silicone (n.)

coined 1863 in German from silico-, comb. form indicating the presence of silicon, + -one.


silicosis (n.)

1881, a hybrid from silicon + -osis.


silk (n.)

c.1300, from Old English seoloc, sioloc silk, silken cloth, from Latin sericum silk, plural serica
silken garments, silks, literally Seric stuff, neuter of Sericus, from Greek Serikos silken;
pertaining to the Seres, an oriental people of Asia from whom the Greeks got silks. Western
cultivation began 552 C.E., when agents from Byzantium impersonating monks smuggled silkworms and
mulberry leaves out of China.    Chinese si silk, Manchurian sirghe, Mongolian sirkek have been
compared to this and the people name in Greek might be a rendering via Mongolian of the Chinese word
for silk, but this is uncertain.    Also found in Old Norse as silki but not elsewhere in Germanic.
The more common Germanic form is represented by Middle English say, from Old French seie, with
Spanish seda, Italian seta, Dutch zijde, German Seide  is from Medieval Latin seta  silk, perhaps
elliptical for seta serica, or else a particular use of seta bristle, hair (see seta (n.)).
According to some sources [Buck, OED], the use of -l- instead of -r- in the Balto-Slavic form of the
word (Old Church Slavonic &#353;elku, Lithuanian &#353;ilkai) passed into English via the Baltic
trade and may reflect a Chinese dialectal form, or a Slavic alteration of the Greek word. But the
Slavic linguist Vasmer dismisses that, based on the initial sh- in the Slavic words, and suggests
the Slavic words are from Scandinavian rather than the reverse.    As an adjective from mid-14c. In
reference to the hair of corn, 1660s, American English. Figurative use of silk-stocking (n.) is from
1590s; as an adjective meaning wealthy it is attested from 1798, American English (silk stockings,
especially worn by men, being regarded as extravagant and reprehensible, indicative of luxurious
habits). Silk-screen (n.) is first attested 1930; as a verb from 1961. Silk road so called in
English from 1931.


silken (adj.)

Old English seolcen made of silk; see silk + -en (2). Meaning silk-like, soft and glossy is from
1510s.


silkworm (n.)

Old English seolcwyrm; see silk + worm (n.).


silky (adj.)

1610s, from silk + -y (2). Related: Silkily; silkiness.


sill (n.)

Old English syll beam, threshold, large timber serving as a foundation of a wall, from Proto-
Germanic *suljo (cognates: Old Norse svill, Swedish syll, Danish syld framework of a building,
Middle Low German sull, Old High German swelli, German Schwelle sill), perhaps from PIE root *swel-
(3) post, board (cognates: Greek selma beam). Meaning lower horizontal part of a window opening is
recorded from early 15c.


sillabub (n.)

also sillibub, syllabub, etc., 1530s, of unknown origin. Drink or dish of milk and wine or cider,
often sweetened. Figurative sense of floridly vapid prose is from 1706.


silliness (n.)

foolishness, c.1600, from silly + -ness; a reformation of seeliness, from Old English saelignes
happiness, (good) fortune, occurrence.


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


silo (n.)

1835, from Spanish silo, traditionally derived from Latin sirum (nominative sirus), from Greek siros
a pit to keep corn in.  The change from r to l in Spanish is abnormal and Greek siros was a rare
foreign term peculiar to regions of Asia Minor and not likely to emerge in Castilian Spain
[Barnhart]. Alternatively, the Spanish word is from a pre-Roman Iberian language word represented by
Basque zilo, zulo dugout, cave or shelter for keeping grain. Meaning underground housing and launch
tube for a guided missile is attested from 1958.


Siloam

pool and spring outside Jerusalem (John ix:7), from Late Latin, from New Testament Greek, from
Hebrew shiloach, literally sending forth, from shalach to send.


silphium

plant genus, 1771, from Latin, from Greek Silphion, name of a North  African Mediterranean plant
whose identity has been lost, the gum or juice of which was prized by the ancients as a condiment
and a medicine. Probably of African origin.


silt (n.)

mid-15c., originally sediment deposited by seawater, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare
Norwegian and Danish sylt salt marsh), or from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch silte, sulte salt
marsh, brine, from Proto-Germanic *sultjo- (cognates: Old English sealt, Old High German sulza
saltwater, German Sulze brine), from PIE *sal- (see salt (n.)).


silt (v.)

to become choked with silt (of river channels, harbors, etc.), 1799, from silt (n.). Related:
Silted; silting.


Silurian (adj.)

1708, pertaining to the Silures, from Latin Silures ancient British tribe inhabiting southeast
Wales. Geological sense is from 1835, coined by Sir Roderick Impey Murchison (1792-1871) because
rocks of this period are especially frequent in Wales.


silvan (adj.)

see sylvan.


silver (n.)

Old English seolfor, Mercian sylfur silver; money, from Proto-Germanic *silubra- (cognates: Old
Saxon silvbar, Old Frisian selover, Old Norse silfr, Middle Dutch silver, Dutch zilver, Old High
German silabar, German silber silver; money, Gothic silubr silver), from a common Germanic/Balto-
Slavic term (cognates: Old Church Slavonic s(u)rebo, Russian serebro, Polish srebro, Lithuanian
sidabras silver) of uncertain relationship and origin. According to Klein's sources, possibly from a
language of Asia Minor, perhaps from Akkadian sarpu silver, literally refined silver, related to
sarapu to refine, smelt.    As an adjective from late Old English (cognates: silvern). As a color
name from late 15c. Of voices, words, etc., from 1520s in reference to the metal's pleasing
resonance; silver-tongued is from 1590s. The silver age (1560s) was a phrase used by Greek and Roman
poets. Chemical abbreviation Ag is from Latin argentum silver, from the usual PIE word for the metal
(see argent), which is missing in Germanic.


silver (v.)

to cover or plate with silver, mid-15c., from silver (n.). Meaning to tinge with gray (of hair) is
from c.1600. Related: Silvered; silvering.


silver bullet (n.)

very effective, almost magical remedy, 1808. The belief in the magical power of silver weapons to
conquer foes goes back at least to ancient Greece (as in Delphic Oracle's advice to Philip of
Macedon).


silver lining

a bright side which proverbially accompanies even the darkest trouble; by 1843, apparently from oft-
quoted lines from Milton's Comus, where the silver lining is the light of the moon shining from
behind the cloud.    Was I deceived? or did a sable cloud  Turn forth her silver lining on the
night?  I did not err, there does a sable cloud,  Turn out her silver lining on the night  And casts
a gleam over this tufted grove.    To which Thomas Warton added the commentary: When all succour
&#383;eems to be lost, Heaven unexpectedly presents the &#383;ilver lining o&#383; a &#383;able
cloud to the virtuous.


silver screen (n.)

1921, originally in reference to movie house projection screens colored with metallic paint to be
more reflective. Transferred sense of movies generally is attested from 1924.


Silver Star

U.S. military decoration awarded for gallantry in action, originally (1918) a small badge worn on
the ribbon of a campaign medal; as a distinct medal, it was established Aug. 8, 1932.


silverfish (n.)

1703, in reference to various types of silver-colored fish (similar formation in German Silberfisch,
Dutch zilvervisch); from silver (adj.) + fish (n.). In reference to a type of household insect
damaging to books, wallpaper, etc. (also known as silvertail and furniture-bug), it is attested from
1855.


silvern (adj.)

Middle English silveren, from Old English seolfren made of silver; see silver (n.) + -en (2).
Similar formation in German silbern, Dutch zilveren. Fallen from use in English except in poetry.


silversmith (n.)

Old English seolfursmi&#240;; see silver (n.) + smith (n.).


silverware

1860, from silver (n.) + ware (n.).


silvery (adj.)

late 14c., from silver (n.) + -y (2). Related: Silveriness.


Simeon

masc. proper name, Biblical second son of Jacob and Leah; also a tribe of Israel; see Simon.


simian (adj.)

characteristic of monkeys or apes, c.1600, from Latin simia ape, from simus snub-nosed, from Greek
simos snub-nosed (like the Scythians), also a masculine proper name, of unknown origin. Biological
meaning pertaining to monkeys is from 1863. The noun meaning an ape or monkey first is attested in
1880.


similar (adj.)

having characteristics in common, 1610s (earlier similary, 1560s), from French similaire, from a
Medieval Latin extended form of Latin similis like, resembling, from Old Latin semol together, from
PIE root *sem- (1) one, as one, together with (see same). The noun meaning that which is similar is
from 1650s. Related: Similarly.


similarity (n.)

state of being similar, 1660s, from similar + -ity, or from French similarit&eacute;. Related:
Similarities points of resemblance (1838).


simile (n.)

late 14c., from Latin simile a like thing; a comparison, likeness, parallel, neuter of similis like
(see similar). Both things must be mentioned and the comparison directly stated. To Johnson, A
simile, to be perfect, must both illustrate and ennoble the subject.


similitude (n.)

late 14c., from Old French similitude similarity, relationship, comparison (13c.) and directly from
Latin similitudinem (nominative similitudo) likeness, resemblance, from similis like (see similar).


simmer (v.)

1650s, alteration of simperen to simmer (late 15c.), possibly imitative; not thought to be connected
to simper (v.). OED says the change is probably due to a feeling of phonetic appropriateness.
Figurative sense, of feelings, to be agitated is from 1764. Opposite sense, in simmer down, first
recorded 1871, probably from the notion of moving from a full boil to a mere simmer.    I must and
will keep shady and quiet till Bret Harte simmers down a little. [Mark Twain, letter, 1871]
Related: Simmered; simmering. The noun meaning a condition of simmering is from 1809.


simnel (n.)

sweet cake, c.1200, from Old French simenel fine wheat flour; flat bread cake, Lenten cake, probably
by dissimilation from Vulgar Latin *siminellus (also source of Old High German semala the finest
wheat flour, German Semmel a roll), a diminutive of Latin simila fine flour (see semolina).


simoleon (n.)

slang for a dollar, 1895, American English, of unknown origin. Related sambolio is attested from
1886; perhaps this was altered based on Napoleon, name of a late 19c. French gold coin.


Simon

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Symeon, from Hebrew Shim'on, literally hearkening,
hearing, from shama he heard. In English Old Testaments, usually printed as Simeon, but in New
Testament almost always as Simon. Confused with Greek masc. proper name Simon, which is from simos
snub-nosed.


simon-pure (adj.)

1815, from the true Simon Pure the genuine person or thing (1795), from Simon Pure, name of a Quaker
who is impersonated by another character (Colonel Feignwell) in part of the comedy A Bold Stroke for
a Wife (1717) by Susannah Centlivre, English dramatist and actress. The real Simon Pure is dealt
with as an imposter in the play and is believed only after he has proved his identity.


simonize (v.)

1921, from Simoniz, trademark for a type of car polish invented by George Simons, who along with
Elmer Rich of the Great Northern Railway organized Simons Manufacturing Company to sell it in
Chicago, U.S.A., in 1910. Rich and his brother, R.J. Rich, acquired sole ownership two years later.


simony (n.)

c.1200, the sin of buying or selling sacred things, from Old French simonie selling of church
offices (12c.), from Late Latin simonia, from Simon Magus, the Samaritan magician who was rebuked by
Peter when he tried to buy the power of conferring the Holy Spirit (Acts viii:18-20). Related:
Simoniac; simoniacal.


simoom (n.)

hot, dry desert wind, 1790, from Arabic samum a sultry wind, literally poisonous, from samma he
poisoned, from sam poison.


simp (n.)

1903, circus slang shortening of simpleton.


simpatico (adj.)

1864 (in fem. form simpatica), from Spanish simpatico sympathetic, from simpatia sympathy, or from
Italian simpatico, from simpatia, both ultimately from Latin sympathia (see sympathy).


simper (v.)

1560s, to smile in an affected and silly way, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (such as dialectal
Danish semper affected, coy, prudish) or Middle Dutch zimperlijk affected, coy, prim, of unknown
origin. Related: Simpered; simpering. As a noun, 1590s, from the verb.


simpering (adj.)

1580s, present participle adjective from simper (v.). Related: Simperingly.


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


simple-minded (adj.)

1744, from simple (adj.) + minded. Related: Simple-mindedly; simple-mindedness.


simpleness (n.)

14c., absence of pride, from simple (adj.) + -ness. From late 14c. as absence of duplicity;
ignorance; absence of complexity.


simpleton (n.)

1640s, probably a jocular formation from simple and -ton, suffix extracted from surnames. Compare
skimmington, personification of an ill-used spouse, c.1600.


simplex (adj.)

characterized by a single part, 1590s, from Latin simplex single, simple, plain, unmixed,
uncompounded, literally onefold, from PIE root *sem- one, together (cognates: Latin semper always,
literally once for all; Sanskrit sam together; see same) + *plac- -fold, from PIE *plek- to plait
(see ply (v.1.)). The noun is attested from 1892, simple uncompounded word.


simpliciter (adv.)

not relatively; in the full sense of the word, a Latin adverb (from stem of simplex simple; see
simplex) meaning, in classical Latin, simply, plainly, directly, straightforwardly.


simplicity (n.)

late 14c., singleness of nature, unity, indivisibility; immutability, from Old French simplicite
(12c., Modern French simplicit&eacute;), from Latin simplicitatem (nominative simplicitas) state of
being simple, frankness, openness, artlessness, candor, directness, from simplex (genitive
simplicis) simple (see simplex). Sense of ignorance is from c.1400; that of simplicity of
expression, plainness of style is early 15c.    Middle English also had simplesse, from French,
attested in English from mid-14c. in sense humility, lack of pride, late 14c. as wholeness, unity;
c.1400 as ignorance.


simplification (n.)

1680s, from Middle French simplification act or process of simplifying, from simplifier (see
simplify).


simplify (v.)

1650s, from French simplifier to make simpler (15c.), from Medieval Latin simplificare to simplify,
from Latin simplex simple (see simplex) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Meaning to make
easier to do is from 1759. Related: Simplified; simplifying.


simplism (n.)

oversimplification, 1955, from simple (adj.) + -ism.


simplistic (adj.)

simple, plain, not compound, 1844, from simple (adj.) + -istic. From 1867 as over-simple, trying to
explain too much by a single principle. Also (1860) of or pertaining to simples (herbs used in
healing, medicine of one ingredient only; the notion being that each herb possesses a particular
virtue, thus a simple remedy), from simplist one who studies simples (1590s; see simple (adj.)) +
-ic.


simply (adv.)

late 13c., simpleliche; see simple + -ly (2). Purely intensive sense is attested from 1580s.


simulacrum (n.)

1590s, from Latin simulacrum likeness, image, form, representation, portrait, dissimilated from
*simulaclom, from simulare to make like, imitate, copy, represent (see simulation). The word was
borrowed earlier as semulacre (late 14c.), via Old French simulacre.


simular (n.)

1520s, one who simulates, irregularly formed (perhaps on the model of similar) from Latin simulare
to make like, imitate, copy, represent, from stem of similis like (see similar). As an adjective,
simulated, from 1610s.


simulate (v.)

1620s, feign, pretend, assume falsely (implied in simulated), back-formation from simulation or else
from Latin simulatus, past participle of simulare to make like, imitate, copy. Meaning to use a
model to imitate certain conditions for purposes of study or training is from 1947. Related:
Simulating.


simulated (adj.)

1620s, feigned, past participle adjective from simulate (v.). Meaning imitative for purposes of
experiment or training is from 1966 (agent noun simulator in the related sense dates from 1947; also
see simulation). In commercial jargon, artificial, imitation by 1942.


simulation (n.)

mid-14c., a false show, false profession, from Old French simulation pretence and directly from
Latin simulationem (nominative simulatio) an imitating, feigning, false show, hypocrisy, noun of
action from past participle stem of simulare imitate, from stem of similis like (see similar).
Meaning a model or mock-up for purposes of experiment or training is from 1954.


simulator (n.)

1835, of persons, from Latin simulator a copier, feigner, agent noun from simulare imitate, from
stem of similis like (see similar). In reference to training devices for complex systems, from 1947
(flight simulator).


simulcast (v.)

to broadcast simultaneously on radio and television, 1948, formed from simul(taneous) + (broad)cast.
The noun is first recorded 1949, from the verb.


simultaneity (n.)

1650s, from simultaneous + -ity.


simultaneous (adj.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin simultaneus, perhaps from simultim at the same time, extended from Latin
simul at the same time (see similar (adj.)), or from simul with ending abstracted from Late Latin
spontaneus, where the -t- is organic. Related: Simultaneously.


simurgh (n.)

monstrous bird, rational and ancient, in Persian mythology, 1786, from Persian simurgh, from Pahlavi
sin eagle + murgh bird. Compare Avestan saeno merego eagle, Sanskrit syenah eagle, Armenian cin
kite. Probably identical with the roc (q.v.).


sin (n.)

Old English synn moral wrongdoing, injury, mischief, enmity, feud, guilt, crime, offense against
God, misdeed, from Proto-Germanic *sun(d)jo- sin (cognates: Old Saxon sundia, Old Frisian sende,
Middle Dutch sonde, Dutch zonde, German S&uuml;nde sin, transgression, trespass, offense, extended
forms), probably ultimately it is true, i.e. the sin is real (compare Gothic sonjis, Old Norse sannr
true), from PIE *snt-ya-, a collective form from *es-ont- becoming, present participle of root *es-
to be (see is).    The semantic development is via notion of to be truly the one (who is guilty), as
in Old Norse phrase ver&eth; sannr at be found guilty of, and the use of the phrase it is being in
Hittite confessional formula. The same process probably yielded the Latin word sons (genitive
sontis) guilty, criminal from present participle of sum, esse to be, that which is. Some
etymologists believe the Germanic word was an early borrowing directly from the Latin genitive. Also
see sooth.   Sin-eater is attested from 1680s. To live in sin cohabit without marriage is from 1838;
used earlier in a more general sense. Ice hockey slang sin bin penalty box is attested from 1950.


sin (v.)

Old English syngian to commit sin, transgress, err, from synn (see sin (n.)); the form influenced by
the noun. Compare Old Saxon sundion, Old Frisian sendigia, Middle Dutch sondighen, Dutch zondigen,
Old High German sunteon, German s&uuml;ndigen to sin. Form altered from Middle English sunigen by
influence of the noun.


Sinai

the mountain is perhaps named for Sin, a moon goddess worshipped by Sumerians, Akkadians, and
ancient Arabs. As an adjectival form, Sinaic (1769), Sinaitic (1786).


since (adv.)

early 15c., synnes, from sithenes since, from sithen (plus adverbial genitive -es), from Old English
si&#240;&#240;an afterward, from now on, hereafter, further, later, as soon as, after that,
originally si&eth; &eth;an after that, from si&#240; after (see sith) + &#240;an, weakened form of
&#240;am, dative of &#240;&#230;t (see that).    As a conjunction from late 14c.; as a preposition
from 1510s; from the time when, hence as a consequence of the fact that. Modern spelling replaced
syns, synnes 16c. to indicate voiceless final -s- sound. Since when? often expressing incredulity,
is from 1907.


sincere (adj.)

1530s, pure, unmixed, from Middle French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus, of things, whole,
clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed, figuratively sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful, of
uncertain origin. Ground sense seems to be that which is not falsified. Meaning free from pretense
or falsehood in English is from 1530s.    There has been a temptation to see the first element as
Latin sine without. But there is no etymological justification for the common story that the word
means without wax (*sin cerae), which is dismissed out of hand by OED and others, and the stories
invented to justify that folk etymology are even less plausible. Watkins has it as originally of one
growth (i.e. not hybrid, unmixed), from PIE *sm-ke-ro-, from *sem- one (see same) + root of crescere
to grow (see crescent).


sincerely (adv.)

1530s, correctly; 1550s, honestly, from sincere + -ly (2). As a subscription to letters, recorded
from 1702.


sincerity (n.)

early 15c., honesty, genuineness, from Middle French sinceritie (early 16c., Modern French
sinc&eacute;rit&eacute;) and directly from Latin sinceritatem (nominative sinceritas) purity,
soundness, wholeness, from sincerus whole, clean, uninjured, figuratively sound, genuine, pure,
true, candid, truthful (see sincere).


sinciput (n.)

forepart of the head, 1570s, from Latin sinciput half a head, also one of the smoked cheeks of a
pig, from semi- (see semi-) + caput (see capitulum. Related: Sincipital.


sine (n.)

trigonometric function, 1590s (in Thomas Fale's Horologiographia, the Art of Dialling), from Latin
sinus fold in a garment, bend, curve, bosom (see sinus). Used mid-12c. by Gherardo of Cremona in
Medieval Latin translation of Arabic geometrical text to render Arabic jiba chord of an arc, sine
(from Sanskrit jya bowstring), which he confused with jaib bundle, bosom, fold in a garment.


sine die

indefinitely, Latin, literally without (fixed) day, from sine without (see sans) + ablative singular
of dies day (see diurnal).


sine prole

legalistic Latin, without issue, from sine without (see sans) + prole, ablative of proles offspring
(see prolific).


sine qua non

an indispensable condition, Latin, literally without which not, from sine without (see sans) + qua
ablative fem. singular of qui which (see who) + non not (see non-). Feminine to agree with implied
causa. The Latin phrase is common in Scholastic use. Sometimes a masculine form, sine quo non, is
used when a person is intended. Proper plural is sine quibus non.


sinecure (n.)

1660s, church benefice with an emolument but without parish duties, from Medieval Latin beneficium
sine cura benefice without care (of souls), from Latin sine without (see sans) + cura, ablative
singular of cura care (see cure (n.1)).


sinew (n.)

Old English seonowe, oblique form of nominative sionu sinew, from Proto-Germanic *senawo (cognates:
Old Saxon sinewa, Old Norse sina, Old Frisian sine, Middle Dutch senuwe, Dutch zenuw, Old High
German senawa, German Sehne), from PIE root *sai- to tie, bind (cognates: Sanskrit snavah sinew,
Avestan snavar, Irish sin chain).


sinewy (adj.)

late 14c., made of sinews, from sinew + -y (2). As tough, stringy from 1570s.


sinfonia (n.)

1773, from Italian sinfonia, from Medieval Latin symphonia (see symphony).


sinful (adj.)

Old English synnfull full of sin, wicked, unholy, contrary to the laws of God; see sin (n.) + -ful.
Weakened sense of contrary to propriety or decency is from 1863. Related: Sinfully; sinfulness.


sing (v.)

Old English singan to chant, sing, celebrate, or tell in song, also used of birds (class III strong
verb; past tense sang, past participle sungen), from Proto-Germanic *sengwan (cognates: Old Saxon
singan, Old Frisian sionga, Middle Dutch singhen, Dutch zingen, Old High German singan, German
singen, Gothic siggwan, Old Norse syngva, Swedish sjunga), from PIE root *sengwh- to sing, make an
incantation. The criminal slang sense of to confess to authorities is attested from 1610s.    No
related forms in other languages, unless perhaps it is connected to Greek omphe voice (especially of
a god), oracle; and Welsh dehongli explain, interpret. The typical Indo-European root is represented
by Latin canere (see chant (v.)). Other words meaning sing derive from roots meaning cry, shout, but
Irish gaibim is literally take, seize, with sense evolution via take up a song or melody.


sing (n.)

act of singing, especially collective, 1850, from sing (v.).


sing-along

1959, noun and adjective, from verbal phrase; see sing (v.) + along (adv.). Originally associated
with U.S. music producer Mitch Miller (1911-2010).


sing-song (adj.)

also singsong, musically repetitive and unvarying, 1734, from earlier use as a noun meaning a
jingling ballad (c.1600), from sing (v.) + song (n.).


Singapore

from Sanskrit Simhapuram Lion City, from simhah lion + puram city, from PIE *pele- citadel,
fortified high place (see polis (n.)). The name is perhaps metaphoric of something, as no lions are
found there. Singapore sling attested from 1930; said on the island to have been invented there 1915
by a barman named Ngian Tong Dron.


singe (v.)

Old English sengan to burn lightly, burn the edges (of hair, wings, etc.), from Proto-Germanic
*sangjanan (cognates: Old Frisian of-sendza, Middle Dutch singhen, Dutch zengen, Old High German
sengan, German sengen to singe). The root is said to be related to that of sing (v.), on the idea of
some sort of sound produced by singeing (Century Dictionary), but Klein's sources reject this.
Related: Singed; singeing. Singed cat person whose appearance does not do him justice, person who is
better than he looks is from 1827.


singer (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), agent noun from sing (v.). Old English had songer psalm-writer,
sangere singer, poet (also see songster).


Singh

common surname and middle name in North India, later (1699) adopted by Sikhs as a title after their
initiation ceremony, also a surname adopted by male Sikhs; 1620s in English, from Hindi Singh, from
Sanskrit simhah lion.


single (adj.)

early 14c., unmarried, from Old French sengle, sangle alone, unaccompanied; simple, unadorned, from
Latin singulus one, one to each, individual, separate (usually in plural singuli one by one), from
sim- (stem of simplus; see simple) + diminutive suffix. Meaning consisting of one unit, individual,
unaccompanied by others is from late 14c. Meaning undivided is from 1580s. Single-parent (adj.) is
attested from 1966.


single (n.)

c.1400, unmarried person, mid-15c., a person alone, an individual, from single (adj.). Given various
technical meanings from 16c. Sports sense is attested from 1851 (cricket), 1858 (baseball). Of
single things from 1640s. Meaning one-dollar bill is from 1936. Meaning phonograph record with one
song on each side is from 1949. Meaning unmarried swinger is from 1964; singles bar attested from
1969. An earlier modern word for unmarried or unattached person is singleton (1937).


single (v.)

to separate from the herd (originally in deer-hunting, often with forth or out), 1570s, from single
(adj.). Baseball sense of to make a one-base hit is from 1899 (from the noun meaning one-base hit,
attested from 1858). Related: Singled; singling.


single-handed (adj.)

1709, done alone, from single (adj.) + handed. Meaning using one hand only is from 1844. Related:
Single-handedly.


single-minded (adj.)

1570s, sincere, honest (a sense also in single-hearted); meaning having a single aim or purpose is
from 1860. See single (adj.) + minded. Related: Single-mindedly; single-mindedness.


singlet (n.)

unlined woolen garment, c.1746, from single (adj.) in clothing sense of unlined, of one thickness
(late 14c.) + -et, apparently in imitation of doublet.


singleton (n.)

single card of a suit in a hand, 1876, originally in whist, from single (adj.); compare simpleton,
etc. Extended early 20c. to other instances of singularity.


singly (adv.)

c.1300, from single (adj.) + -ly (2).


singspiel (n.)

1876, from German Singspiel, literally a singing play, from singen to sing (see sing (v.)) + Spiel a
play (see spiel). Kind of performance popular in Germany late 18c.


singular (adj.)

mid-14c., alone, apart; being a unit; special, unsurpassed, from Old French singuler personal
particular; distinctive; singular in number (12c., Modern French singulier) or directly from Latin
singularis single, solitary, one by one, one at a time; peculiar, remarkable, from singulus (see
single (adj.)). Meaning remarkably good, unusual, rare, separated from others (by excellence),
uncommon is from c.1400 in English; this also was a common meaning of Latin singularis.


singularity (n.)

c.1400, unusual behavior, also singleness of aim or purpose, from Old French singulerte peculiarity
(12c., Modern French singularit&eacute;) or directly from Late Latin singularitatem (nominative
singularitas) a being alone, from singularis (see singular (adj.)). Meaning fact of being different
from others is c.1500. Mathematical sense of point at which a function takes an infinite value is
from 1893. Astronomical use is from 1965.


singularly (adv.)

late 14c., exclusively, alone, solely; uniquely; individually; in an unusual way, especially, from
singular + -ly (2).


singultus (n.)

Latin, a sob; a speech broken by sobs.


Sinhalese (adj.)

also Singhalese, pertaining to Sri Lanka, 1797, from Sanskrit Sinhala Sri Lanka, Ceylon, from
simhala-, literally of lions, from simhah lion. As the name of a language spoken there, it is
attested from 1801.


Sinic (adj.)

Chinese, 1660s, from Medieval Latin Sinicus, from Sina China, from Late Latin Sinae (plural) the
Chinese (see Sino-).


sinical (adj.)

of or relating to sines, 1590s, from sine + -ical.


Sinicism (n.)

Chinese ways, Chinese affectations, 1891; see Sino- + -ism. Related: Sinicize; Sinification.


sinister (adj.)

early 15c., prompted by malice or ill-will, intending to mislead, from Old French senestre, sinistre
contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left (14c.), from Latin sinister left, on the left side
(opposite of dexter), of uncertain origin. Perhaps meaning properly the slower or weaker hand
[Tucker], but Klein and Buck suggest it's a euphemism (see left (adj.)) connected with the root of
Sanskrit saniyan more useful, more advantageous. With contrastive or comparative suffix -ter, as in
dexter (see dexterity).    The Latin word was used in augury in the sense of unlucky, unfavorable
(omens, especially bird flights, seen on the left hand were regarded as portending misfortune), and
thus sinister acquired a sense of harmful, unfavorable, adverse. This was from Greek influence,
reflecting the early Greek practice of facing north when observing omens. In genuine Roman auspices,
the augurs faced south and left was favorable. Thus sinister also retained a secondary sense in
Latin of favorable, auspicious, fortunate, lucky.    Meaning evil is from late 15c. Used in heraldry
from 1560s to indicate left, to the left. Bend (not bar) sinister in heraldry indicates illegitimacy
and preserves the literal sense of on or from the left side (though in heraldry this is from the
view of the bearer of the shield, not the observer of it).


sinistral (adj.)

late 15c., unlucky, from Old French senestral, sinistral or Medieval Latin *sinistralis, from
sinister (see sinister). Meaning on the left side is from 1803. Related: Sinistrally.


sinistrorse (adj.)

1856, a word wanted by the botanists to describe the direction of spiral structures in nature, from
Latin sinistrorsus toward the left side, from sinister left (see sinister). It was paired with
dextrorse but confusion over what was the proper point of view to reckon leftward or rightward
spiraling prevented the word being as useful as it might have been.


sink (v.)

Old English sincan (intransitive) become submerged, go under, subside (past tense sanc, past
participle suncen), from Proto-Germanic *senkwan (cognates: Old Saxon sinkan, Old Norse s&ouml;kkva,
Middle Dutch sinken, Dutch zinken, Old High German sinkan, German sinken, Gothic sigqan), from PIE
root *sengw- to sink.    The transitive use (mid-13c.) supplanted Middle English sench (compare
drink/drench) which died out 14c. Related: Sank; sunk; sinking. Sinking fund is from 1724. Adjective
phrase sink or swim is from 1660s. To sink without a trace is World War I military jargon,
translating German spurlos versenkt.


sink (n.)

early 15c., cesspool, pit for reception of wastewater or sewage, from sink (v.). Figurative sense of
place where corruption and vice abound is from 1520s. Meaning drain for carrying water to a sink is
from late 15c. Sense of shallow basin (especially in a kitchen) with a drainpipe for carrying off
dirty water first recorded 1560s. In science and technical use, place where heat or other energy is
removed from a system (opposite of source), from 1855.


sinker (n.)

1838 in the fishing-line sense, agent noun from sink (v.).


sinkhole (n.)

also sink-hole, mid-15c., sewage pit, from sink (n.) + hole (n.). As a geological phenomenon, hole
made in the earth in limestone regions by underground erosion, 1780, from sink (v.).


sinless (adj.)

Old English synleas; see sin (n.) + -less. Related: Sinlessly; sinlessness.


Sinn Fein (n.)

1905, from Irish, literally we ourselves, from Old Irish f&eacute;in self, from PIE *swei-no-,
suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom). Movement founded 1905 by Irish journalist and politician
Arthur Griffith (1872-1922).


sinner (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from sin (v.). Old English had synngiend in this sense.


Sino-

before vowels Sin-, word-forming element meaning Chinese, 1879, from Late Latin Sin&aelig; (plural)
the Chinese, from Ptolemaic Greek Sinai, from Arabic Sin China, probably from Chinese Ch'in, name of
the fourth dynasty of China (see China).


Sinologist (n.)

1814; see Sino- + -logy + -ist. Related: Sinology (1834).


Sinon

name of the Greek who induced the Trojans to take the wooden horse into the city; hence a deceiver
by false tales.


Sinophobe (n.)

1919, from Sino- + phobe. Related: Sinophobic; Sinophobia (1876).


sinsemilla (n.)

potent strain of marijuana, 1975, from Mexican Spanish, literally without seed, from Latin sine
without (see sans) + semen seed (see semen).


sinter (n.)

1780, from German Sinter, cognate with English cinder.


sinuate (adj.)

1680s, from Latin sinuatus, past participle of sinuare (see insinuate).


sinuous (adj.)

full of turns and curves, 1570s, from Latin sinuosus full of curves, folds, or bendings, from sinus
curve, fold, bend (see sinus). Related: Sinuously; sinuousness.


sinus (n.)

hollow curve or cavity in the body, early 15c., from Medieval Latin sinus, from Latin sinus bend,
fold, curve, a bent surface; a bay, bight, gulf; a fold in land; also fold of the toga about the
breast, hence bosom, and figuratively love, affection, intimacy; interior, inmost part; of unknown
origin.


sinusitis (n.)

inflammation of the sinuses, 1896; see sinus + -itis.


sinusoid

1823 in mathematics; 1900 in physiology, from sinus + -oid. Related: Sinusoidal.


Siouan (adj.)

1885, from Sioux + -an. Replacing Dakotan.


Sioux

group of North American Indian tribes, 1761, from North American French, short for Nadouessioux,
sometimes said to be from Ojibway (Algonquian) Natowessiwak (plural), literally little snakes, from
nadowe Iroquois (literally big snakes). Another explanation traces it to early Ottawa (Algonquian)
singular /na:towe:ssi/ (plural /na:towe:ssiwak/) Sioux, apparently from a verb meaning to speak a
foreign language [Bright]. In either case, a name given by their neighbors; the people's name for
themselves is Dakota.


sip (v.)

late 14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from a source related to Low German sippen to sip, or from
Old English sypian absorb, drink in, related to supan to take into the mouth a little at a time (see
sup (v.2)). Related: Sipped; sipping.


sip (n.)

c.1500, from sip (v.).


siphon (n.)

late 14c., from Latin sipho (genitive siphonis) a siphon, from Greek siphon pipe, tube for drawing
wine from a cask, of unknown origin. Related: Siphonal.


siphon (v.)

1859, from siphon (n.). Figurative sense of to draw off, divert is recorded from 1940. Related:
Siphoned; siphoning.


sir

c.1300, title of honor of a knight or baronet (until 17c. also a title of priests), variant of sire,
originally used only in unstressed position. Generalized as a respectful form of address by mid-
14c.; used as a salutation at the beginning of letters from early 15c.


sire (v.)

to beget, to be the sire of, 1610s, from sire (n.). Used chiefly of beasts, especially of stallions.
Related: Sired; siring.


sire (n.)

c.1200, title placed before a name and denoting knighthood, from Old French sire lord (appellation),
sire, my lord, from Vulgar Latin *seior, from Latin senior older, elder (see senior (adj.)).
Standing alone and meaning your majesty it is attested from early 13c. General sense of important
elderly man is from mid-14c.; that of father, male parent is from mid-13c.


siren (n.)

mid-14c., sea nymph who by her singing lures sailors to their destruction, from Old French sereine
(12c., Modern French sir&#232;ne) and directly from Latin Siren (Late Latin Sirena), from Greek
Seiren [Odyssey, xii.39 ff.], one of the Seirenes, mythical sisters who enticed sailors to their
deaths with their songs, also in Greek a deceitful woman, perhaps literally binder, entangler, from
seira cord, rope.    Meaning device that makes a warning sound (on an ambulance, etc.) first
recorded 1879, in reference to steamboats, perhaps from similar use of the French word. Figurative
sense of one who sings sweetly and charms is recorded from 1580s. The classical descriptions of them
were mangled in medieval translations and glosses, resulting in odd notions of what they looked
like.


Sirius (n.)

brightest star by magnitude, late 14c., from Latin Sirius the Dog Star, from Greek Seirios, said to
mean literally scorching or the scorcher. But other related Greek words seem to derive from this
use, and the name might be a folk-etymologized borrowing from some other language. An Egyptian name
for it was Sothis. The connection of the star with scorching heat is from its ancient heliacal
rising at the summer solstice (see dog days). Also see dog star. Related: Sirian. The constellation
Canis Major seems to have grown from the star, not the other way.    Homer made much of it as
[Kyon], but his <b>Dog</b> doubtless was limited to the star Sirius, as among the ancients generally
till, at some unknown date, the constellation was formed as we have it, -- indeed till long
afterwards, for we find many allusions to the Dog in which we are uncertain whether the
constellation or its lucida is referred to. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Canis Major in Star Names and
Their Meanings, London: 1899]


sirloin (n.)

early 15c., surloine, from Middle French surlonge, literally upper part of the loin, from sur over,
above (see sur-) + longe loin, from Old French loigne (see loin).    English spelling with sir-
dates from 1620s, by folk-etymology supposed to be because the cut of beef was knighted by an
English king for its superiority, a tale variously told of Henry VIII, James I, and Charles II. The
story dates to 1655.


sirocco (n.)

hot wind blowing from the Libyan deserts, 1610s, from Italian sirocco, from vulgar Arabic shoruq the
east wind, from Arabic sharqi eastern, east wind, from sharq east, from sharaqa to rise (in
reference to the sun).


sirrah

1520s, term of address used to men or boys expressing anger or contempt, archaic extended form of
sir (in U.S., siree, attested from 1823).


sis (n.)

1650s, abbreviated form of sister; in American English, applied generally to girls and young women
(1859). It also was the familiar short form of Cecilie, Cicely, a common name for girls in the
Middle English period.


sis-boom-bah

cheerleading chant, originally (1867) an echoic phrase imitating the sound of a skyrocket flight
(sis), the burst of the fireworks (boom), and the reaction of the crowd ((b)ah).


sisal (n.)

1883, short for Sisal hemp or grass (1843), from Sisal, port in Yucatan, from which the rope-making
fiber was exported.


sissify (v.)

1897 (implied in sissified), American English, from sissy + -fy. Related: Sissifying; sissification
(1915).


sissy (n.)

1846, sister, extended form of sis (q.v.). Meaning effeminate man is recorded from 1887; the
adjective in this sense is from 1891. Related: Sissiness. Sissy bar is recorded from 1969.


sist

legal term, from Latin sistere to cause to stand (see assist).


sister (n.)

mid-13c., from Old English sweostor, swuster sister, or a Scandinavian cognate (Old Norse systir,
Swedish syster, Danish s&oslash;ster), in either case from Proto-Germanic *swestr- (cognates: Old
Saxon swestar, Old Frisian swester, Middle Dutch suster, Dutch zuster, Old High German swester,
German Schwester, Gothic swistar).    These are from PIE *swesor, one of the most persistent and
unchanging PIE root words, recognizable in almost every modern Indo-European language (Sanskrit
svasar-, Avestan shanhar-, Latin soror, Old Church Slavonic, Russian sestra, Lithuanian sesuo, Old
Irish siur, Welsh chwaer, Greek eor). French soeur a sister (11c., instead of *sereur) is directly
from Latin soror, a rare case of a borrowing from the nominative case.    According to Klein's
sources, probably from PIE roots *swe- one's own + *ser- woman. For vowel evolution, see bury. Used
of nuns in Old English; of a woman in general from 1906; of a black woman from 1926; and in the
sense of fellow feminist from 1912. Meaning female fellow-Christian is from mid-15c. Sister act
variety act by two or more sisters is from vaudeville (1908).


sister-in-law (n.)

mid-15c.; see sister + in-law.


sisterhood (n.)

state of being a sister, late 14c., from sister + -hood. Meaning a society of sisters (usually a
religious order) is from 1590s; sense of women having some common characteristic or calling is from
c.1600.


sisterly (adj.)

1560s, from sister + -ly (1). Related: Sisterliness.


Sistine (adj.)

1769, literally pertaining to Pope Sixtus, from Italian sistino, from Sixtus, name of five popes,
from Latin sextus sixth (see Sextus). The chapel is named for Sixtus IV (Francesco della Rovere),
pope 1471-84, who had it built. The painting by Raphael known as the Sistine Madonna is so called
because it also shows Sixtus II, a 3c. martyr and saint; it is better known now for the two cherubs
at the bottom of the picture who by 1900 were well-known in isolation from the rest of the picture
in engravings, etc.


Sisyphean (adj.)

pertaining to or resembling the unceasingly recurring and fruitless labors of Sisyphus, 1630s, from
Sisyphus + -an. Earlier Sisyphian (1590s).


Sisyphus

 King of Corinth, famed as the craftiest of men, he was condemned in the afterlife to roll uphill a
stone which perpetually rolls down again; Greek Sisyphos, a name of unknown origin. Liddell &amp;
Scott suggest a reduplication of syphos the crafty (with Aeolic -u- for -o-), but Klein calls this
folk-etymology.


sit (v.)

Old English sittan to occupy a seat, be seated, sit down, seat oneself; remain, continue; settle,
encamp, occupy; lie in wait; besiege (class V strong verb; past tense s&aelig;t, past participle
seten), from Proto-Germanic *setjan (cognates: Old Saxon sittian, Old Norse sitja, Danish sidde, Old
Frisian sitta, Middle Dutch sitten, Dutch zitten, Old High German sizzan, German sitzen, Gothic
sitan), from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    With past tense sat, formerly also set,
now restricted to dialect, and sate, now archaic; and past participle sat, formerly sitten. In
reference to a legislative assembly, from 1510s. Meaning to baby-sit is recorded from 1966.    To
sit back be inactive is from 1943. To sit on one's hands was originally to withhold applause (1926);
later, to do nothing (1959). To sit around be idle, do nothing is 1915, American English. To sit out
not take part is from 1650s. Sitting pretty is from 1916.


sit-down (adj.)

1836 of meals, 1936 of strikes, from verbal phrase (c.1200), from sit (v.) + down (adv.); as a noun,
sit-down act of sitting down is from 1861.


sit-in

1936, in reference to session musicians; 1937, in reference to union action; 1941, in reference to
student protests. From the verbal phrase; see sit (v.) + in (adv.). To sit in is attested from 1868
in the sense attend, be present; from 1919 specifically as attend as an observer.


sit-up (n.)

also situp, kind of physical exercise, 1955, from the verbal phrase (attested from early 13c.); see
sit (v.) + up (adv.). Related: Sit-ups.


sitar (n.)

1845, from Hindi sitar, from Persian sitar three-stringed, from si three (Old Persian thri-; see
three) + tar string (see tenet).


sitcom (n.)

1964, from the first elements of situation comedy, a phrase attested from 1953 of television shows,
1943 of radio programs; see situation.  Even Bing Crosby has succumbed to series TV and will appear
in a sitcom as an electrical engineer who happens to break into song once a week. [Life, Sept. 18,
1964]


site (n.)

place or position occupied by something, especially with reference to environment, late 14c., from
Anglo-French site, Old French site place, site; position, and directly from Latin situs a place,
position, situation, location, station; idleness, sloth, inactivity; forgetfulness; the effects of
neglect, from past participle of sinere let, leave alone, permit, from PIE *si-tu-, from root *tkei-
to settle, dwell, be home (see home (n.)).


site (v.)

to give a location to, place, 1590s, from site (n.). Related: Sited; siting.


sith (adv., conj., prep.)

since (obsolete), Middle English, reduced from Old English si&#240;&#240;an then, thereupon;
continuously, during which; seeing that, from *si&eth; &#254;on subsequent to that, from si&#240;
after, from Proto-Germanic *sith- later, after (cognates: Old Saxon sith after that, since, later,
German seit since, Gothic sei&#254;us late), from PIE *se- (2) long, late (see soiree).


sitophobia (n.)

morbid aversion to food (or certain foods), 1882, from Greek sitos wheat, corn, meal; food, of
unknown origin, + -phobia. Related: Sitophobe; sitophobic.


sitter (n.)

c.1300, one that sits, agent noun from sit (v.). As short for baby-sitter from 1937.


sitting (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun from sit (v.). Meaning a meeting of a body is from c.1400. Meaning interval
during which one sits (for some purpose, especially to have one's portrait taken) is from 1706.
Sitting-room first recorded 1771. Slang sitting duck easy target first recorded 1944; literal sense
is from 1867 (it is considered not sporting to shoot at one).


situ

see in situ.


situate (v.)

early 15c., to place in a particular state or condition, from Medieval Latin situatus, past
participle of situare to place, locate, from Latin situs a place, position (see site). Related:
Situated; situating.


situate (adj.)

1520s, now obsolete, adjective from Late Latin situatus, past participle of situare (see situate
(v.)).


situation (n.)

early 15c., place, position, or location, from Middle French situation or directly from Medieval
Latin situationem (nominative situatio) a position, situation, noun of action from past participle
stem of situare to place, locate (see situate). Meaning state of affairs is from 1710; meaning
employment post is from 1803.


situational (adj.)

1903, from situation + -al. Related: Situationally. Situational ethics attested from 1969 (situation
ethics first attested 1955).


situs (n.)

Latin, situation, position (see site). In technical uses in English, proper or original position and
location of something (as in in situ).


sitz-bath (n.)

1849, a hybrid, from German Sitzbad, literally bath in a sitting position, with English bath for
German Bad.


sitzkrieg (n.)

1940, static warfare (such as prevailed in Europe in the winter of 1939-40), R.A.F. coinage on
analogy of blitzkrieg (q.v.), from German sitz a sitting.


Siva (n.)

also Shiva, one of the three supreme gods of Hinduism, lord of destruction and reproduction, 1788,
from Hindi Shiva, from Sanskrit Sivah, literally propitious, gracious, from PIE *ki-wo-, from root
*kei- beloved, dear (connected with Latin civis citizen, literally member of a household), also to
lie, couch (compare cemetery). But by some this is said to be a euphemism. Related: Sivaism;
Sivaistic.


six (n.)

Old English siex, six, sex, from Proto-Germanic *sekhs (cognates: Old Saxon and Danish seks, Old
Norse, Swedish, and Old Frisian sex, Middle Dutch sesse, Dutch zes, Old High German sehs, German
sechs, Gothic saihs), from PIE *s(w)eks (cognates: Sanskrit sas, Avestan kshvash, Persian shash,
Greek hex, Latin sex, Old Church Slavonic sesti, Polish sze&#347;&#263;, Russian shesti, Lithuanian
szeszi, Old Irish se, Welsh chwech).   Six-shooter, usually a revolver with six chambers, is first
attested 1844; six-pack of beverage containers is from 1952, of abdominal muscles by 1995. Six of
one and half-a-dozen of the other little difference is recorded from 1833. Six-figure in reference
to hundreds of thousands (of dollars, etc.) is from 1840. Six feet under dead is from 1942.
Phrase at sixes and sevens originally was hazarding all one's chances, first in Chaucer, perhaps
from dicing (the original form was on six and seven); it could be a corruption of on cinque and
sice, using the French names (which were common in Middle English) for the highest numbers on the
dice. Meaning at odds, in disagreement or confusion is from 1785, perhaps via a notion of left
unsettled.


sixfold (adj.)

Old English sixfeald; see six + -fold. Similar formation in Danish sexfold, Dutch zes-voudig; German
sechsf&#228;ltig, Swedish sexfaldig.


sixpence (n.)

late 14c., sum of six pennies, from six + pence. As a specific British coin, from 1590s. Sixpenny
(adj.) had a figurative sense paltry, cheap, petty, worthless by 1560s; sixpenny nails (early 15c.)
cost so much per hundred.


sixteen

Old English sixtyne, from siex (see six) + -teen. Similar formation in Old Frisian sextine, Middle
Dutch sestien, Dutch zestien, German sechszehn, Old Norse sextan.  The age of the gods is always
sixteen. Sixteen represents the number of perfection, of plenitude. In man it is after the sixteenth
year that the first elements of decay begin to appear, and when the moon reaches the sixteenth digit
it begins to decrease. [Alain Dani&eacute;lou, The Myths and Gods of India]  From Latin contracted
form sexdecim, sedecim come Italian sedici, French seize.


sixteenmo (n.)

book printed on sheets of 16 leaves, 1847, from an English reading of the printers' Latin
abbreviation 16-mo, representing sexto decimo sixteen.


sixteenth (adj.)

early 13c., from sixteen + -th (1); replacing sixtethe, sixteothe, forms based on Old English
syxteo&#240;a. Cf Old Frisian sextinda, Middle Dutch sestiende, German sechzehnte, Old Norse
sextandi. Musical sixteenth note is from 1861.


sixth (adj.)

1520s, replacing Middle English sixte (c.1200), from Old English syxte, from siex (see six). Compare
Old Frisian sexta, Middle Dutch seste, Old High German sehsto, German sechste, Gothic saihsta. With
ending conformed to -th (1). Related: Sixthly. The noun meaning a sixth part is from 1550s. As a
music tone, from 1590s. Sixth sense supernatural perception of objects is attested from 1712;
earlier it meant titillation, the sense that apprehends sexual pleasure (1690s, from Scaliger).
Then said Peter, That is false; for there is a sixth Sense, that of Prescience : for the other five
Senses are capable only of Knowledg ; but the Sixth of Foreknowledg ; which Sense the Prophets had.
[William Whitson, Primitive Christianity Reviv'd, vol. V, London, 1712]


sixties (n.)

1848 as the years of someone's life between 60 and 69; 1827 as the seventh decade of years in a
given century. See sixty.


sixtieth

Old English sixteogo&#240;a sixtieth; see sixty + -th (1).


sixty

Old English sixtig, from siex (see six) + -tig (see -ty (1)). Similar formation in Old Norse
sextugr, sext&#246;gr, sextigir, Old Frisian sextich, Middle Dutch sestig, Dutch zestig, Old High
German sehszug, German sechzig. Phrase sixty-four dollar question is 1942, from radio quiz show
where that was the top prize.


sixty-nine (n.)

in sexual sense, 1888, as a translation of French faire soixante neuf, literally to do 69. So called
from the similarity of positions to the arrangement of the numerals.


sixtyfold

also sixty-fold, Old English  sixtigfeald; see sixty + -fold.


sizar (n.)

also sizer, at certain British universities, a student of limited means who received  school meals
for free, 1580s, from size (n.) in a specialized sense ration, allowance for provisions.


size (n.)

c.1300, an ordinance to fix the amount of a payment or tax, from Old French sise, shortened form of
assise session, assessment, regulation, manner (see assize), probably a misdivision of l'assise as
la sise. The sense of extent, amount, volume, magnitude (c.1300) is from the notion of regulating
something by fixing the amount of it (weights, food portions, etc.). Specific sense of set of
dimensions of a manufactured article for sale is attested from 1590s.


size (v.)

c.1400, to regulate, from size (n.). Meaning to make of a certain size is from c.1600; that of to
classify according to size is first attested 1630s. Verbal phrase size up estimate, assess is from
1847 and retains the root sense of size (n.). Related: Sized; sizing.


sizeable (adj.)

also sizable, 1610s, of relatively good, suitable, or desirable size, usually somewhat large
[Century Dictionary], from size + -able. Related: Sizeably; sizeableness.


sizer (n.)

device for measuring sizes, 1670s, agent noun from size (v.).


sizzle (v.)

c.1600, to burn with a hissing sound, perhaps a frequentative form of Middle English sissen hiss,
buzz (c.1300), of imitative origin. The figurative sense is attested from 1859. Related: Sizzled;
sizzling. The noun is first recorded 1823.


ska (n.)

1964, Jamaican, of unknown origin.


skag (n.)

heroin, 1967, American English, earlier cigarette (1915), of unknown origin.


skald (n.)

Scandinavian poet and singer of medieval times, 1763, from Old Norse skald skald, poet (9c.), of
unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *sekw- (3) to say, utter. The modern word is an antiquarian
revival. Usually applied to Norwegian and Icelandic poets of the Viking period and down to c 1250,
but often without any clear idea as to their function and the character of their work [OED].
Related: Scaldic.


skank (n.)

unattractive woman, 1965, perhaps from skag in this sense (1920s), of unknown origin. Verbal meaning
dance to reggae music is 1976, probably not the same word, but also of unknown origin. Related:
Skanking.


skanky (adj.)

ugly, unattractive (originally of women), by 1965, U.S. Black slang; see skank.


skat (n.)

card game, 1864, from German Skat (by 1838), from earlier scart (said to have been a term used in
the old card game called taroc, which was of Italian origin), from Italian scarto cards laid aside,
which is said to be a back-formation from scartare, from Latin ex- off, away + Late Latin carta (see
card (n.1)). The German game is perhaps so called because it is played with a rump deck, or because
two cards are laid aside at the start of the game, or because discarding is an important part of the
game. Compare French card game &eacute;cart&eacute;, literally cards removed.


skate (n.1)

type of flat, cartilaginous fish, a kind of ray, mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse skata skate, Danish skade, Faeroese sk&#248;ta, of unknown origin.


skate (n.2)

ice skate, 1660s, skeates ice skates, from Dutch schaats (plural schaatsen), a singular mistaken in
English for plural, from Middle Dutch schaetse. The word and the custom were brought to England
after the Restoration by exiled followers of Charles II who had taken refuge in Holland.    The
Dutch word is from Old North French escache a stilt, trestle, related to Old French eschace stilt
(French &eacute;chasse), from Frankish *skakkja stilt or a similar Germanic source (compare Frisian
skatja stilt), perhaps literally thing that shakes or moves fast and related to root of Old English
sceacan to vibrate (see shake (v.)). Or perhaps [Klein] the Dutch word is connected to Middle Low
German schenke, Old English scanca leg (see shank). Sense alteration in Dutch from stilt to skate is
not clearly traced. Sense in English extended to roller-skates by 1876. Meaning an act of skating is
from 1853.


skate (v.)

1690s, to ice-skate, from skate (n.2). U.S. slang sense of to get away with something is attested
from 1945. Related: Skated; skating.


skateboard

1964, noun and verb, from skate (v.) on model of surfboard. The phenomenon began c.1963 in southern
California and was nationwide the following summer.    Skateboarding requires only a tapered piece
of wood flexibly mounted on roller-skate wheels and a stretch of pavement -- preferably downhill and
away from traffic. [Life, June 5, 1964]


skater (n.)

1700, one who ice-skates, agent noun from skate (v.). Extended to skateboarders by 1977.


sked (n.)

short for schedule, student slang from 1929.


skedaddle (v.)

to run away, 1861, American Civil War military slang, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to
earlier use in northern England dialect with a meaning to spill. Liberman says it has no connection
with any word of Greek, Irish, or Swedish, and it is not a blend [contra De Vere]. He calls it
instead an enlargement of dial. scaddle 'scare, frighten.' Related: Skedaddled; skedaddling. As a
noun from 1870.


Skee-Ball (n.)

1909, proprietary name (Skee-Ball Alley Company, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.), the first element said to
represent the old alternative spelling of ski (v.).    Skee ball bowling, in which the ball is
jumped or skeed into the pockets in the same manner as a skee-jumper rises from the bump in his
flight, is a new and unique hand-ball game that seems destined to great popularity. [Popular
Mechanics, July 1909]


skeet (n.)

form of trapshooting, 1926, a name chosen as a very old form of our present word 'shoot.'  Perhaps
Old Norse skotja to shoot (see shoot (v.)) was intended.


skeeter (n.)

colloquial shortening of mosquito, 1839, American English.


skeezicks (n.)

1850, rascal, rogue, of unknown origin, perhaps a fanciful formation. In early 20c. used
affectionately or playfully of children.


skein (n.)

fixed quantity of yarn doubled over and over and knotted, mid-15c., from Middle French escaigne a
hank of yarn (Old French escagne, mid-14c., Modern French &#233;cagne), of uncertain origin. Compare
Medieval Latin scagna a skein, Irish sgainne a skein, clue.


skeletal (adj.)

1849, from skeleton + -al (1). Related: Skeletally.


skeleton (n.)

1570s, from Modern Latin sceleton bones, bony framework of the body, from Greek skeleton soma dried-
up body, mummy, skeleton, from neuter of skeletos dried-up (also, as a noun, dried body, mummy),
from skellein dry up, make dry, parch, from PIE root *skele- to parch, wither (see sclero-).
Skelton was an early variant form. The noun use of Greek skeletos passed into Late Latin (sceletus),
hence French squelette and rare English skelet (1560s), Spanish esqueleto, Italian scheletro. The
meaning bare outline is first recorded c.1600; hence skeleton crew (1778), skeleton key, etc. Phrase
skeleton in the closet source of secret shame to a person or family is from 1812.


skelm (n.)

also skellum, a rascal, scamp, scoundrel, 1610s, from Dutch schelm, from German schelm rascal,
devil, pestilence, etc., from Old High German scelmo. Used by Dryden, but Now arch. (except in
S.Africa) [OED].


skene (n.)

ancient type of Celtic dagger found in Ireland, double-edged and leaf-like, 1520s, from Irish Gaelic
scian (genitive sceine) knife, cognate with Gaelic sgian knife, Welsh ysgien a slicer, from PIE
*skiy-ena-, from root *skei- to divide, split (see shed (v.)).


skep (n.)

quantity measure for grain, etc.; basket, grain receptacle, c.1100, from Old Norse skeppa basket,
bushel. Related: Skepful.


skeptic (n.)

also sceptic, 1580s, member of an ancient Greek school that doubted the possibility of real
knowledge, from Middle French sceptique and directly from Latin scepticus the sect of the Skeptics,
from Greek skeptikos (plural Skeptikoi the Skeptics, followers of Pyrrho), noun use of adjective
meaning inquiring, reflective (the name taken by the disciples of the Greek philosopher Pyrrho, who
lived c.360-c.270 B.C.E.), related to skeptesthai to reflect, look, view (see scope (n.1)).  Skeptic
does not mean him who doubts, but him who investigates or researches as opposed to him who asserts
and thinks that he has found. [Miguel de Unamuno, Essays and Soliloquies, 1924]  The extended sense
of one with a doubting attitude first recorded 1610s. The sk- spelling is an early 17c. Greek
revival and is preferred in U.S. As a verb, scepticize (1690s) failed to catch on.


skeptical (adj.)

also sceptical, 1630s; see skeptic + -al (1). Related: Skeptically.


skepticism (n.)

also scepticism, 1640s, from skeptic + -ism. Specifically regarding Christian religion, from 1800.


skerry (n.)

isolated rock in the sea, 1610s, from Old Norse sker, related to skera to cut off (see shear (v.)).


sketch (n.)

rough drawing intended to serve as the basis for a finished picture, 1660s, from Dutch schets or Low
German skizze, both apparently 17c. artists' borrowings from Italian schizzo sketch, drawing, which
is commonly said to be from Latin *schedius (OED compares schedia raft, schedium an extemporaneous
poem), from or related to Greek skhedios temporary, extemporaneous, done or made off-hand, related
to skhema form, shape, appearance (see scheme (n.)). But according to Barnhart Italian schizzo is a
special use of schizzo a splash, squirt, from schizzare to splash or squirt, of uncertain origin.
Extended sense of brief account is from 1660s; meaning short play or performance, usually comic is
from 1789. Sketch-book recorded from 1820. German Skizze, French esquisse, Spanish esquicio are
likewise from Italian schizzo.


sketch (v.)

1690s, present the essential facts of, from sketch (n.). Meaning draw, portray in outline and
partial shading is from 1725. Related: Sketched; sketcher; sketching.


sketchy (adj.)

1805, having the form or character of a sketch, from sketch (n.) + -y (2). Colloquial sense of
unsubstantial, imperfect, flimsy is from 1878, perhaps via the notion of unfinished. Related:
Sketchily; sketchiness.


skew (v.)

late 15c., to turn aside (intransitive), from Old North French eskiuer shy away from, avoid, Old
French eschiver (see eschew). Transitive sense of turn (something) aside is from 1570s. Meaning
depict unfairly first recorded 1872, on notion of being give oblique direction to, hence to distort,
to make slant. Statistical sense dates from 1929. Related: Skewed; skewing. The adjectival meaning
slanting, turned to one side is recorded from c.1600, from the verb; noun meaning slant, deviation
first attested 1680s.


skewbald (adj.)

1650s, having white and brown (or some other color) patches, spotted in an irregular manner (used
especially of horses), from skued skewbald (mid-15c.), of unknown origin, + bald having white
patches (see bald). First element said to be unconnected with skew (v.) (but Klein's sources say it
is); OED suggests perhaps from Old French escu shield, but also notes a close resemblance in form
and sense with Icelandic skjottr, the history of which is equally obscure. Watkins says it is
Scandinavian and akin to Old Norse sky cloud on the resemblance of the markings to cloud cover.
When the white is mixed with black it is called 'pie-bald,' with bay the name of 'skew-bald' is
given to it. [Youatt's 'The Horse,'  1866]    As a noun meaning skewbald horse from 1863.


skewer (n.)

1670s, variant of dialectal skiver (1660s), perhaps from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
skifa a cut, slice (of bread, etc.), Swedish skifer a slate, which are related to shiver (n.1) small
piece.


skewer (v.)

1701, from the noun. Related: Skewered; skewering.


skewness (n.)

1877, from skew + -ness.


ski (n.)

1883 (there is an isolated instance from 1755; in early use often spelled skee), from Norwegian ski,
related to Old Norse ski&eth; long snowshoe, literally stick of wood, firewood, cognate with Old
English scid stick of wood, obsolete English shide piece of wood split off from timber; Old High
German skit, German Scheit log, from Proto-Germanic *skid- to divide, split, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, split (see shed (v.)). Ski-jumper is from 1894; ski bum first attested 1960; ski-mask is from
1963; noted as part of criminal disguises from 1968.


ski (v.)

1885, from ski (n.). Related: Skied; skiing.


Ski-doo (n.)

proprietary name of a type of snowmobile, 1961, from ski.


skid (n.)

c.1600, beam or plank on which something rests, especially on which something heavy can be rolled
from place to place (1782), of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old
Norse ski&eth; stick of wood (see ski (n.)). As a sliding along from 1890; specifically of motor
vehicles from 1903. Skid-mark is from 1914.    In the timber regions of the American West, skids
laid down one after another to form a road were a poor thing for pleasure walks, but admirably
adapted for hauling logs on the ground with a minimum of friction [Out West magazine, October 1903].
A skid as something used to facilitate downhill motion led to figurative phrases such as hit the
skids go into rapid decline (1909), and see skid row.


skid (v.)

1670s, apply a skid to (a wheel, to keep it from turning), from skid (n.). Meaning slide along first
recorded 1838; extended sense of slip sideways (on a wet road, etc.) first recorded 1884. The
original notion is of a block of wood for stopping a wheel; the modern senses are from the notion of
a wheel slipping when blocked from revolving.


skid row (n.)

place where vagabonds, low-lifes, and out-of-work men gather in a town, 1921, with reference to
Seattle, Washington, U.S., a variant of skid road track of skids along which logs are rolled (1851);
see skid (n.); the sense of which was extended to part of town inhabited by loggers (1906), then, by
hobos, to disreputable district (1915); probably shaded by the notion of go downhill.


skidoo (v.)

a vogue word of 1905, to leave in a hurry, perhaps a variant of skedaddle (q.v.). The association
with twenty-three is as old as the word, but the exact connection is obscure.    Then skidoo, little
girl, skidoo.  23 is the number for you.  [1906]


skier (n.)

1895, agent noun from ski (v.).


skiff (n.)

small boat, 1570s, from French esquif (1540s), from Italian schifo little boat, from a Germanic
source (such as Old High German scif boat; see ship (n.)). Originally the small boat of a ship.


skiffle (n.)

style of U.K. pop music, 1957, from U.S. slang meaning type of jazz played on improvised instruments
(1926), of unknown origin.


skiing (n.)

1885, verbal noun from ski (v.).    THE new sport which has lately been introduced at Beloit is
skeeing. They are long ash planks, carefully and turned up at the end, and are warranted to take
down hill quicker than a wink. After some practice performers become very expert, and the speed with
which they go is something surprising. [Beloit College, Wisconsin, Round Table, Dec. 18, 1885]


skill (n.)

late 12c., power of discernment, from Old Norse skil distinction, ability to make out, discernment,
adjustment, related to skilja (v.) to separate; discern, understand, from Proto-Germanic *skaljo-
divide, separate (cognates: Swedish sk&#228;l reason, Danish skjel a separation, boundary, limit,
Middle Low German schillen to differ, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schele separation,
discrimination; see shell (n.)). Sense of ability, cleverness first recorded early 13c.


skilled (adj.)

1550s, past participle adjective from skill (v.) to have personal and practical knowledge (c.1200),
from Old Norse skilja separate, part, divide; break off, break up; part company, take leave;
discern, distinguish; understand, find out; decide, settle, from the source of skill (n.).


skillet (n.)

c.1400, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Middle French esculette a little dish (Modern French
&eacute;cuelle), diminutive of escuele plate, from Latin scutella serving platter (see scuttle
(n.)); or formed in English from skele wooden bucket or pail (early 14c.), from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse skjola pail, bucket.


skillful (adj.)

also skilful, early 14c., from skill + -ful. Related: Skillfully; skilfully.


skim (v.)

early 15c. (skimmer, the utensil, is attested from late 14c.), to clear (a liquid) from matter
floating on the surface, lift the scum from, from Old French escumer remove scum, from escume
(Modern French &eacute;cume) scum, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German scum scum, German
Schaum; see scum). Meaning to throw (a stone) so as to skip across the surface of (water) is from
1610s. Meaning to move lightly and rapidly over the surface of is from 1650s, from the motion
involved in skimming liquid; that of to glance over carelessly (in reference to printed matter)
recorded by 1799. Related: Skimmed; skimming.


skim-milk (n.)

milk from which the cream has been skimmed, 1590s, from skim (v.) + milk (n.).


skimmer (n.)

skimming utensil, late 14c., agent noun from skim (v.). From 1751 as one who reads superficially.
The North American shore bird (1785) is so called from its method of feeding. As one who diverts
money from earnings for some private purpose by 1970.


skimp (v.)

1879, probably a back-formation of skimpy. Related: Skimped; skimping.


skimpy (adj.)

1842, from skimp (adj.) scanty (1775), which perhaps ultimately is from an early 18c. alteration of
scrimp or a variant of scamp (v.). Related: Skimpiness.


skin (n.)

c.1200, animal hide (usually dressed and tanned), from Old Norse skinn animal hide, fur, from Proto-
Germanic *skintha- (cognates: Old English scinn (rare), Old High German scinten, German schinden to
flay, skin; German dialectal schind skin of a fruit, Flemish schinde bark), from PIE *sken- to cut
off (cognates: Breton scant scale of a fish, Irish scainim I tear, I burst), from root *sek- to cut
(see section (n.)).    Ful of fleissche Y was to fele, Now ... Me is lefte But skyn &amp; boon.
[hymn, c.1430]    The usual Anglo-Saxon word is hide (n.1). Meaning epidermis of a living animal or
person is attested from early 14c.; extended to fruits, vegetables, etc. late 14c. Jazz slang sense
of drum is from 1927. Meaning a skinhead is from 1970. As an adjective, it formerly had a slang
sense of cheating (1868); sense of pornographic is attested from 1968. Skin deep is first attested
in this:    All the carnall beauty of my wife, Is but skin-deep. [Sir Thomas Overbury, A Wife, 1613;
the poem was a main motive for his murder]    The skin of one's teeth as the narrowest of margins is
attested from 1550s in the Geneva Bible literal translation of the Hebrew text in Job xix:20. To get
under (someone's) skin annoy is from 1896. Skin-graft is from 1871. Skin merchant recruiting officer
is from 1792.


skin (v.)

late 14c., to remove the skin from (originally of circumcision), from skin (n.). As to have (a
particular kind of) skin from c.1400. In 19c. U.S. colloquial use, to strip, fleece, plunder; hence
skin-game, one in which one player has no chance against the others (as with a stacked deck), the
type of con game played in a skin-house. Skin the cat in gymnastics is from 1845. Related: Skinned;
skinning.


skin-tight (adj.)

fitting like skin, 1885, originally of men's clothing, from skin (n.) + tight (adj.).


skinflint (n.)

miser, one who makes use of contemptible economy to keep money, 1700, slang; literally kind of
person who would skin a flint to save or gain something, from skin (v.) + flint. Flay-flint in same
sense is from 1670s.


skinhead (n.)

1969, in U.K. youth gang sense, from skin (n.) + head (n.). Earlier, in U.S., it meant man with a
crew cut (1953), especially a military recruit.


skink (n.)

1580s, from Middle French scinc (Modern French scinque), from Latin scincus, from Greek skinkos,
some kind of lizard common in Asia and North Africa, of unknown origin.


skinless (adj.)

mid-14c., from skin (n.) + -less. Related: Skinlessly; skinlessness.


skinner (n.)

late 14c., a dealer in skins, from skin (n.); as one who skins, 1690s, agent noun from skin (v.).
The surname is attested from mid-13c. Also in U.S. use one who strips, robs, or plunders; the name
given to a band of marauders who committed depredations on Loyalists in New York during the
Revolution. Compare Old Norse skinnari a dealer in skins; a skinner, tanner.


Skinner box (n.)

1940 (earlier Skinner apparatus, 1938), from U.S. psychologist B.F. Skinner (1904-1990).


skinny (adj.)

c.1400, resembling skin, from skin (n.) + -y (2). Meaning lean, emaciated is recorded from c.1600.
Of clothes, tight-fitting by 1970. In the noun sense of the truth it is World War II military slang,
perhaps from the notion of the naked truth. Related: skinniness.


skinny-dipping (n.)

1959, from skinny + dip (v.). Skinny-dip is from 1962.


skint (adj.)

broke, out of money, 1925, slang variant of skinned, past participle of skin (v.).


skip (v.)

c.1300, to spring lightly, also to jump over, probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
skopa to take a run, Middle Swedish skuppa to skip, leap, from Proto-Germanic *skupan (cognates:
Middle Swedish skuppa, dialectal Swedish skopa to skip, leap).  Related: Skipped; skipping.
Meaning omit intervening parts first recorded late 14c. Meaning fail to attend is from 1905. Meaning
to cause to skip or bound is from 1680s. The custom of skipping rope has been traced to 17c.; it was
commonly done by boys as well as girls until late 19c.


skip (n.2)

short for skipper (n.1), 1830, originally in sports jargon (curling).


skip (n.1)

a spring, a bound, early 15c., from skip (v.). Meaning a passing over or disregarding is from 1650s.


skipjack (n.)

1550s, a pert shallow-brained fellow; a puppy, a whipper-snapper; a conceited fop or dandy [OED],
from skip (v.) + generic name jack (n.). Applied 1703 to tropical fishes with leaping tendencies. In
reference to a kind of sailing boat used on Chesapeake Bay, attested from 1887.


skipper (n.1)

captain or master of a ship, late 14c., from Middle Dutch scipper, from scip (see ship (n.)).
Compare English shipper, used from late 15c. to 17c. in sense skipper. Transferred sense of captain
of a sporting team is from 1830.


skipper (n.2)

one who skips, mid-15c., agent noun from skip (v.). As a type of butterfly, 1817, from its manner of
flight.


skirl (v.)

to make a shrill sound, mid-15c., from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian skyrla, skrella to
shriek), of imitative origin. In reference to bagpipes, it is attested by 1660s and now rarely used
otherwise. As a noun 1510s from the verb.


skirmish (n.)

late 14c., from Old French escarmouche skirmish, from Italian scaramuccia, earlier schermugio,
probably from a Germanic source (compare Old High German skirmen to protect, defend), with a
diminutive or depreciatory suffix, from Proto-Germanic *skerm-, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear (v.)).    Influenced in Middle English by a separate verb skirmysshen to brandish a weapon,
from Old French eskirmiss-, stem of eskirmir to fence, from Frankish *skirmjan, from the same
Germanic source. Compare scrimmage. Other modern Germanic forms have an additional diminutive affix:
German scharm&#252;tzel, Dutch schermutseling, Danish skj&#230;rmydsel. Skirmish-line attested by
1864.


skirmish (v.)

c.1200, from Old French escarmouchier, from Italian scaramucciare (see skirmish (n.)). Related:
Skirmished; skirmishing.


skirt (n.)

early 14c., lower part of a woman's dress, from Old Norse skyrta shirt, a kind of kirtle; see shirt.
Sense development from shirt to skirt is possibly related to the long shirts of peasant garb
(compare Low German cognate Sch&ouml;rt, in some dialects woman's gown). Sense of border, edge (in
outskirts, etc.) first recorded late 15c. Metonymic use for women collectively is from 1550s; slang
sense of young woman is from 1906; skirt-chaser first attested 1942.


skirt (v.)

c.1600, to border, form the edge of, from skirt (n.). Meaning to pass along the edge is from 1620s.
Related: Skirted; skirting.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


skite (n.)

contemptible person, 1790, Scottish and Northern, earlier sudden stroke or blow (1785), perhaps from
Old Norse skyt-, from skjota to shoot (see shoot (v.)). Compare Old Norse skita to shit, which might
have had some influence.


skitter (v.)

to run rapidly, 1845, frequentative of skite to dart, run quickly (1721), perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse skjota to shoot, launch, move quickly, avoid (a blow);
Norwegian dialectal skutla glide rapidly); see skittish. As a noun from 1905.


skittish (adj.)

early 15c., very lively, frivolous, perhaps from Scandinavian base *skyt- (stem of Old Norse skjota
to shoot, launch, move quickly), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see
shoot (v.)). Sense of shy, nervous, apt to run first recorded c.1500, of horses. Related:
Skittishly; skittishness.


skittles (n.)

game played with nine pins, 1630s, plural of skittle, the word for the pins used in the game,
probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish and Norwegian skyttel shuttle, child's toy). But
OED says there is no evidence of a connection.


skive (v.1)

split or cut into strips, pare off, grind away, 1825, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
skifa to cut, split, from Proto-Germanic *skif-, from Proto-Indo-European *skei- to cut, split (see
shed (v.)). Related: Skived; skiving.


skive (v.2)

evade duty, usually with off, 1919, probably from earlier sense move lightly and quickly, dart
(1854), of unknown origin. Related: Skived; skiving.


skivvies (n.)

underwear, 1932, nautical slang, of unknown origin. An earlier skivvy/skivey was London slang for
female domestic servant (1902).


skoal (interj.)

also skol, Scandinavian toasting word, c.1600, from Danish skaal a toast, literally bowl, cup, from
Old Norse skal bowl, drinking vessel, originally a cup made from a shell, from Proto-Germanic
*skelo, from PIE *(s)kel- (1) to cut (see shell (n.)). The word first appears in Scottish English,
and may have been connected to the visit of James VI of Scotland to Denmark in 1589.


skosh

a little bit, Korean War armed forces slang, from Japanese sukoshi few, little, some.


Skraeling (n.)

1767, Norse name for inhabitants of Greenland encountered by the Viking settlers there, from Old
Norse Skr&aelig;ingjar (plural), apparently literally little men (compare Icelandic skr&aelig;lna
shrink); another term for them was smair menn. The name may have been used first in reference to the
inhabitants of Vineland (who would have been Indians), then transferred to Eskimos, who adopted it
into their own language as Kalaleq.  Hans Egede, who published a dictionary of Greenland Eskimo in
1739, says that the Eskimos themselves told him that they got the name from the Norsemen who once
lived in Greenland. [Gordon, p.217-8]


sku (n.)

by 1974, acronym from stock-keeping unit.


skua (n.)

type of predatory gull, 1670s, from Faeroese skugvur, related to Old Norse skufr seagull, tuft,
tassel, and possibly to skauf fox's tail.


skulduddery (n.)

also sculduddery, fornication, 1713; see skulduggery.


skulduggery (n.)

1856, apparently an alteration of Scottish sculdudrie adultery (1713), sculduddery bawdry, obscenity
(1821), a euphemism of uncertain origin.


skulk (v.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source such as Norwegian skulke to shirk, malinger, Danish skulke to
spare oneself, shirk, Swedish skolka to shirk, skulk, slink, play truant. Common in Middle English
but lacking in 15c.-16c. records; possibly reborrowed 17c. Related: Skulked; skulking; skulker;
skulkery.


skull (n.)

bony framework of the head, c.1200, probably from Old Norse skalli a bald head, skull, a general
Scandinavian word (compare Swedish skulle, Norwegian skult), probably related to Old English scealu
husk (see shell (n.)). But early prominence in southwestern texts suggests rather origin from a
Dutch or Low German cognate (such as Dutch schol turf, piece of ice, but the sense of head bone
framework is wanting). Derivation from Old French escuelle seems unlikely on grounds of sound and
sense. Old English words for skull include heafod-bolla.


skull-cap (n.)

1680s, from skull (n.) + cap (n.).


skunk (n.)

1630s, squunck, from a southern New England Algonquian language (probably Abenaki) seganku, from
Proto-Algonquian */&#353;eka:kwa/, from */&#353;ek-/ to urinate + */-a:kw/ fox. As an insult,
attested from 1841. Skunk cabbage is attested from 1751; earlier skunkweed (1738).


skunk (v.)

to completely defeat (in a game), to shut out from scoring, 1831, from skunk (n.). Related: Skunked;
skunking.


sky (n.)

c.1200, a cloud, from Old Norse sky cloud, from Proto-Germanic *skeujam cloud, cloud cover
(cognates: Old English sceo, Old Saxon scio cloud, region of the clouds, sky; Old High German scuwo,
Old English scua, Old Norse skuggi shadow; Gothic skuggwa mirror), from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover,
conceal (see hide (n.1)).    Meaning upper regions of the air is attested from c.1300; replaced
native heofon in this sense (see heaven). In Middle English, the word can still mean both cloud and
heaven, as still in the skies, originally the clouds. Sky-high is from 1812; phrase the sky's the
limit is attested from 1908. Sky-dive first recorded 1965; sky-writing is from 1922.


sky (v.)

to raise or throw toward the skies, 1802, from sky (n.).


skyclad (adj.)

also sky-clad, naked, 1909, from sky (n.) + clad. Perhaps translating Sanskrit digam-bara having the
four quarters for clothing.


skyhook (n.)

also sky-hook, imaginary device to hold things up, 1915, originally aviators' jargon, from sky (n.)
+ hook (n.). Applied from 1935 to actual device for lifting things into the air.


skyjack (v.)

to hijack an airplane, 1961, apparently coined in New York Mirror headlines, from sky (n.) + second
element of hijack (q.v.).


Skylab (n.)

name of a U.S. space program, first attested 1970, launched 1973, fell to earth 1979. From sky (n.)
+ lab (n.).


skylark (n.)

the common European lark, 1680s, from sky (n.) + lark (n.1). So called because it sings as it mounts
toward the sky in flight.


skylark (v.)

to frolic or play, 1809, originally nautical, in reference to wanton play about the rigging, and
tops, probably from skylark (n.), influenced by (or from) lark (n.2). Related: Skylarked;
skylarking.


skylight (n.)

1670s, light from the sky, from sky (n.) + light (n.). Meaning small opening in a roof to admit
light is recorded from 1680s. Related: Sky-lit.


skyline (n.)

horizon, 1824, from sky (n.) + line (n.).


skyrocket (n.)

1680s, type of firework, from sky (n.) + rocket (n.2). The verb, in the figurative sense of to rise
abruptly and rapidly (often with suggestion of 'and then explode and vanish') is attested from 1895.


skyscraper (n.)

very tall urban building, 1888, in a Chicago context, from sky (n.) + agent noun of scrape (v.).
Used earlier for ornament atop a building (1883), very tall man (1857), high-flying bird (1840),
light sail at the top of a mast (1794), and the name of a racehorse (1789). Compare cognate French
gratte-ciel, from gratter to scrape + ciel sky; German Wolkenkratzer, from Wolke cloud + Kratzer
scraper.    cloud-cleaver, an imaginary sail jokingly assumed to be carried by Yankee ships. [W.
Clark Russell, Sailors' Word Book, 1883]


slab (n.)

late 13c., large, flat mass, of unknown origin, possibly related to Old French escopel, escalpe thin
fragment of wood, which according to Klein is possibly a Gaulish word (compare Breton scolp, Welsh
ysgolp splinter, chip). But OED rejects this on formal grounds. Meaning rectangular block of pre-
cast concrete used in building is from 1927. Slab-sided is having flat sides like slabs, hence tall
and lank (1817, American English).


slack (n.2)

coal dust, mid-15c., sleck, of uncertain origin, probably related to Middle Dutch slacke, Middle Low
German slecke slag, small pieces left after coal is screened, perhaps related to slagge splinter
flying off metal when it is struck (see slag (n.)).


slack (adj.)

Old English sl&aelig;c remiss, lax, characterized by lack of energy, sluggish, indolent, languid;
slow, gentle, easy, from Proto-Germanic *slakas (cognates: Old Saxon slak, Old Norse slakr, Old High
German slah slack, Middle Dutch lac fault, lack), from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax).
Sense of not tight (in reference to things) is first recorded c.1300. As an adverb from late 14c.
Slack-key (1975) translates Hawaiian ki ho'alu. Slack water (n.) time when tide is not flowing is
from 1769. Slack-handed remiss is from 1670s. Slack-baked baked imperfectly, half-baked is from
1823; figuratively from 1840.


slack (n.1)

early 14c., cessation (of pain, grief, etc.), from slack (adj.). Meaning a cessation of flow in a
current or tide is from 1756; that of still stretch of a river is from 1825. Meaning loose part or
end (of a rope, sail, etc.) is from 1794; hence figurative senses in take up the slack (1930
figuratively) and slang cut (someone) some slack (1968). Meaning quiet period, lull is from 1851.
Slacks loose trousers first recorded 1824, originally military.


slack (v.)

1510s, to moderate, make slack, back-formed from slack (adj.) after the original verb veered into
the specialized sense of slake. Meaning be remiss, inactive or idle, fail to exert oneself is
attested from 1540s; current use is probably a re-coining from c.1904 (see slacker, and compare Old
English slacful lazy, sleacmodnes laziness). Related: Slacked; slacking.


slack-jawed (adj.)

1882, over-talkative, from slack-jaw (n.) impertinent language (1797), from slack (adj.) + jaw (n.).
Meaning open-mouthed and speechless from astonishment, stupidity, etc., is from 1905.


slacken (v.)

early 15c., from slack (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Slackened; slackening.


slacker (n.)

popularized 1994, but the meaning person who shirks work dates to 1897; agent noun from slack (v.).
In early use also slackster (1901). Compare Old English sleacornes laziness, which is not, however,
an agent noun. Related: Slackerly; slackerish.


slackly (adv.)

Old English sl&aelig;clice; see slack (adj.) + -ly (2).


slackness (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;cnes slowness, remissness, laziness; see slack (adj.) + -ness.


slag (n.)

refuse from smelting, 1550s, from Middle Low German slagge (German Schlacke) splinter flying off
when metal is struck, related to Old High German slahan to strike, slay (see slay (v.)).


slag (v.)

denigrate, by 1971, from slag (n.) in a secondary sense of worthless person (1788). Related:
Slagged; slagging.


slain (adj.)

early 13c., from Old English (ge)slegen, past participle of slean (see slay (v.)). The noun meaning
those who have been slain is attested from mid-14c.


slake (v.)

late Old English sleacian, slacian become slack or remiss; slacken an effort (intransitive); delay,
retard (transitive), from sl&aelig;c lax (see slack (adj.)). Transitive sense of make slack is from
late 12c. Sense of allay, diminish in force, quench, extinguish (in reference to thirst, hunger,
desire, wrath, etc.) first recorded early 14c. via notion of make slack or inactive. Related:
Slaked; slaking.


slalom (n.)

1921, from Norwegian slalam skiing race, literally sloping track, from sla slope + lam track
(related to Norwegian laan a row of houses; compare lane).


slam (n.1)

1670s, a severe blow, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian slamre, Swedish slemma
to slam, bang) of imitative origin. Meaning a violent closing of a door is from 1817. Meaning an
insult, put-down is from 1884. Slam-bang recorded by 1806 (also slap-bang, 1785). Slam-dunk is from
1976; early use often in reference to Julius Erving. Slam-dance is attested by 1987 (slam by itself
in this sense is recorded from 1983).


slam (n.2)

a winning of all tricks in a card game, 1660s, earlier the name of a card game (also called ruff),
1620s, used especially in whist, of obscure origin. Grand slam in bridge first recorded 1892;
earlier in related card games from 1814; figurative sense of complete success is attested from 1920;
in baseball sense from 1935.


slam (v.)

1690s, to beat, slap; 1775 as to shut with force, from slam (n.1). Meaning throw or push with force
is from 1870. Meaning say uncomplimentary things about is from 1916. Related: Slammed; slamming.


slammer (n.)

jail, prison, 1952, perhaps from earlier U.S. slang sense of door (by 1943), agent noun from slam
(v.). As one who slams, from 1892.


slander (n.)

late 13c., state of impaired reputation, disgrace or dishonor; c.1300, a false tale; the fabrication
and dissemination of false tales, from Anglo-French esclaundre, Old French esclandre scandalous
statement, alteration (with interloping l [Century Dictionary]) of escandle, escandre scandal, from
Latin scandalum cause of offense, stumbling block, temptation (see scandal). From late 14c. as bad
situation, evil action; a person causing such a state of affairs.


slander (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French esclaundrer, Old French esclandrer, from esclandre (see slander (n.)).
Related: Slandered; slandering; slanderer.


slanderous (adj.)

early 15c., from slander + -ous. Related: Slanderously; slanderousness.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


slangy (adj.)

1822, from slang (n.) + -y (2). Related: Slanginess. Slangular (1852) also was tried.


slant (n.)

1650s, an oblique direction or plane (originally of landforms), from slant (v.). Meaning a way of
regarding something is from 1905. Derogatory slang sense of a slant-eyed Asian person is recorded
from 1943, from earlier slant-eyes (1929).


slant (v.)

1520s, to strike obliquely (against something), alteration of slenten slip sideways (c.1300),
perhaps via a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish slinta to slip, Norwegian slenta to fall on one
side), from Proto-Germanic *slintanan. Intransitive sense of to slope, to lie obliquely is first
recorded 1690s; transitive sense of to give a sloping direction to is from 1805. Related: Slanted;
slanting. As an adverb from late 15c.; as an adjective from 1610s. Slant rhyme attested from 1944.


slantways (adv.)

1826, from slant (n.) + way (n.) + adverbial genitive -s.


slap (v.)

late 15c., strike with the open hand, from slap (n.). As an adverb, 1670s, suddenly; 1829, directly.
Related: Slapped; slapping.


slap (n.)

mid-15c., probably of imitative origin, similar to Low German slappe, German Schlappe. Figurative
meaning insult, reprimand is attested from 1736. Slap-happy (1936) originally meant punch-drunk.
Slap on the wrist very mild punishment dates from 1914.


slapdash (adv.)

1670s, from slap (v.) + dash (v.). As an adjective, dashing, offhand, careless, from 1792. As a
noun, rough-coat, coarse plaster, from 1796.


slapper (n.)

large or impressive person or thing, 1781, agent noun from slap (v.). Also see whopper.


slapshot (n.)

in ice hockey, 1942, from slap (v.) + shot (n.).


slapstick (n.)

also slap-stick, originally (1896) a device consisting of two sticks fastened together so as to slap
loudly when a clown or actor hits somebody with it, or to make a sound-effect offstage; from slap
and stick (n.). As an adjective by 1906. Meaning farcical physical comedy, horseplay (1916) is short
for slapstick comedy or humor.


slash (v.)

1540s, to cut with a stroke of a blade or whip; 1650s, to strike violently, perhaps from Middle
French esclachier to break, variant of esclater to break, splinter (see slat). Meaning to clear land
(of trees) is from 1821, American English. In reference to prices, it is attested from 1906.
Related: Slashed; slashing. Slash-and-burn for a method of clearing forest for cultivation is from
1919.


slash (n.)

a cutting stroke with a weapon, 1570s, from slash (v.); sense of slit in a garment is from 1610s;
that of open tract in a forest is first attested 1825, American English. As a punctuation mark in
writing or printing, it is recorded from 1961.


slasher (n.)

1550s, a bully, a fighter; 1815, weapon for slashing, agent noun from slash (v.). As violent movie
by 1978.


slat (n.)

late 14c., earlier sclat (c.1300), a roofing slate, a thin, flat stone, from Old French esclat split
piece, chip, splinter (Modern French &#233;clat), back-formation from esclater to break, splinter,
burst, probably from Frankish *slaitan to tear, slit or some other Germanic source (compare Old High
German slizan, Old English slitan; see slit (v.)). Meaning long, thin, narrow piece of wood or metal
attested from 1764.


slate (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French esclate, fem. of esclat split piece, splinter (Modern French &eacute;clat;
see slat), so called because the rock splits easily into thin plates. As an adjective, 1510s. As a
color, first recorded 1813. Sense of a writing tablet (made of slate), first recorded late 14c., led
to that of list of preliminary candidates prepared by party managers, first recorded 1842, from
notion of being easily altered or erased. Clean slate (1856) is an image from customer accounts
chalked up in a tavern.


slate (v.)

1520s, to cover with slates (earlier sclatten, late 15c.), from slate (n.). Meaning propose,
schedule is from 1883; earlier to nominate (1804); the notion is of writing on a slate board.
Related: Slated; slating.


slater (n.)

one who makes or lays slates, c.1400 (mid-13c. as a surname), agent noun from slate.


slather (v.)

spread liberally, 1847, of uncertain origin. Early 19c. local glossaries from western England have
the word with a sense to slip or slide.   Slather on the manure on all the hoed crops, if you have
it; if not buy of your improvident neighbor. [Genesee Farmer, June 1847]    Sometimes said to be
from a dialectal noun meaning large amount (usually as plural, slathers), but this is first attested
1855. Related: Slathered; slathering.


slattern (n.)

1630s, a woman negligent or disordered in her dress or household, of uncertain origin, probably
related to Low German Slattje, Dutch slodder, dialectal Swedish slata slut (in the older, non-sexual
sense; compare slut). Compare dialectal English verb slatter to spill or splash awkwardly, to waste,
used of women or girls considered untidy or slovenly.


slatternly (adj.)

1670s, from slattern + -ly (1).


slaughter (n.)

c.1300, killing of a cattle or sheep for food, killing of a person, from a Scandinavian *slahtr,
akin to Old Norse slatr a butchering, butcher meat, slatra to slaughter, slattr a mowing from Proto-
Germanic *slukhtis, related to Old Norse sla to strike (see slay (v.)) + formative suffix (as in
laugh/laughter). Meaning killing of a large number of persons in battle is attested from mid-14c.
Old English had slieht stroke, slaughter, murder, death; animals for slaughter; as in sliehtswyn pig
for killing.


slaughter (v.)

1530s, butcher an animal for market, from slaughter (n.). Meaning slay wantonly, ruthlessly, or in
great numbers is from 1580s. Related: Slaughtered; slaughtering.


slaughterhouse (n.)

also slaughter-house, late 14c., place where animals are butchered for market, from slaughter (n.) +
house (n.). The Slaughter-house cases in U.S. history were 1873.


Slav (n.)

late 14c., Sclave, from Medieval Latin Sclavus (c.800), from Byzantine Greek Sklabos (c.580), from
Old Church Slavonic Sloveninu a Slav, probably related to slovo word, speech, which suggests the
name originally identified a member of a speech community (compare Old Church Slavonic Nemici
Germans, related to nemu dumb; and Old English &thorn;eode, which meant both race and language).
Identical with the -slav in personal names (such as Russian Miroslav, literally peaceful fame;
Mstislav vengeful fame; Jaroslav famed for fury; Czech Bohuslav God's glory; and see Wenceslas).
Spelled Slave c.1788-1866, influenced by French and German Slave. As an adjective from 1876.


slave (n.)

late 13c., person who is the chattel or property of another, from Old French esclave (13c.), from
Medieval Latin Sclavus slave (source also of Italian schiavo, French esclave, Spanish esclavo),
originally Slav (see Slav); so used in this secondary sense because of the many Slavs sold into
slavery by conquering peoples.  This sense development arose in the consequence of the wars waged by
Otto the Great and his successors against the Slavs, a great number of whom they took captive and
sold into slavery. [Klein]    Meaning one who has lost the power of resistance to some habit or vice
is from 1550s. Applied to devices from 1904, especially those which are controlled by others
(compare slave jib in sailing, similarly of locomotives, flash bulbs, amplifiers). Slave-driver is
attested from 1807; extended sense of cruel or exacting task-master is by 1854. Slate state in U.S.
history is from 1812. Slave-trade is attested from 1734.    Old English Wealh Briton also began to
be used in the sense of serf, slave c.850; and Sanskrit dasa-, which can mean slave, apparently is
connected to dasyu- pre-Aryan inhabitant of India. Grose's dictionary (1785) has under Negroe A
black-a-moor; figuratively used for a slave, without regard to race. More common Old English words
for slave were &thorn;eow (related to &thorn;eowian to serve) and &thorn;r&aelig;l (see thrall). The
Slavic words for slave (Russian rab, Serbo-Croatian rob, Old Church Slavonic rabu) are from Old
Slavic *orbu, from the PIE root *orbh- (also source of orphan), the ground sense of which seems to
be thing that changes allegiance (in the case of the slave, from himself to his master). The Slavic
word is also the source of robot.


slave (v.)

1550s, to enslave, from slave (n.). The meaning work like a slave is first recorded 1719. Related:
Slaved; slaving.


Slave

Indian tribe of northwestern Canada, 1789, from slave (n.), translating Cree (Algonquian) awahkan
captive, slave.


slaver (v.)

dribble from the mouth, early 14c., from Old Norse slafra to slaver, probably imitative (compare
slobber (v.)). Related: Slavered; slavering. The noun is from early 14c.


slaver (n.)

ship in the slave trade, 1830, agent noun from slave (v.). Meaning person in the slave trade is from
1842.


slavery (n.)

1550s, severe toil, hard work, drudgery; from slave (v.) + -ery. Meaning state of servitude is from
1570s; meaning keeping or holding of slaves is from 1728.


Slavic (adj.)

1813; see Slav + -ic. Earlier in same sense was Slavonic (1640s), from Slavonia, a region of
Croatia; Slavonian (1570s). As a noun in reference to a language group from 1812.


slavish (adj.)

1560s, from slave (n.) + -ish. Sense of servilely imitative, lacking originality or independence is
from 1753. Related: Slavishly; slavishness.


slavocracy (n.)

also slaveocracy, in U.S. history, the political dominance of slave-owners, 1840, formed irregularly
from slave (n.) + -cracy. Related: Slavocrat.


slaw (n.)

sliced cabbage, 1794, from Dutch sla, short for salade, from French salade (see salad).


slay (v.)

Old English slean to smite, strike, beat, also to kill with a weapon, slaughter (class VI strong
verb; past tense sloh, slog, past participle slagen), from Proto-Germanic *slahan, from root *slog-
to hit (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian sla, Danish slaa, Middle Dutch slaen, Dutch slaan, Old
High German slahan, German schlagen, Gothic slahan to strike). The Germanic words are from PIE root
*slak- to strike (cognates: Middle Irish past participle slactha struck, slacc sword).    Modern
German cognate schlagen maintains the original sense of to strike. Meaning overwhelm with delight
(mid-14c.) preserves one of the wide range of meanings the word once had, including, in Old English,
stamp (coins); forge (weapons); throw, cast; pitch (a tent), to sting (of a snake); to dash, rush,
come quickly; play (the harp); gain by conquest.


slay (n.)

instrument on a weaver's loom to beat up the weft, Old English sl&#230;, slea, slahae, from root
meaning strike (see slay (v.)), so called from striking the web together. Hence the surname
Slaymaker maker of slays.


slayer (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from slay (v.). The Old English agent noun was slaga slayer, killer.


sleave (v.)

to separate or divide (threads, strands, fibers), Old English -sl&#230;fan, from stem of -slifan to
separate, split, cleave, from Proto-Germanic *slifanan, perhaps related to the root of slip (v.).
Compare German Schleife a loop, knot, noose. Related: Sleaved; sleaving. As a noun, knotted, tangled
silk or thread, 1590s, from the verb; this is the word in Shakespeare's rauel'd Sleeue of Care
(Macbeth).


sleaze (n.)

condition of squalor, by 1967, back-formation from sleazy. Meaning person of low moral standards,
and the adjectival use, are attested from 1976.


sleazy (adj.)

1640s, downy, fuzzy, later flimsy, unsubstantial (1660s), of unknown origin; one theory is that it
is a corruption of Silesia, the German region, where thin linen or cotton fabric was made for
export. Silesia in reference to cloth is attested in English from 1670s; and sleazy as an
abbreviated form is attested from 1670), but OED is against this. Sense of sordid is from 1941.
Related: Sleazily; sleaziness.    A day is a more magnificent cloth than any muslin, the mechanism
that makes it is infinitely cunninger, and you shall not conceal the sleazy, fraudulent, rotten
hours you have slipped into the piece, nor fear that any honest thread, or straighter steel, or more
inflexible shaft, will not testify in the web. [Emerson, The Conduct of Life, 1860]


sled (n.)

early 14c., a dragged vehicle used for transport of heavy goods, from Middle Dutch sledde sled, from
Proto-Germanic *slid- (cognates: Old Saxon slido, Old Norse sle&eth;i, Danish sl&aelig;de, Swedish
sl&auml;de, Old High German slito, German Schlitten sledge), from the same root as Old English
slidan (see slide (v.)). Not found in Old English. In reference to a sleigh used for travel or
recreation, it is attested from 1580s, now mainly American English.


sled (v.)

transport on a sled, 1718; ride on a sled, 1780, from sled (n.). Related: Sledded; sledding.


sledge (n.1)

heavy hammer, Old English slecg hammer, mallet, from Proto-Germanic *slagjo- (cognates: Old Norse
sleggja, Middle Swedish sleggia sledgehammer), related to slege beating, blow, stroke and slean to
strike (see slay (v.)). Sledgehammer is pleonastic.


sledge (n.2)

sleigh, 1610s, from dialectal Dutch sleedse, variant of slede (see sled (n.)); said by OED to be
perhaps of Frisian origin.


sledgehammer (n.)

late 15c., from sledge (n.1) + hammer (n.). As a verb, from 1834. Old English had slegebytel hammer,
from beetle (n.2).


sleek (adj.)

1580s, variant of Middle English slike (see slick (adj.)). Originally of healthy-looking animal
hair; applied to persons 1630s, with sense of plump and smooth-skinned. Figurative meaning slick,
fawning, flattering is from 1590s.


sleek (v.)

make sleek, mid-15c., a variant of slick (v.). Related: Sleeked; sleeking.


sleep (v.)

Old English sl&aelig;pan to be or fall asleep; be dormant or inactive (class VII strong verb; past
tense slep, past participle sl&aelig;pen), from Proto-Germanic *slepan (cognates: Old Saxon slapan,
Old Frisian slepa, Middle Dutch slapen, Dutch slapen, Old High German slafen, German schlafen,
Gothic slepan to sleep), from PIE root *sleb- to be weak, sleep (cognates: Old Church Slavonic slabu
lax, weak, Lithuanian silpnas weak), which perhaps is connected to the root of slack (adj.). Sleep
with do the sex act with is in Old English:  Gif hwa f&aelig;mnan beswice unbeweddode, and hire mid
sl&aelig;pe ... [Laws of King Alfred, c.900]    Related: Slept; sleeping. Sleep around first
attested 1928.


sleep (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;p sleep, sleepiness, inactivity, from Proto-Germanic *slepaz, from the root of
sleep (v.); compare cognate Old Saxon slap, Old Frisian slep, Middle Dutch sl&aelig;p, Dutch slaap,
Old High German slaf, German Schlaf, Gothic sleps.    Personified in English from late 14c., on
model of Latin Somnus), Greek Hypnos. Figurative use for repose of death was in Old English; to put
(an animal) to sleep kill painlessly is recorded from 1923 (a similar imagery is in cemetery). Sleep
deprivation attested from 1906. Sleep-walker somnambulist is attested from 1747; sleep-walking is
from 1840. To be able to do something in (one's) sleep easily is recorded from 1953.


sleep-over (n.)

1935, from verbal phrase; see sleep (v.) + over (adv.).


sleeper (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;pere one who sleeps, one who is inclined to sleep much, agent noun from sleep
(v.). Meaning strong horizontal beam is from c.1600. Meaning dormant or inoperative thing is from
1620s. Meaning railroad sleeping car is from 1875. Sense of something whose importance proves to be
greater than expected first attested 1892, originally in American English sports jargon, probably
from earlier (1856) gambling slang sense of unexpected winning card. Meaning spy, enemy agent,
terrorist etc. who remains undercover for a long time before attempting his purpose first attested
1955, originally in reference to communist agents in the West.


sleeping (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from sleep (v.). Sleeping-pill is from 1660s; sleeping-bag is from
1850; sleeping sickness as a specific African tropical disease is first recorded 1875; sleeping has
been used since late 14c. for diseases marked by morbid conditions. Sleeping Beauty (1729) is
Perrault's La belle au bois dormant.    It is ill wakyng of a sleapyng dogge. [Heywood, 1562]   <hr
/>   It is nought good a slepyng hound to wake. [Chaucer, c.1385]


sleepless (adj.)

early 15c., from sleep (n.) + -less. Old English had sl&aelig;pleas but the modern word seems to be
a re-formation. Similar formation in German schlaflos, Dutch slapeloos. Related: Sleeplessly;
sleeplessness.


sleepy (adj.)

early 13c. from sleep (n.) + -y (2). Perhaps in Old English but not recorded. Old English had
sl&aelig;por, sl&aelig;pwerig in the sense sleepy; sl&aelig;pnes sleepiness. Similar formation in
Old High German slafag. Of places, from 1851 (Irving's Sleepy Hollow is from 1820). Sleepy-head is
from 1570s. Related: Sleepily; sleepiness.


sleet (n.)

c.1300, slete, either from an unrecorded Old English *slete, *slyte, related to Middle High German
sloz, Middle Low German sloten (plural) hail, from Proto-Germanic *slautjan- (cognates: dialectal
Norwegian slutr, Danish slud, Swedish sloud sleet), from root *slaut-.


sleet (v.)

early 14c., from sleet (n.). Related: Sleeted; sleeting.


sleeve (n.)

Old English sliefe (West Saxon), slefe (Mercian) arm-covering part of a garment, probably literally
that into which the arm slips, from Proto-Germanic *slaubjon (cognates: Middle Low German sloven to
dress carelessly, Old High German sloufen to put on or off). Related to Old English slefan, sliefan
to slip on (clothes) and slupan to slip, glide, from PIE root *sleubh- to slide, slip.    Compare
slipper, Old English slefescoh slipper, slip (n.) woman's garment, and expression to slip into to
dress in). Mechanical sense is attested from 1864. To have something up one's sleeve is recorded
from c.1500 (large sleeves formerly doubled as pockets). Meaning the English Channel translates
French La Manche.


sleeveless (adj.)

Old English sliefleas, slyflease; see sleeve (n.) + -less.


sleigh (n.)

vehicle mounted on runners for use on ice and snow, 1703, American and Canadian English, from Dutch
slee, shortened from slede (see sled (n.)). As a verb from 1728. Related: Sleighing. Sleigh-ride is
first recorded 1770; sleigh-bells is from c.1780; they originally were used to give warning of the
approach of a sleigh.


sleight (n.)

cunning, early 14c. alteration of sleahthe (c.1200), from Old Norse sloeg&eth; cleverness, cunning,
slyness, from sloegr (see sly). Meaning skill, cleverness, dexterity is from late 14c. Meaning feat
or trick requiring quickness and nimbleness of the hands is from 1590s. Term sleight of hand is
attested from c.1400.


slender (adj.)

c.1400, earlier sclendre (late 14c.), probably from a French source, often said to be from Old
French esclendre thin, slender, which could be from Old Dutch slinder, but the connections, and even
the existence of these words, is doubtful. Related: Slenderly; slenderness.


slenderize (v.)

1921, from slender + -ize. Related: Slenderized; slenderizing. As a verb, slender make narrower is
from 1590s.


slept

past tense and past participle of sleep (v.).


sleuth (n.)

c.1200, track or trail of a person, from Old Norse slo&eth; trail, of uncertain origin. Meaning
detective is 1872, shortening of sleuth-hound keen investigator (1849), a figurative use of a word
that dates back to late 14c. meaning a kind of bloodhound. The verb (intransitive) meaning to act as
a detective, investigate is recorded from 1905. Related: Sleuthed; sleuthing.


slew (n.1)

swampy place, 1708, North American variant of slough.


slew (v.)

to turn, swing, twist, 1834, earlier slue (1769), a nautical word, of unknown origin. Slewed (1801)
is old nautical slang for drunk. Slew-foot clumsy person who walks with feet turned out is from
1896.


slew (n.2)

large number, 1839, from Irish sluagh a host, crowd, multitude, from Celtic and Balto-Slavic *sloug-
help, service (see slogan).


slice (n.)

c.1300, a fragment, from Old French escliz splinter, fragment (Modern French &#233;clisse), a back-
formation from esclicier to splinter, shatter, smash, from Frankish *slitan to split or some other
Germanic source (compare Old High German slihhan; see slit (v.)). Meaning piece cut from something
emerged early 15c. Meaning a slicing stroke (in golf, tennis) is recorded from 1886. Slice of life
(1895) translates French tranche de la vie, a term from French Naturalist literature.


slice (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French esclicier, from Old French escliz (see slice (n.)). Golfing sense is
from 1890. Related: Sliced; slicing. Sliced bread introduced 1958; greatest thing since ... first
attested 1969.    No matter how thick or how thin you slice it it's still baloney. [Carl Sandburg,
The People, Yes, 1936]


slicer (n.)

1520s, agent noun from slice (v.).


slick (v.)

Old English -slician (in nigslicod newly made sleek), from Proto-Germanic *slikojan, from base
*slikaz (cognates: Old Norse slikr smooth, Old High German slihhan to glide, German schleichen to
creep, crawl, sneak, Dutch slijk mud, mire), from PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from root
*(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). Related: Slicked; slicking.


slick (n.)

1620s, a kind of cosmetic, from slick (v.). Meaning smooth place on the surface of water caused by
oil, etc. is attested from 1849. Meaning a swindler, clever person is attested from 1959.


slick (adj.)

early 14c., smooth, glossy, sleek (of skin or hair); sense of clever in deception is first recorded
1590s; that of first-class, excellent is from 1833. Related: Slickly; slickness.


slicker (n.)

1851, tool for smoothing leather, from slick (v.). Meaning waterproof raincoat is from 1884; sense
of clever and crafty person is from 1900.


slid

past tense and past participle of slide (v.).


slide (v.)

Old English slidan (intransitive, past tense slad, past participle sliden) to glide, slip, fall,
fall down; figuratively fail, lapse morally, err; be transitory or unstable, from Proto-Germanic
*slidan to slip, slide (cognates: Old High German slito, German Schlitten sleigh, sled), from PIE
root *sleidh- to slide, slip (cognates: Lithuanian slystu to glide, slide, Old Church Slavonic sledu
track, Greek olisthos slipperiness, olisthanein to slip, Middle Irish sloet slide).    Meaning slip,
lose one's footing is from early 13c. Transitive sense from 1530s. Phrase let (something) slide let
it take its own course is in Chaucer (late 14c.). Sliding scale in reference to payments, etc., is
from 1842.


slide (n.)

1560s, from slide (v.). As a smooth inclined surface down which something can be slid, from 1680s;
the playground slide is from 1890. Meaning collapse of a hillside, landslide is from 1660s. As a
working part of a musical instrument from 1800 (as in slide-trombone, 1891). Meaning rapid downturn
is from 1884. Meaning picture prepared for use with a projector is from 1819 (in reference to magic
lanterns). Baseball sense is from 1886. Slide-guitar is from 1968.


slide-rule (n.)

also slide rule, mathematical calculating tool, 1838, from slide (v.) + rule (n.). So called for its
method of operation. Earlier sliding-rule (1660s).


slider (n.)

1520s, skater, agent noun from slide (v.). As a type of terrapin, from 1877; as a type of baseball
pitch, 1936.


slight (adj.)

early 14c., flat, smooth; hairless, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse slettr
smooth, sleek, from Proto-Germanic *slikhtaz (cognates: Old Saxon slicht; Low German slicht smooth,
plain common; Old English -sliht level, attested in eor&eth;slihtes level with the ground; Old
Frisian sliucht smooth, slight, Middle Dutch sleht even, plain, Old High German sleht, Gothic
slaihts smooth), probably from a collateral form of PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from
root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)).    Sense evolution probably is from smooth (c.1300), to slim,
slender; of light texture, hence not good or strong; insubstantial, trifling, inferior,
insignificant (early 14c.). Meaning small in amount is from 1520s. Sense of German cognate schlecht
developed from smooth, plain, simple to bad, mean, base, and as it did it was replaced in the
original senses by schlicht, a back-formation from schlichten to smooth, to plane, a derivative of
schlecht in the old sense [Klein].


slight (v.)

c.1300, make plain or smooth, from slight (adj.) Meaning treat with indifference (1590s) is  from
the adjective in sense of having little worth. Related: Slighted; slighting.


slight (n.)

1550s, small amount or weight, from slight (v.). Meaning act of intentional neglect or ignoring out
of displeasure or contempt is from 1701, probably via 17c. phrase make a slight of (1610s).


slightly (adv.)

1520s, slenderly; 1590s, in a small degree, from slight (adj.) + -ly (2).


slim (adj.)

1650s, thin, slight, slender, from Dutch slim bad, sly, clever, from Middle Dutch slim bad, crooked,
from Proto-Germanic *slembaz oblique, crooked (cognates: Middle High German slimp slanting, awry,
German schlimm bad, cunning, unwell). In English 17c. also sometimes with a sense sly, cunning,
crafty. Related: Slimly; slimness. With obsolete extended adjectival forms Slimsy flimsy,
unsubstantial (1845); slimikin small and slender (1745). Slim Jim attested from 1887 in sense of
very thin person; from 1902 as a type of slender cigar; from 1975 as a brand of meat snack.


slim (v.)

1808, to scamp one's work, do carelessly or superficially, from slim (adj.). Meaning to make slim (a
garment, etc.) is from 1862; meaning reduce (one's) weight is from 1930. Related: Slimmed; slimming.


slime (n.)

Old English slim slime, from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (cognates: Old Norse slim, Old Frisian slym,
Dutch slijm slime, phlegm, German Schleim slime), probably related to Old English lim birdlime;
sticky substance, from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (cognates: Sanskrit linati sticks,
stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears; Russian slimak snail; Old Church Slavonic slina spittle;
Old Irish sligim to smear, leinam I follow, literally I stick to; Welsh llyfn smooth; Greek leimax
snail, limne marsh, pool, lake, alinein to anoint, besmear; Latin limus slime, mud, mire, linere to
daub, besmear, rub out, erase). As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Slime-mold is from 1880.


slime (v.)

to cover with slime, 1620s, from slime (n.). Related: Slimed; sliming.


slimming (adj.)

producing an appearance of thinness, 1925, present participle adjective from slim (v.).


slimnastics (n.)

1967 (with an isolated use from 1959), from slim (adj.) + ending abstracted from gymnastics.


slimy (adj.)

late 14c., covered with slime; of the nature of slime, from slime (n.) + -y (2). Similar formation
in Middle Dutch slimich, Dutch slijmig, German schleimig. Figurative sense of morally repulsive is
first attested 1570s. Related: Slimily; sliminess.


sling (n.1)

c.1300, implement for throwing stones, from an unidentified continental Germanic source (such as
Middle Low German slinge a sling); see sling (v.). The notion probably is of a sling being twisted
and twirled before it is thrown. Sense of loop for lifting or carrying heavy objects first recorded
early 14c. Meaning piece of cloth tied around the neck to support an injured arm is first attested
1720.


sling (v.)

c.1200, to knock down using a sling, later to throw (mid-13c.), especially with a sling, from Old
Norse slyngva, from Proto-Germanic *slingwanan (cognates: Old High German slingan, German schlingen
to swing to and fro, wind, twist; Old English slingan to creep, twist; Old Frisian slinge, Middle
Dutch slinge, Old High German slinga, German Schlinge sling; Middle Swedish slonga noose, knot,
snare), from PIE *slengwh to slide, make slide; sling, throw. Meaning to hang from one point to
another (as a hammock) is from 1690s. Related: Slung; slinging.


sling (n.2)

sweetened, flavored liquor drink, 1807, American English, of unknown origin; perhaps literally to
throw back a drink (see sling (v.)), or from German schlingen to swallow.


sling (n.3)

act of throwing, 1520s, from sling (v.).


slinger (n.)

soldier armed with a sling, late 14c., agent noun from sling (v.).


slingshot (n.)

1849, from sling (v.) + shot (n.). As a verb, from 1969. The piece of stone or metal hurled from it
is a sling-stone (late 14c.). A slung-shot (1848) was a rock wrapped in a sling, used as a weapon by
roughs and criminals.


slink (v.)

Old English slincan to creep, crawl (of reptiles), from Proto-Germanic *slinkan (cognates: Swedish
slinka to glide, Dutch slinken to shrink, shrivel; related to sling (v.)). Of persons, attested from
late 14c. Related: Slinked; slinking.


slinky (adj.)

sinuous and slender, of women or clothes, 1921, from slink + -y (2). Related: Slinkily; slinkiness.
As a proprietary name (with capital from S-) for a coil of spring marketed as a toy, 1948, by James
Industries Inc., Philadelphia, U.S.A.


slip (v.)

early 14c., to escape, to move softly and quickly, from an unrecorded Old English word or cognate
Middle Low German slippen to glide, slide, from Proto-Germanic *slipan (cognates: Old High German
slifan, Middle Dutch slippen, German schleifen to glide, slide), from PIE *sleib-, from root
*(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (see slime (n.)).    From mid-14c. with senses lose one's footing,
slide out of place, fall into error or fault. Sense of pass unguarded or untaken is from mid-15c.
That of slide, glide is from 1520s. Transitive sense from 1510s; meaning insert surreptitiously is
from 1680s. Related: Slipped; slipping. To slip up make a mistake is from 1855; to slip through the
net evade detection is from 1902.


slip (n.2)

in various senses from slip (v.). Meaning act of slipping is from 1590s. Meaning mistake, minor
fault, blunder is from 1610s. Sense of woman's sleeveless garment (1761) is from notion of something
easily slipped on or off (compare sleeve). To give (someone) the slip escape from is from 1560s.
Meaning landing place for ships is mid-15c.; more technical sense in ship-building is from 1769.
Slip of the tongue (1725) is from earlier slip of the pen (1650s), which makes more sense as an
image.


slip (n.1)

mid-15c., edge of a garment; 1550s, narrow strip, probably from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch
slippe cut, slit, possibly related to Old English toslifan to split, cleave. Sense of narrow piece
of paper (as in pink slip) in 1680s.


slip (n.3)

potter's clay, mid-15c., mud, slime, from Old English slypa, slyppe slime, paste, pulp, soft semi-
liquid mass, related to slupan to slip (see sleeve).


slip (n.4)

sprig or twig for planting or grafting, small shoot, late 15c., of uncertain origin. Compare Middle
Dutch slippe, German schlippe, schlipfe cut, slit, strip. Hence young person of small build (1580s,
as in a slip of a girl); see slip (n.1).


slipknot (n.)

also slip-knot, 1650s, from slip (v.) + knot (n.). One which easily can be slipped or undone by
pulling on the loose end of the last loop.


slippage (n.)

1850, act of slipping, from slip (v.) + -age.


slipper (n.)

type of loose, light indoor footwear, late 15c., agent noun from slip (v.), the notion being of a
shoe that is slipped onto the foot. Old English had slypescoh slipper, literally slip-shoe.


slippery (adj.)

having a slippery surface, c.1500, from Middle English sliper (adj.) readily slipping, from Old
English slipor slippery, having a smooth surface (see slip (v.)) + -y (2). Metaphoric sense of
deceitful, untrustworthy is first recorded 1550s. Related: Slipperiness. In a figurative sense,
slippery slope is first attested 1844. Slippery elm (1748) so called for its mucilaginous inner
bark.


slipshod (adj.)

1570s, wearing slippers or loose shoes, from slip (v.) + shod wearing shoes. Sense of slovenly,
careless is from 1815, probably from the notion of appearing like one in slippers, or whose shoes
are down at the heels.


slipstream (n.)

also slip-stream, 1913, from slip (n.2) + stream (n.).


slit (v.)

c.1200, from or related to Old English slitan to slit, tear, split, rend to pieces; bite, sting;
back-bite, from Proto-Germanic *slitan (cognates: Old Saxon slitan, Old Frisian slita, Old Norse
slita, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch sliten, Dutch slijten, Old High German slizan, German
schlei&szlig;en to slit). A more violent verb in Old English than after, as in slitcwealm death by
rending. Slit skirt is attested from 1913.A slitting-mill (1660s) cut iron plates into thin rods for
making nails, etc.


slit (n.)

mid-13c., long cut or rent (in clothes), incision, from slit (v.). Slang sense of vulva is attested
from 1640s. Old English had slit (n.) with a sense of a rending, bite; backbiting.


slither (v.)

early 15c., variant of Middle English slidder to slip, slide, from Old English slidrian to slip,
slide on a loose slope, a frequentative form of slidan to slide (see slide (v.)). For spelling
change, compare gather. Meaning to walk in a sliding manner is attested from 1848. In reference to
reptile motion, attested from 1839. Related: Slithered; slithering.


slither (n.)

slithering movement, 1861, from slither (v.).


sliver (n.)

splinter of wood, late 14c., from obsolete verb sliven to split, cleave, from Old English toslifan
to split, cleave (see sleave).


Sloane Square

neighborhood near Chelsea in London, named for Sir Hans Sloane who purchased the manor of Chelsea in
1712 and whose collections contributed to the British Museum. Previous to development the place was
known as Great Bloody Field [Oxford Dictionary of London Place Names]. Sloane Ranger attested from
1975, with a play on Lone Ranger.


slob (n.)

1780, mud, muddy land, from Irish slab mud, mire dirt, itself probably borrowed from English slab
muddy place (c.1600), from a Scandinavian source (compare Icelandic slabb sludge). The meaning
untidy person is first recorded 1887, from earlier expressions such as slob of a man (1861).


slobber (v.)

c.1400, probably of imitative origin; compare Frisian slobberje to slurp, Middle Low German
slubberen slurp, Middle Dutch overslubberen wade through a ditch. Related: Slobbered; slobbering. As
noun from c.1400 as mud, slime, 1755 as saliva. Congreve has slabber (v.), from Middle Dutch
slabberen.


slobbery (adj.)

late 14c., muddy, from slobber + -y (2).


sloe (n.)

fruit of the blackthorn, Old English slah (plural slan), from Proto-Germanic *slaikhwon (cognates:
Middle Dutch sleeu, Dutch slee, Old High German sleha, German Schlehe), from PIE *sleie- blue,
bluish, blue-black (see livid).    The vowel has been influenced by that in the old plural form,
which according to OED persisted into the 17c. Scottish slae preserves the older vowel. Sloe-eyed is
attested from 1804; sloe gin first recorded 1878.


slog (v.)

1824, hit hard, probably a variant of slug (v.3) to strike. Sense of walk doggedly first recorded
1872. Related: Slogged; slogger; slogging.


slog (n.)

1846, a hard hit, from slog (v.). Sense of spell of hard work is from 1888.


slogan (n.)

1670s, earlier slogorne (1510s), battle cry, from Gaelic sluagh-ghairm battle cry used by Scottish
Highland or Irish clans, from sluagh army, host, slew, from Celtic and Balto-Slavic *slough- help,
service. Second element is gairm a cry (see garrulous). Metaphoric sense of distinctive word or
phrase used by a political or other group is first attested 1704.


sloganeer (v.)

1941, from noun (1922), from slogan + -eer. Earlier verb was sloganize (1909). Related:
Sloganeering.


sloop (n.)

small fore and aft rigged vessel with one mast, generally carrying a jib, fore-stay sail, mainsail,
and gaff-topsail, 1620s, from Dutch sloep a sloop; probably from French chaloupe, from Old French
chalupe small, sloop-rigged vessel, which is perhaps related to English shallop [OED]. But according
to Barnhart and Watkins the Dutch word might simply be from Middle Dutch slupen to glide, from PIE
*sleubh- (see sleeve). In old military use, a small ship of war carrying guns on the upper deck only
(1670s).


slop (n.)

c.1400, mudhole, probably from Old English -sloppe dung (in plant name cusloppe, literally cow
dung), related to slyppe slime (see slip (v.)). Meaning semiliquid food first recorded 1650s; that
of refuse liquid of any kind, household liquid waste (usually slops) is from 1815. Meaning affected
or sentimental material is from 1866.


slop (n.2)

late 14c., loose outer garment, probably from Middle Dutch slop, of uncertain origin, corresponding
to words in Old Norse and perhaps in Old English. Sense extended generally to clothing, ready-made
clothing (1660s), usually in plural slops. Hence, also, slop-shop shop where ready-made clothes are
sold (1723).


slop (v.)

to spill carelessly (transitive), 1550s, from slop (n.1). Intransitive sense from 1746. Related:
Slopped; slopping.


slope (n.)

1610s, inclination, from slope (v.). Meaning an incline, a slant (of ground) is from 1620s.
Derogatory slang meaning Oriental person is attested from 1948.


slope (v.)

1590s, go in an oblique direction, from earlier adjective meaning slanting (c.1500), probably from
Middle English aslope (adv.) on the incline (late 15c.), from Old English *aslopen, past participle
of aslupan to slip away, from a- away + slupan to slip (see sleeve). From 1709 as to be in a
slanting position; transitive sense place in a slanting position is from c.1600. Related: Sloped;
sloping.


sloppy (adj.)

1727, muddy, from slop (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning loose, ill-fitting, slovenly is first recorded 1825,
influenced by slop (n.2). Related: Sloppily; sloppiness. Sloppy Joe was originally loose-fitting
sweater worn by girls (1942); as a name for a kind of spiced hamburger, it is attested from 1961.


slosh (n.)

1814, slush, sludge, a watery mess, probably a blend of slush and slop (n.1) in its Middle English
sense of muddy place.


slosh (v.)

to splash about in mud or wet, 1844, from slosh (n.). Meaning to pour carelessly is recorded from
1875. Related: Sloshed; sloshing.


sloshed (adj.)

drunk, c.1900, colloquial, past participle adjective from slosh (v.).


slot (n.1)

late 14c., hollow at the base of the throat above the breastbone, from Old French esclot hoofprint
of a deer or horse, of uncertain origin, probably from Old Norse slo&#240; trail (see sleuth).
Original sense is rare or obsolete in Modern English; sense of narrow opening into which something
else can be fitted is first recorded 1520s. Meaning middle of the (semi-circular) copy desk at a
newspaper, the spot occupied by the chief sub-editor, is recorded from 1917. The sense of opening in
a machine for a coin to be inserted is from 1888 (slot machine first attested 1891). The sense of
position in a list is first recorded 1942; verb sense of designate, appoint is from 1960s. Slot car
first attested 1966.


slot (n.2)

bar or bolt used to fasten a door, window, etc., c.1300, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German slot
(compare Old Norse slot, Old High German sloz, German Schloss bolt, bar, lock, castle; Old Saxon
slutil key, Dutch slot a bolt, lock, castle), from Proto-Germanic stem *slut- to close (cognates:
Old Frisian sluta, Dutch sluiten, Old High German sliozan, German schliessen to shut, close, bolt,
lock), from PIE root *klau- hook, peg (cognates: Greek kleis key; Latin claudere to shut, close,
clavis key, clavus nail; see close (v.)). Wooden pegs seem to have been the original keys.


slot (v.2)

1560s, to bolt a door, from slot (n.2). Related: Slotted; slotting.


slot (v.1)

1747, provide with a slot, cut slots in, from slot (n.1). Meaning drop a coin in a slot is from
1888. Sense of take a position in a slot is from 1940; that of fit (something) into a slot is from
1966. Oldest sense is obsolete: stab in the base of the throat (c.1400). Related: Slotted; slotting.


sloth (n.)

late 12c., indolence, sluggishness, formed from Middle English slou, slowe (see slow (adj.)) +
abstract formative -th (2). Replaced Old English sl&aelig;w&eth; sloth, indolence. Sense of
slowness, tardiness is from mid-14c. As one of the deadly sins, it translates Latin accidia.    The
slow-moving mammal first so called 1610s, a translation of Portuguese pregui&ccedil;a slowness,
slothfulness, from Latin pigritia laziness (compare Spanish perezosa slothful, also the sloth).


slothful (adj.)

c.1400, from sloth + -ful. Related: Slothfully; slothfulness. For the latter, Middle English also
had sloth-head (c.1300), with Middle English -hede, cognate with -hood.


slouch (v.)

walk with a slouch, 1754; have a downcast or stooped aspect, 1755; from slouch (n.). Related:
Slouched; slouching (1610s as a past participle adjective; 1660s of persons, 1690s of hats).


slouch (n.)

1510s, lazy man, variant of slouk (1560s), probably from a Scandinavian source, perhaps Old Norse
slokr lazy fellow, and related to slack (adj.) on the notion of sagging, drooping. Meaning stooping
of the head and shoulders first recorded 1725. Slouch hat, made of soft material, first attested
1764.


slouchy (adj.)

1690s, from slouch + -y (2). Related: Slouchily; slouchiness.


slough (n.1)

muddy place, Old English sloh soft, muddy ground, of uncertain origin. Compare Middle Low German
sloch muddy place, Middle High German sluoche ditch. Figurative use (of moral sunkenness or Bunyan's
Slough of Despond, 1678) attested from mid-13c.


slough (v.)

to cast off (as the skin of a snake or other animal), 1720, originally of diseased tissue, from
Middle English noun slough shed skin of a snake (see slough (n.)). Related: Sloughed; sloughing.


slough (n.2)

cast-off skin (of a snake or other animal), early 14c., slughe, slouh, probably related to Old Saxon
sluk skin of a snake, Middle High German sluch snakeskin, wineskin, Middle Low German slu husk,
peel, skin, German Schlauch wineskin; from Proto-Germanic *sluk-, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE root *sleug- to glide.


Slovak

1829 (n.), 1887 (adj.), from French Slovak, from the people's own name (compare Slovak and Czech
Slovak, plural Slovaci; Polish S&#322;owak; Russian Slovak; German Slowake). Related: Slovakian.


sloven (n.)

late 15c., immoral woman, later (16c.) also rascal, knave (regardless of gender); probably from a
continental Germanic source, compare Middle Flemish sloovin a scold, sloef untidy, shabby, Dutch
slof careless, negligent, Middle Low German sloven put on clothes carelessly, from Proto-Germanic
*slaubjan, from PIE *sleubh- to slide, slip (see sleeve). Meaning person careless of dress or
negligent of cleanliness is from 1520s. Also see slut.


Slovene (n.)

Slavic people of Carinthia and Styria, 1883, from German Slowene, from Slovenec, the people's own
name, originally literally Slav. A survival of the old native designation of the Slavic people,
compare Old Church Slavonic Slovene. Related: Slovenian.


slovenly (adj.)

1510s, low, base, lewd, later untidy, dirty (1560s), from sloven + -ly (1). Related: Slovenliness;
also in this sense was slovenry (1540s), which OED reports in common use early 17c.


slow (adj.)

Old English slaw inactive, sluggish, torpid, lazy, also not clever, from Proto-Germanic
*sl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old Saxon sleu blunt, dull, Middle Dutch slee, Dutch sleeuw sour, tart,
blunt, Old High German sleo blunt, dull, Old Norse sljor, Danish sl&oslash;v, Swedish sl&ouml;
blunt, dull). Meaning taking a long time is attested from early 13c. Meaning dull, tedious is from
1841. As an adverb c.1500. The slows imaginary disease to account for lethargy is from 1843.


slow (v.)

1550s, make slower; 1590s, go slower, from slow (adj.). Related: Slowed; slowing. Old English had
slawian (intransitive) to be or become slow, be sluggish, but the modern use appears to be a 16c.
re-formation.


slowdown (n.)

also slow-down, 1892, act of going more slowly, from verbal phrase; see slow (v.) + down (adv.).


slowly (adv.)

Old English slawlice slowly, sluggishly; see slow (adj.) + -ly (2).


slowness (n.)

c.1300, from slow (adj.) + -ness.


slowpoke (n.)

also slow poke, 1848, American English from slow (adj.) + poke (n.3), the name of a device, like a
yoke with a pole, attached to domestic animals such as pigs and sheep to keep them from escaping
enclosures. Bartlett (1859) calls it a woman's word.


slubberdegullion (n.)

a slobbering or dirty fellow, a worthless sloven, 1610s, from slubber to daub, smear; behave
carelessly or negligently (1520s), probably from Dutch or Low German (compare slobber (v.)). Second
element appears to be an attempt to imitate French; or perhaps it is French, related to Old French
goalon a sloven. Century Dictionary speculates the -de- means insignificant or else is from
hobbledehoy.


sludge (n.)

mud, mire, ooze, 1640s, of uncertain origin, possibly a variant of Middle English slutch mud, mire,
or a variant of slush (n.).


sluff (v.)

avoid work, 1951 slang variant of slough (v.).


slug (n.1)

shell-less land snail, 1704, originally lazy person (early 15c.); related to sluggard.


slug (n.2)

lead bit, 1620s, perhaps a special use of slug (n.1), perhaps on some supposed resemblance. Meaning
token or counterfeit coin first recorded 1881; meaning strong drink first recorded 1756, perhaps
from slang fire a slug take a drink, though it also may be related to Irish slog swallow. Journalism
sense is from 1925, originally a short guideline for copy editors at the head of a story.


slug (n.3)

a hard blow, 1830, dialectal, of uncertain origin; perhaps related to slaughter or perhaps a
secondary form of slay.


slug (v.)

deliver a hard blow with the fist, 1862, from slug (n.3). Related: Slugged; slugging. Slugging-match
is from 1878.


slug-a-bed (n.)

also slugabed, 1590s, with bed (n.) + obsolete verb slug be lazy, intert (early 15c.), which is
perhaps from Scandinavian (see sluggard).


slugfest (n.)

1910, originally in reference to baseball, from slug (n.3) + -fest.


sluggard (n.)

late 14c., late 13c. as a surname, habitually lazy person, from Middle English sluggi sluggish,
indolent, probably from a Scandinavian word such as dialectal Norwegian slugga be sluggish,
dialectal Norwegian sluggje heavy, slow person, dialectal Swedish slogga to be slow or sluggish.
Adjective sluggy is attested in English from early 13c.    'Tis the voice of a sluggard -- I heard
him complain:  You have wak'd me too soon, I must slumber again.  [Isaac Watts, 1674-1748]   <hr />
'Tis the voice of the Lobster: I heard him declare  You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my
hair.  [Lewis Carroll (Charles L. Dodgson), 1832-1898]     As an adjective meaning sluggish, lazy
from 1590s. Related: Sluggardly.


slugger (n.)

1877, originally in baseball, agent noun from slug (v.). Meaning one who hits with the fists is from
1883.


sluggish (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle English slugge lazy person (see sluggard) + -ish. Earlier adjective was sluggi
(early 13c.). Related: Sluggishly; sluggishness.


sluice (n.)

c.1400, earlier scluse (mid-14c.), a shortening of Old French escluse sluice, floodgate (Modern
French &#233;cluse), from Late Latin exclusa barrier to shut out water (in aqua exclusa water shut
out, i.e. separated from the river), from fem. singular of Latin exclusus, past participle of
excludere to shut out (see exclude).


sluice (v.)

1590s, from sluice (n.). Related: Sluiced; sluicing.


slum (n.)

1845, from back slum dirty back alley of a city, street of poor or low people (1825), originally a
slang or cant word meaning room, especially back room (1812), of unknown origin, pastime popularized
by East End novels. Related: slums. Slumscape is from 1947.


slum (v.)

visit slums of a city, especially for diversion or amusement, often under guise of philanthropy,
1884, from slum (n.). Pastime popularized by East End novels. Earlier it meant to visit slums for
disreputable purposes or in search of vice (1860). Related: Slumming.


slumber (n.)

mid-14c., from slumber (v.). Slumber party first recorded 1942. Slumberland is from 1875.


slumber (v.)

mid-14c. alteration of slumeren (mid-13c.), frequentative form of slumen to doze, probably from Old
English sluma light sleep (compare Middle Dutch slumen, Dutch sluimeren, German schlummern to
slumber). Frequentative on the notion of intermittent light sleep. For the -b-, compare number,
lumber, chamber, etc. Related: Slumbered; slumbering.


slumlord (n.)

also slum-lord, 1899, from slum landlord (1885); see slum (n.) + landlord.


slummy (adj.)

1873, from slum (n.) + -y (2). Related: Slummily; slumminess.


slump (v.)

1670s, fall or sink into a muddy place, probably from a Scandinavian source such as Norwegian and
Danish slumpe fall upon, Swedish slumpa; perhaps ultimately of imitative origin. Related: Slumped;
slumping.    The word slump, or slumped, has too coarse a sound to be used by a lady. [Eliza Leslie,
Miss Leslie's Behaviour Book, Philadelphia, 1839]    Economic sense from 1888.


slump (n.)

act of slumping, slumping movement, 1850; heavy decline in prices on the stock exchange, 1888, from
slump (v.). Generalized by 1922 to sharp decline in trade or business.


slung

past tense and past participle of sling.


slunk

past tense and past participle of slink (v.).


slur (n.)

deliberate slight, disparaging or slighting remark, c.1600, from dialectal slur thin or fluid mud,
from Middle English slore (mid-15c.), cognate with Middle Low German sluren, Middle Dutch sloren to
trail in mud. Related to East Frisian sluren to go about carelessly, Norwegian slora to be careless.
Literal sense of a mark, stain, smear is from 1660s in English. The musical sense (1746) is from the
notion of sliding. Meaning act or habit of slurring in speech is from 1882.


slur (v.)

c.1600, smear, soil by smearing, from slur (n.). Meaning disparage depreciate is from 1650s. In
music, from 1746; of speech, from 1893. Related: Slurred; slurring.


slurp (v.)

1640s, from Dutch slurpen, perhaps of imitative origin (compare German schl&#252;rfen). Related:
Slurped; slurping. The noun is first recorded 1949, from the verb.


slurry (n.)

mid-15c., mud, slime, semi-fluid mix of water and dirt or clay, probably related to Middle English
sloor thin or fluid mud (see slur (n.)).


slush (n.)

1640s, melting snow, snow and water, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian and
Swedish slask slushy ground; obsolete Danish slus sleet), all probably imitative of the sound of
sloshing. Slush fund is first attested 1839, from an earlier sense of slush refuse fat (1756); the
money from the sale of a ship's slush was distributed among the officers, which was the original
sense of the phrase. The extended meaning money collected for bribes and to buy influence is first
recorded 1874, no doubt with suggestions of greasing palms.


slushy (adj.)

1791, covered with slush, from slush + -y (2). As slang for ship's cook, 1859, from slush (n.)
refuse from a cook's galley (1756). Related: Slushiness.


slut (n.)

c.1400, a dirty, slovenly, or untidy woman, according to OED Of doubtful origin, but probably
cognate with dialectal German Schlutt slovenly woman, dialectal Swedish slata idle woman, slut, and
Dutch slodde slut, slodder a careless man, but the exact relationship of all these is obscure.
Chaucer uses sluttish (late 14c.) in reference to the appearance of an untidy man. Also a kitchen
maid, a drudge (mid-15c.; hard pieces in a bread loaf from imperfect kneading were called slut's
pennies, 18c.).    Specific modern sense of woman who enjoys sex in a degree considered shamefully
excessive is by 1966. Meaning woman of loose character, bold hussy is attested from mid-15c., but
the primary association through 18c. was untidiness. Johnson has it (second definition) as A word of
slight contempt to a woman but sexual activity does not seem to figure into his examples. Playful
use of the word, without implication of messiness or loose morals, is attested by 1660s:    My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most
admirable slut, and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others, and deserves wages
better. [Pepys, diary, Feb. 21, 1664]    Compare playful use of scamp, etc., for boys. Sometimes
used 19c. as a euphemism for bitch to describe a female dog.    There is a group of North Sea
Germanic words in sl- that mean sloppy, and also slovenly woman and, less often, slovenly man, and
that tend to evolve toward woman of loose morals. Compare slattern, also English dialectal slummock
a dirty, untidy, or slovenly person (1861), variant of slammacks slatternly woman, said to be from
slam ill-shaped, shambling fellow. Also slammakin (from 1756 as a type of loose gown; 1785 as
slovenly female, 1727 as a character name in Gay's Beggar's Opera), with variants slamkin,
slammerkin. Also possibly related are Middle Dutch slore a sluttish woman, Dutch slomp, German
schlampe a slattern.


sluttery (n.)

neglect of cleanliness and order, 1580s, from slut + -ery. From 1841 as an untidy room.


sluttish (adj.)

late 14c., from slut + -ish. Related: Sluttishly; sluttishness.


slutty (adj.)

c.1400, dirty, slovenly, from slut + -ish.


sly (adj.)

c.1200, skillful, clever, dexterous, from Old Norse sloegr cunning, crafty, sly, from Proto-Germanic
*slogis (cognates: Low German slu cunning, sly, German schlau), probably from base *slak- to strike,
hit (see slay (v.)), with an original notion of able to hit. Compare German verschlagen cunning,
crafty, sly, schlagfertig quick-witted, literally strike-ready, from schlagen to strike. A non-
pejorative use of the word lingered in northern English dialect until 20c. On the sly in secret is
recorded from 1812. Sly-boots a seeming Silly, but subtil Fellow is in the 1700 Dictionary of the
Canting Crew.


slyly (adv.)

c.1200, from sly (adj.) + -ly (2).


slyness (n.)

mid-14c., from sly (adj.) + -ness.


smack (n.1)

a taste, flavor, savor especially a slight flavor that suggests something, from Old English
sm&#230;c taste; scent, odor, from Proto-Germanic *smak- (cognates: Old Frisian smek, Middle Dutch
sm&#230;ck, Dutch smaak, Old High German smac, German Geschmack, Swedish smak, Danish smag), from a
Germanic and Baltic root *smeg- meaning to taste (cognates: Lithuanian smaguriai dainties, smagus
pleasing). Meaning a trace (of something) is attested from 1530s.


smack (n.4)

heroin, 1942, American English slang, probably an alteration of schmeck a drug, especially heroin
(1932), from Yiddish schmeck a sniff.


smack (v.1)

make a sharp noise with the lips, 1550s, probably of imitative origin (see smack (v.2)). With
adverbial force, suddenly, directly, from 1782; extended form smack-dab is attested from 1892,
American English colloquial (slap-dab is from 1886).


smack (n.3)

single-masted sailboat, 1610s, probably from Dutch or Low German smak sailboat, perhaps from smakken
to fling, dash (see smack (v.2)), perhaps so-called from the sound made by its sails. French
semaque, Spanish zumaca, Italian semacca probably are Germanic borrowings.


smack (v.2)

to slap a flat surface with the hand, 1835, from smack (n.) in this sense; perhaps influenced by Low
German smacken to strike, throw, which is likely of imitative origin (compare Swedish smak slap,
Middle Low German smacken, Frisian smakke, Dutch smakken to fling down, Lithuanian smagiu to strike,
knock down, whip).


smack (v.3)

mid-13c., to smell (something); mid-14c., to taste (something), perceive by taste (transitive); late
14c. to have a taste, taste of (intransitive), from smack (n.1). Compare Old English sm&#230;ccan to
taste, Old Frisian smakia Middle Dutch smaecken, Old High German smakken have a savor, scent, or
taste, German schmecken taste, try, smell, perceive. Sometimes also smatch. Now mainly in verbal
figurative use smacks of ... (first attested 1590s). Commonly but erroneously regarded as identical
with [smack (n.2)], as if 'taste' proceeds from 'smacking the lips.' [Century Dictionary]


smack (n.2)

smart, sharp sound made by the lips, 1560s, from smack (v.1). Meaning a loud kiss is recorded from
c.1600. Meaning sharp sound made by hitting something with the flat of the hand is from c.1746.


smacker (n.)

money, c.1918, American English slang, perhaps from smack (v.1) on notion of something smacked into
the palm of the hand. Extended form smackeroo is attested from 1939.


smaik (n.)

mean or contemptible fellow, mid-15c., Scottish, now archaic, current c.1450-c.1900, perhaps cognate
with Old High German smeichari, from smeken to flatter.


small (adj.)

Old English sm&aelig;l thin, slender, narrow; fine, from Proto-Germanic *smal- small animal; small
(cognates: Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German smal, Old Frisian smel,
German schmal narrow, slender, Gothic smalista smallest, Old Norse smali small cattle, sheep),
perhaps from a PIE root *(s)melo- smaller animal (cognates: Greek melon, Old Irish mil a small
animal; Old Church Slavonic malu bad). Original sense of narrow now almost obsolete, except in
reference to waistline and intestines.    My sister ... is as white as a lilly, and as small as a
wand. [Shakespeare, Two Gentlemen of Verona, 1591]    Sense of not large, of little size developed
in Old English. Of children, young, from mid-13c. Meaning inferior in degree or amount is from late
13c. Meaning trivial, unimportant is from mid-14c. Sense of having little property or trade is from
1746. That of characterized by littleness of mind or spirit, base, low, mean is from 1824. As an
adverb by late 14c.  Small fry, first recorded 1690s of little fish, 1885 of insignificant people.
Small potatoes no great matter first attested 1924; small change something of little value is from
1902; small talk chit-chat, trifling conversation (1751) first recorded in Chesterfield's Letters.
Small world as a comment upon an unexpected meeting of acquaintances is recorded from 1895. Small-
arms, indicating those capable of being carried in the hand (contrasted to ordnance) is recorded
from 1710.


small (n.)

early 13c., small person or animal, from small (adj.). From c.1300 as persons of low rank (opposed
to great); late 15c. as the small part of something (such as small of the back, 1530s).


small beer (n.)

1560s, originally weak beer; used figuratively of small things or trifling matters. Small with the
meaning of low alcoholic content is attested from mid-15c.


small-time (adj.)

1910, originally theater slang for lower-salaried circuits, or ones requiring more daily
performances; from noun phrase (also 1910). Compare big time.


small-town (adj.)

unsophisticated, provincial, 1824, from noun phrase, from small (adj.) + town.


smallish (adj.)

late 14c., from small (adj.) + -ish.


smallmouth (n.)

1880, short for small-mouth (black) bass (1878); from small (adj.) + mouth (n.).


smallness (n.)

late 14c., from small (adj.) + -ness.


smallpox (n.)

acute, highly contagious disease, 1510s, small pokkes, as distinguished from great pox syphillis;
from small-pock pustule caused by smallpox (mid-15c.); see small (adj.) + pox. Compare French petite
v&eacute;role. Fatal in a quarter to a third of unvaccinated cases.


smarm (n.)

1914, from colloquial verb smalm, smarm to smear, bedaub (the hair, with pomade), 1847, of unknown
origin, perhaps somehow suggestive of the action. Verbal meaning to smear with flattery is from
1902.


smarmy (adj.)

smooth and sleek (1909); ingratiating, unctuous, 1924, from smarm + -y (2). Related: Smarmily;
smarminess.


smart (v.)

Old English smeortan be painful, from Proto-Germanic *smarta- (cognates: Middle Dutch smerten, Dutch
smarten, Old High German smerzan, German schmerzen to pain, originally to bite), from PIE *smerd-
pain, an extension of the root *mer- (2) to rub; to harm (cognates: Greek smerdnos terrible,
dreadful, Sanskrit mardayati grinds, rubs, crushes, Latin mordere to bite). Related: Smarted;
smarting.


smart (adj.)

late Old English smeart painful, severe, stinging; causing a sharp pain, related to smeortan (see
smart (v.)). Meaning executed with force and vigor is from c.1300. Meaning quick, active, clever is
attested from c.1300, from the notion of cutting wit, words, etc., or else keen in bargaining.
Meaning trim in attire first attested 1718, ascending from the kitchen to the drawing-room c.1880
[Weekley]. For sense evolution, compare sharp (adj.).    In reference to devices, the sense of
behaving as though guided by intelligence (as in smart bomb) first attested 1972. Smarts good sense,
intelligence, is first recorded 1968. Smart cookie is from 1948.


smart (n.)

sharp pain, c.1200, from sharp (adj.). Cognate with Middle Dutch smerte, Dutch smart, Old High
German smerzo, German Schmerz pain.


smart aleck (n.)

1865, of unknown origin, perhaps in reference to Aleck Hoag, notorious pimp, thief, and confidence
man in New York City in early 1840s [Barnhart]. See smart (adj.). Related: Smart-alecky.


smart money (n.)

money bet by those in the know, 1926, from smart (adj.). The same phrase earlier meant money paid to
sailors, soldiers, workers, etc., who have been disabled while on the job (1690s), from a noun
derivative of smart (v.). Also money paid to obtain the discharge of a recruit (1760), hence money
paid to escape some unpleasant situation (1818). Sometimes in legal use, damages in excess of injury
done.


smart-arse

see smart-ass.


smart-ass

also smartass, 1960 (adj.), 1962 (n.), from smart (adj.) + ass (n.2).


smarten (v.)

to make smart, to spruce up, to improve appearance, 1786, from smart (adj.) in its sense of spruce,
trim + -en (1). Related: Smartened; smartening.


smartly (adv.)

early 13c., vigorously, from smart (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning handsomely is from 1836.


smartmouth (n.)

1968, from smart (adj.) + mouth (n.).


smartness (n.)

c.1300, severity, from smart (adj.) + -ness. From 1752 as trimness, 1800 as cleverness.


smarty (n.)

would-be witty or clever person, 1854, from smart (n.) + -y (3). Extended form smarty-pants first
attested 1939.


smash (v.)

1759, break to pieces, earlier kick downstairs (c.1700), probably of imitative origin (compare smack
(v.), mash (v.), crush (v.)). Meaning act with crushing force is from 1813; that of strike violently
is from 1835. Tennis sense is from 1882. Smash-and-grab (adj.) is first attested 1927.


smash (n.)

1725, hard blow, from smash (v.). Meaning broken-up condition is from 1798; that of failure,
financial collapse is from 1839. Tennis sense is from 1882. Meaning great success is from 1923
(Variety headline, Oct. 16, in reference to Broadway productions of The Fool and The Rise of Rosie
O'Reilly).


smash-up (n.)

collision, 1841, from verbal phrase; see smash (v.) + up (adv.).


smashed (adj.)

1819, crushed, past participle adjective from smash (v.). Slang meaning drunk is from 1962.


smashing (adj.)

1833, violently crushing to pieces, present participle adjective from smash (v.). Meaning pleasing,
sensational is from 1911. Related: Smashingly.


smatch

see smack (n.1); smack (v.3).


smatter (v.)

early 15c., talk idly, chatter; talk ignorantly or superficially, of uncertain origin, perhaps
imitative. Similar forms are found in Middle High German smetern to chatter and Swedish smattra to
patter, rattle, and compare Danish snaddre chatter, jabber, Dutch snateren, German schnattern
cackle, chatter, prattle. Related: Smattered; smattering.


smatterer (n.)

one who has but slight or superficial knowledge, 1510s, agent noun from smatter (v.).


smattering (n.)

a slight or superficial knowledge, 1530s, verbal noun from smatter (v.).


smear (n.)

mark or stain left by smearing, 1610s, from smear (v.). Sense of small quantity prepared for
microscopic examination is from 1903. Meaning a quantity of cream cheese, etc., smeared on a bagel
is by 1999, from Yiddish shmir. The earliest noun sense in English is fat, grease, ointment
(c.1200), from Old English had smeoru fat, grease, cognate with Middle Dutch smere, Dutch smeer,
German Schmer grease, fat (Yiddish schmir), Danish sm&oslash;r, Swedish sm&#246;r butter.


smear (v.)

Old English smerian, smierwan to anoint or rub with grease, oil, etc., from Proto-Germanic *smerwjan
to spread grease on (cognates: Old Norse smyrja to anoint, rub with ointment, Danish sm&oslash;re,
Swedish sm&ouml;rja, Dutch smeren, Old High German smirwen apply salve, smear, German schmieren to
smear; Old Norse sm&#246;r butter), from PIE *smeru- grease (cognates: Greek myron unguent, balsam,
Old Irish smi(u)r marrow, Old English smeoru fat, grease, ointment, tallow, lard, suet, Lithuanian
smarsas fat).    Figurative sense of assault a public reputation with unsubstantiated charges is
from 1879. Related: Smeared; smearing. Smear-word, one used regardless of its literal meaning but
invested with invective, is from 1938.


smear-case (n.)

1829, semi-translation of German Schmier-k&#228;se; see smear (v.) + cheese (n.).


smee (n.)

pintail duck, 1660s, reduced from earlier smeath (1620s), probably from Middle Dutch smeente.


smegma (n.)

sebaceous secretion, 1819, from Latin, from Greek smegma a detergent, soap, unguent, from smekhein
to wipe off, wipe clean, cleanse, from PIE root *sme- to smear (cognates: Czech smetana cream, and
see smear (v.)). So called from resemblance; a medical coinage, the word seems not to have been used
in its literal Greek sense in English before this. Related: Smegmatic.


smell (n.)

odor, aroma, stench, late 12c.; faculty of perceiving by the nose, c.1200; see smell (v.). Ousted
Old English stenc (see stench) in most senses.


smell (v.)

late 12c., emit or perceive an odor, not found in Old English, perhaps cognate with Middle Dutch
smolen, Low German smelen to smolder (see smolder). However, OED says no doubt of Old English
origin, but not recorded, and not represented in any of the cognate languages. Related: Smelled or
smelt; smelling.   Smelling salts (1840), used to revive the woozy, typically were a scented
preparation of carbonate of ammonia. Smell-feast (n.) one who finds and frequents good tables, one
who scents out where free food is to be had is from 1510s (very common c.1540-1700, OED). Smell-
smock licentious man was in use c.1550-c.1900. To smell a rat be suspicious is from 1540s.


smelly (adj.)

1854, from smell (n.) + -y (2). Related: Smelliness.


smelt (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in smelter), from Dutch or Low German smelten, from Proto-Germanic *smelt-
(cognates: Old High German smelzan, German schmelzen to melt), from PIE *smeld-, variant of *mel-
soft. Thus the word is from a variant of the stem of Old English meltan to melt (see melt (v.)).
Related: Smelted; smelting.


smelt (n.)

Old English smelt sardine, small salmon-like sea fish, cognate with Dutch smelt sand eel, Danish
smelt (c.1600). OED notes that it has a peculiar odor (but doesn't suggest a connection with smell);
Klein suggests a connection with the way the fish melts in one's mouth. Century Dictionary
speculates it means smooth and compares Old English smeolt, smylt serene, smooth.


smelter (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from smelt (v.).


SMERSH (n.)

Soviet Army counter-espionage organization begun during World War II, 1953, from Russian
abbreviation of smert' shpionam death to spies. Introduced in English by James Bond author Ian
Fleming.


smicker (adj.)

elegant, fine, gay, from Old English smicere neat, elegant, beautiful, fair, tasteful. Hence smicker
(v.) look amorously (1660s); smickering an amorous inclination (1690s).


smidge (n.)

short form of smidgen, 1902, American English dialect.


smidgen (n.)

1845, perhaps from Scottish smitch very small amount; small insignificant person (1822). Compare
Northumbrian dialectal smiddum small particle of lead ore (1821).


smilax

type of lilaceous plant, c.1600, from Latin, from Greek smilax blindweed, also used of the yew and a
kind of evergreen oak.


smile (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Low German *smilen or a Scandinavian source (such as Danish smile smile,
Swedish smila smile, smirk, simper, fawn), from Proto-Germanic *smil-, extended form of PIE root
*smei- to laugh, smile (cognates: Old English smerian to laugh at, scorn, Old High German smieron to
smile, Latin mirus wonderful, mirari to wonder). Related: Smiled; smiling.     Gradually pushed the
usual Old English word, smearcian (modern smirk), into a specific, unpleasant sense. Of the eyes,
from 1759. Figuratively, as indicating favor or encouragement, from c.1400. Romance, Celtic, and
Slavic languages tend to use a diminutive of the word for laugh to mean smile (such as Latin ridere
laugh; subridere smile), perhaps literally small laugh or low laugh.


smile (n.)

1560s, from smile (v.).


smiley (adj.)

also smily, inclined to smile, 1848, from smile (n.) + -y (2). Smiley-face (n.) is from 1981; as a
computer icon from 1987.


smirch (v.)

late 15c., to discolor, to make dirty, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French esmorcher to
torture, perhaps also befoul, stain, from es- out (see ex-) + morcher to bite, from Latin morsus,
past participle of mordere to bite (see mordant). Sense perhaps influenced by smear. Sense of
dishonor, disgrace, discredit first attested 1820.


smirch (n.)

1680s, a soiling mark or smear, from smirch (v.). Figurative use by 1862.


smirk (v.)

Old English smearcian to smile. No exact cognates in other languages, but probably related to
smerian to laugh at, scorn, from Proto-Germanic *smer-, *smar-, variant of PIE *smei- to smile; see
smile (v.), which after c.1500 gradually restricted smirk to the unpleasant sense smile affectedly;
grin in a malicious or smug way. In some 18c. glossaries smirk is still simply to smile. Related:
Smirked; smirking. The noun is recorded by 1560s.


smirk (n.)

1550s, from smirk (v.).


Smirnoff (n.)

proprietary name of a brand of vodka, said to have been in use since 1914.


smite (v.)

to hit, strike, beat, mid-12c., from Old English smitan, which however is attested only as to daub,
smear on; soil, pollute, blemish, defile (strong verb, past tense smat, past participle smiten),
from Proto-Germanic *smitan (cognates: Swedish smita, Danish smide to smear, fling, Old Frisian
smita, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch smiten to cast, fling, Dutch smijten to throw, Old High
German smizan to rub, strike, German schmei&szlig;en to cast, fling, Gothic bismeitan to spread,
smear). The development of the various senses is not quite clear, but that of throwing is perh. the
original one [OED]. Watkins suggests the semantic channel may have been slapping mud on walls in
wattle and daub construction and connects it with PIE *sme- to smear; Klein's sources also say this.
Sense of slay in combat (c.1300) is from Biblical expression smite to death, first attested c.1200.
Meaning visit disastrously is mid-12c., also Biblical. Meaning strike with passion or emotion is
from c.1300.


smith (n.)

Old English smi&#240; blacksmith, armorer, one who works in metal (jewelers as well as blacksmiths),
more broadly, handicraftsman, practitioner of skilled manual arts (also including carpenters), from
Proto-Germanic *smithaz skilled worker (cognates: Old Saxon smith, Old Norse smi&#240;r, Danish
smed, Old Frisian smith, Old High German smid, German Schmied, Gothic -smi&thorn;a, in aiza-
smi&#254;a coppersmith), from PIE root *smi- to cut, work with a sharp instrument (cognates: Greek
smile knife, chisel). Attested as a surname since at least c.975.


smith (v.)

Old English smi&#240;ian to forge, fabricate, design, from the source of smith (n.). Related:
Smithed; smithing.


Smith &amp; Wesson

proprietary name of a type of firearm, 1860, from the gunsmith firm of Horace Smith (1808-1893) and
Daniel B. Wesson (1825-1906) in Springfield, Massachusetts.


smithereens (n.)

small fragments, 1810, smiddereens, from Irish smidirin, diminutive of smiodar fragment, perhaps
with diminutive ending as in Colleen.


Smithfield

place in London, celebrated since at least 17c. as a market for cattle and horses, later the central
meat market. In various colloquial expressions. Originally Smethefield, from Old English smethe
smooth (see smooth (adj.)). Smithfield ham (1908, American English) is from a town of that name in
Virginia.


Smithsonian

Smithsonian Institute, named for English scientist and philanthropist James Smithson (1765-1829),
who left a legacy to the U.S. government to found it. The mineral smithsonite also is named for him.


smithy (n.)

workshop of a smith, c.1300, from Old Norse smi&#240;ja (cognate with Old English smi&#240;&#240;e),
from Proto-Germanic *smith-ja-, from PIE smi- (see smith (n.)).


smitten (adj.)

mid-13c., struck hard, afflicted, visited with disaster, past participle adjective from smite. Sense
of inspired with love is from 1660s.


smock (n.)

Old English smoc garment worn by women, corresponding to the shirt on men, from Proto-Germanic
*smukkaz (cognates: Old Norse smokkr a smock, but this is perhaps from Old English; Old High German
smoccho smock, a rare word; North Frisian smok woman's shift, but this, too, perhaps from English).
Klein's sources, Barnhart and the OED see this as connected to a group of Germanic sm- words having
to do with creeping or pressing close, such as Old Norse smjuga to creep (through an opening), to
put on (a garment), smuga narrow cleft to creep through; small hole; Old Swedish smog a round hole
for the head; Old English smugan, smeogan to creep, smygel a burrow. Compare also German schmiegen
to cling to, press close, nestle; and Schmuck jewelry, adornments, from schmucken to adorn,
literally to dress up.    Watkins, however, traces it to a possible Germanic base *(s)muk- wetness,
figuratively slipperiness, from PIE root*meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus). Either way, the original
notion, then, seems generally to have been garment one creeps or slips into, by the same pattern
that produced sleeve and slip (n.2).    Now replaced by euphemistic shift (n.2); smock was the
common word down to 18c., and was emblematic of womanhood generally, as in verb smock to render (a
man) effeminate or womanish (1610s); smocker man who consorts with women (18c.); smock-face person
having a pale, effeminate face (c.1600). A smock-race (1707) was an old country pastime, a foot-race
for women and girls with a smock as a prize. Modern meaning woman's or child's loose dress or blouse
is from 1907; sense of loose garment worn by artists over other clothes is from 1938.


smog (n.)

1905, blend of smoke and fog, formed after Lewis Carrol's example [Klein; see portmanteau].
Reputedly coined in reference to London, and first attested there in a paper read by Dr. H.A. des
Voeux, treasurer of the Coal Smoke Abatement Society, though he seems not to have claimed credit for
coining it.    At a recent health congress in London, a member used a new term to indicate a
frequent London condition, the black fog, which is not unknown in other large cities and which has
been the cause of a great deal of bad language in the past. The word thus coined is a contraction of
smoke fog smog -- and its introduction was received with applause as being eminently expressive and
appropriate. It is not exactly a pretty word, but it fits very well the thing it represents, and it
has only to become known to be popular. [Journal of the American Medical Association, Aug. 26, 1905]
Smaze (with haze (n.)) is from 1953.


smoggy (adj.)

1905, from smog (n.) + -y (2). Related: Smogginess.


smokable (adj.)

1839, from smoke (v.) + -able. Related: Smokably; smokability.


smoke (n.1)

late Old English smoca (rare) fumes and volatile material given off by burning substances, related
to smeocan give off smoke, from Proto-Germanic *smuk- (cognates: Middle Dutch smooc, Dutch smook,
Middle High German smouch, German Schmauch), from PIE root *smeug- to smoke; smoke (cognates:
Armenian mux smoke, Greek smykhein to burn with smoldering flame, Old Irish much, Welsh mwg smoke).
The more usual noun was Old English smec, which became dialectal smeech. Abusive meaning black
person attested from 1913, American English. Smoke-eater firefighter is c.1930. Figurative phrase go
up in smoke be destroyed (as if by fire) is from 1933. Smoke alarm first attested 1936; smoke-
detector from 1957.


smoke (v.)

Old English smocian to produce smoke, emit smoke, especially as a result of burning, from smoke
(n.1). Meaning to drive out or away or into the open by means of smoke is attested from 1590s.
Meaning to apply smoke to, to cure (bacon, fish, etc.) by exposure to smoke is first attested 1590s.
In connection with tobacco, draw fumes from burning into the mouth, first recorded 1604 in James I's
Counterblast to Tobacco. Related: Smoked; smoking. Smoking gun in figurative sense of incontestable
evidence is from 1974.


smoke (n.2)

cigarette, slang, 1882, from smoke (n.1). Also opium (1884). Meaning a spell of smoking tobacco is
recorded from 1835.


smoke-screen (n.)

1915, as a form of military camouflage, from smoke (n.1) + screen (n.); 1926 in the figurative
sense. The association of smoke with deception, deliberate obscurity dates back to at least 1560s.


smokeless (adj.)

emitting little smoke, 1580s, from smoke (n.1) + -less.


smoker (n.)

1590s, one who cures meat, agent noun from smoke (v.). Meaning one who smokes tobacco is from 1610s.
Railway meaning smoking car is from 1875. Smoker's cough attested from 1898.


smokestack (n.)

also smoke-stack, 1833, from smoke (n.1) + stack (n.).


smokey (adj.)

variant of smoky. As a noun, sometimes short for Smokey Bear.


Smokey Bear (n.)

state policeman, 1974, from truckers' slang, in reference to the wide-brim style of hat worn by
state troopers (the hats so called by 1969). Ultimately the reference is to a popular illustrated
character of that name, dressed in forest ranger gear (including a hat like those later worn by
state troopers). He was introduced in 1944 by the U.S. Forest Service and the Wartime Advertising
Council in a campaign to lower the number of forest fires in the West.


smoky (adj.)

early 14c., emitting smoke, from smoke (n.) + -y (2). Meaning filled with smoke and meaning
resembling smoke are from late 14c. Of flavors, from 1540s; of colors, from 1550s. Related:
Smokiness.


smolder (v.)

c.1300 (implied in smoldering), to smother, suffocate, related to Middle Dutch smolen, Low German
smelen, Flemish smoel hot, from Proto-Germanic *smel-, *smul-. The intransitive meaning burn and
smoke without flame is first recorded 1520s, fell from use 17c. (though smoldering persisted in
poetry) and was revived 19c. Figurative sense exist in a suppressed state; burn inwardly is from
1810. Related: Smouldered; smolderingly. Middle English also had a noun smolder meaning smoky vapor,
a stifling smoke.


smooch (v.)

1932, alteration of dialectal verb smouch to kiss (1570s), possibly imitative of the sound of
kissing (compare German dialectal schmutzen to kiss). An earlier alteration produced smudge (v.) to
kiss, caress (1844). Related: Smooched; smooching. As a noun by 1942.


smoochy (adj.)

amorous, meant for kissing, 1947, from smooch (n.) + -y (2).


smooth (adj.)

Old English smo&#240; smooth, serene, calm, variant of sme&#240;e free from roughness, not harsh,
polished; soft; suave; agreeable, of unknown origin and with no known cognates. Of words, looks,
pleasant, polite, sincere late 14c., but later flattering, insinuating (mid-15c.). Slang meaning
superior, classy, clever is attested from 1893. Sense of stylish is from 1922.   Smooth-bore in
reference to guns is from 1812. smooth talk (v.) is recorded from 1950. A 1599 dictionary has
smoothboots a flatterer, a faire spoken man, a cunning tongued fellow. The usual Old English form
was sme&#240;e, and there is a dialectal smeeth found in places names, such as Smithfield, Smedley.


smooth (v.)

late Old English smo&#254; to make smooth, replacing sme&#240;an to smooth, soften, polish; appease,
soothe; sme&#240;ian smoothen, become smooth, from the source of smooth (adj.). Meaning to make
smooth is c.1200. Related: Smoothed; smoothing. Middle English also had a verb form smoothen (mid-
14c.).


smoothie (n.)

1928, suave person, person of complete self-assurance and poise, especially in the company of the
opposite sex, college slang, from smooth (adj.) + -ie. As a type of blender drink, by 1983.


smoothly (adv.)

1520s, in a smooth manner, blandly, from smooth (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning without impediment or
complications is from 1660s.


smoothness (n.)

late 14c., smoothness, evenness, from smooth (adj.) + -ness.


smorgasbord (n.)

1893, from Swedish sm&ouml;rg&#229;sbord, literally butter-goose table, from sm&ouml;rg&#229;s,
slice of bread and butter, compounded from sm&#246;r butter (see smear (n.)) and g&#229;s, literally
goose (and from the same Germanic root that yielded English goose (n.)).    [Sm&ouml;rg&#229;s]
properly signifies a slice of bread-and-butter; and has come by custom--in much the same way as when
we familiarly speak of taking a sandwich for partaking of some light refreshment--to be applied
synecdochically to the preliminary relish or appetizer partaken of before meals. [Notes and Queries,
Nov. 15, 1884]     The final element is bord table, from Proto-Germanic *burdam plank, board, table
(see board (n.1)). Figurative sense of medley, miscellany is recorded from 1948.


smote

past tense of smite (v.).


smother (v.)

c.1200, to suffocate with smoke, from smother (n.), earlier smorthre dense, suffocating smoke (late
12c.), from stem of Old English smorian to suffocate, choke, strangle, stifle, cognate with Middle
Dutch smoren, German schmoren; possibly connected to smolder. Meaning to kill by suffocation in any
manner is from 1540s; sense of to extinguish a fire is from 1590s. Sense of stifle, repress is first
recorded 1570s; meaning to cover thickly (with some substance) is from 1590s. Related: Smothered;
smothering.


smoulder (v.)

see smolder. Related: Smouldered; smouldering; smoulderingly.


smudge (v.)

early 15c., smogen to soil, stain, blacken, of obscure origin. Related: Smudged; smudging. Meaning
make a smoky fire is from 1860, hence smudge-pot (1903). The noun meaning a stain, spot, smear is
first attested 1768, from the verb.


smudgy (adj.)

dirty, 1859, from smudge (n.) + -y (2).


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


smuggle (v.)

import or export secretly and contrary to law, 1680s, of Low German or Dutch origin (see smuggler).
Related: Smuggled; smuggling.


smuggler (n.)

1660s, from Low German smuggeln or Dutch smokkelen to transport (goods) illegally, apparently a
frequentative formation of a word meaning to sneak (from Proto-Germanic *smuganan; cognates: Dutch
smuigen to eat secretly; Swedish smyg a lurking-hole, Danish smughandel contraband trade, Norwegian
smjuga, Old English smeogan to creep), perhaps literally to slip (contraband through), from Proto-
Germanic *(s)muk- (see smock).


smush

1825 (n.), variant of mush. As a verb, by 1980.


smut (n.)

1660s, black mark, stain, from verb smutten debase, defile (late 14c.), later stain or mark with
soot, etc. (1580s), cognate with Middle High German smotzen make dirty, from West Germanic *smutt-
(cognates: Middle High German smuz grease, dirt; German Schmutz dirt, schmutzen to make dirty). The
meaning indecent or obscene language is first attested 1660s.


smutch (v.)

1610s, variant of smudge (v.). As a noun from 1520s.


smutty (adj.)

1590s, soiled with smut (of grain); 1660s, indecent, from smut + -y (2). Related: Smuttily;
smuttiness. Smutty-nosed in ornithology means having black nostrils.


snack (v.)

c.1300, to bite or snap (of a dog), probably from Middle Dutch or Flemish snacken to snatch, snap;
chatter, which Watkins traces to a hypothetical Germanic imitative root *snu- forming words having
to do with the nose (see snout). The meaning have a mere bite or morsel, eat a light meal is first
attested 1807. Related: Snacked; snacking.


snack (n.)

c.1400, a snatch or snap (especially that of a dog), from snack (v.). Later a snappish remark
(1550s); a share, portion, part (1680s; hence old expression go snacks share, divide; have a share
in). Main modern meaning a bite or morsel to eat hastily is attested from 1757. Snack bar is
attested from 1923. Commercial plural form snax attested from 1942 in the vending machine trade.


snaffle (n.)

simple bridle-bit, 1530s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from or related to Dutch snavel beak, bill;
compare German Schnabel beak, face, Old English nebb, Old Norse neff beak, nose (see neb).


snafu (n.)

1941, U.S. military slang, acronym for situation normal, all fucked up, an expression conveying the
common soldier's laconic acceptance of the disorder of war and the ineptitude of his superiors
[Oxford English Dictionary]. As an adjective from 1942. In public explanations the word typically
was euphemised to fouled.


snag (n.)

1570s, stump of a tree, branch, of Scandinavian origin, compare Old Norse snagi clothes peg, snaga a
kind of ax, snag-hyrndr snag-cornered, with sharp points. The ground sense seems to be a sharp
protuberance. The meaning sharp or jagged projection is first recorded 1580s; especially tree or
branch in water and partly near the surface, so as to be dangerous to navigation (1807). The
figurative meaning obstacle, impediment is from 1829.


snag (v.)

be caught on an impediment, 1807, from snag (n.). Originally in American English, often in reference
to steamboats caught on branches and stumps lodged in riverbeds. Of fabric, from 1967. The
transitive meaning to catch, steal, pick up is U.S. colloquial, attested from 1895. Related:
Snagged; snagging.


snaggle-toothed (adj.)

having crooked, projecting teeth, 1580s) from the root of snag (n.). Alternative snaggle-tooth
(adj.) is from 1650s; snaggle-tooth (n.) is from 1820.


snail (n.)

Old English sn&aelig;gl, from Proto-Germanic *snagila (cognates: Old Saxon snegil, Old Norse
snigill, Danish snegl, Swedish snigel, Middle High German snegel, dialectal German Schnegel, Old
High German snecko, German Schnecke snail), from *snog-, variant of PIE root *sneg- to crawl, creep;
creeping thing (see snake (n.)). The word essentially is a diminutive form of Old English snaca
snake, which literally means creeping thing. Also formerly used of slugs. Symbolic of slowness since
at least c.1000; snail's pace is attested from c.1400.


snake (n.)

Old English snaca, from Proto-Germanic *snakon (cognates: Old Norse snakr snake, Swedish snok,
German Schnake ring snake), from PIE root *sneg- to crawl, creeping thing (cognates: Old Irish
snaighim to creep, Lithuanian snake snail, Old High German snahhan to creep). In Modern English,
gradually replacing serpent in popular use.    Traditionally applied to the British serpent, as
distinguished from the poisonous adder. Meaning treacherous person first recorded 1580s (compare Old
Church Slavonic gadu reptile, gadinu foul, hateful). Applied from 17c. to various snake-like devices
and appliances. Snakes! as an exclamation is from 1839.   Snake eyes in crap-shooting sense is from
1919. Snake oil is from 1927. Snake-bitten unlucky is sports slang from 1957, from a literal sense,
perhaps suggesting one doomed by being poisoned. The game of Snakes and Ladders is attested from
1907. Snake charmer is from 1813. Snake pit is from 1883, as a supposed primitive test of truth or
courage; figurative sense is from 1941. Phrase snake in the grass is from Virgil's Latet anguis in
herba [Ecl. III:93].


snake (v.)

1650s, to twist or wind (hair) into the form of a snake, from snake (n.). The intransitive sense of
to move like a snake is attested from 1848; that of to wind or twist like a snake (of roads, etc.)
is from 1875. Related: Snaked; snaking.


snakehead (n.)

1845 as a type of plant; 1891 as a type of Asian carnivorous fish, from snake (n.) + head (n.).


snakestone (n.)

fossil ammonite, 1660s, from snake (n.) + stone (n.). So-called from the old popular notion that
they were coiled snakes petrified.


snaky (adj.)

1560s, from snake (n.) + -y (2).


snap (n.)

late 15c., quick, sudden bite or cut, from Dutch or Low German snappen to snap, probably related to
Middle Low German or Middle Dutch snavel bill, beak, from West Germanic *snu-, an imitative root
forming words having to do with the nose (see snout).    As an adjective from 1790. Commonly used to
indicate instantaneous action, as in snap judgment (1841). Sense of quick movement is first recorded
1630s; that of something easily done is 1877. Meaning brief or sudden spell of weather (usually
cold) is from 1740. Meaning catch or fastener that closes with a snapping sound is from 1815. The
card game name is attested from 1881, from a call used in the game. Meaning a snap-shot is from
1894. U.S. football sense is from 1912, earlier snap-back (1880), which also was a name for the
center position. Snap, Crackle and Pop, cartoon characters associated with Kellogg breakfast cereal
Rice Krispies, are from 1940.


snap (v.)

1520s, of animals, to make a quick bite, from snap (n.). Meaning to break suddenly or sharply is
first recorded c.1600; the mental sense is from 1970s. Meaning come into place with a snap is from
1793. Meaning take a photograph is from 1890. U.S. football sense first recorded 1887. Related:
Snapped; snapping. To snap the fingers is from 1670s. Phrase snap out of it recorded by 1907.
Snapping turtle is attested from 1784. Snap-brim (adj.) in reference to a type of hat is from 1928.


snapdragon (n.)

garden plant, 1570s, from snap (n.) + dragon. So called from fancied resemblance of antirrhinum
flowers to a dragon's mouth. As the name of a Christmas game of plucking raisins from burning brandy
and eating them alight, from 1704.


snape (v.)

also sneap, to be hard upon, rebuke, revile, snub, early 14c., from Old Norse sneypa to outrage,
dishonor, disgrace, probably related to similar-sounding words meaning cut (compare snip (v.)).
Verbal meaning bevel the end (of a timber) to fit an inclined surface is of uncertain origin or
connection. Snaiping rebuking, reproaching, reviling is attested from early 14c.


snapper (n.)

one who or that which snaps, 1570s, agent noun from snap (v.). Applied to various fishes since
1690s. Slang meaning vagina is by 2000. As a short form of snapping turtle (1784) it is recorded
from 1872. Snappers teeth is attested from 1924.


snappish (adj.)

peevish, 1540s, from snap (v.) + -ish. Related: Snappishly; snappishness.


snappy (adj.)

quick, energetic, 1825, from snap (v.) + -y (2). Meaning clever, smart is from 1871; that of neat
and stylishly elegant is from 1881. Related: Snappily; snappiness. Command make it snappy attested
from 1910.


snapshot (n.)

also snap-shot, 1808, a quick shot with a gun, without aim, at a fast-moving target, from snap +
shot (n.). Photographic sense is attested from 1890. Figuratively, of something captured at a moment
in time, from 1897.


snare (n.1)

noose for catching animals, late Old English, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse snara
noose, snare, related to soenri twisted rope, from Proto-Germanic *snarkho (cognates: Middle Dutch
snare, Dutch snaar, Old High German snare, German Schnur noose, cord, Old English snear a string,
cord). Figuratively from c.1300.


snare (n.2)

string across a drum, 1680s, probably from Dutch snaar string, from same source as snare (n.1). From
1938 as short for snare-drum (1873).


snare (v.)

late 14c., to ensnare, from snare (n.1). Related: Snared; snaring.


snarf (v.)

to take, grab, by 1989. Related: Snarfed; snarfing.


snark (n.)

imaginary animal, coined 1876 by Lewis Carroll in The Hunting of the Snark. In 1950s, name of a type
of U.S. cruise missile and in 1980s of a type of sailboat. Meaning caustic, opinionated, critical
rhetoric is from c.2002 (see snarky) and not directly related, if at all.


snarky (adj.)

irritable, short-tempered, 1906, from snark (v.) to find fault with, nag (1882), literally to snort
(1866), from an imitative source akin to Low German snarken, North Frisian snarke, Swedish snarka;
and compare snarl (v.2), sneer (v.). Related: Snarkily; snarkiness.


snarl (v.2)

growl and bare the teeth, 1580s, perhaps from Dutch or Low German snarren to rattle, probably of
imitative origin (compare German schnarren to rattle, schnurren to hum, buzz). Meaning speak in a
harsh manner first recorded 1690s. Related: Snarled; snarling.


snarl (v.1)

to tangle, to catch in a snare or noose (trans.), late 14c., from a noun snarl a snare, a noose
(late 14c.), probably a diminutive of snare (n.1). Intransitive sense become twisted or entangled is
from c.1600. Related: Snarled; snarling.


snarl (n.2)

a sharp growl accompanied by a display of the teeth, 1610s, from snarl (v.2).


snarl (n.1)

late 14c., a snare, noose, from snarl (v.1). Meaning a tangle, a knot is first attested c.1600.
Meaning a traffic jam is from 1933.


snatch (n.)

c.1300, a trap, snare, from snatch (v.). Meaning a sudden grab is from 1570s; that of a small amount
is from 1590s. Sense in weight-lifting is from 1928. Vulgar slang sense of vulva is recorded from
1903; a much older venereal sense was sexual intercourse quickly performed (1580s).


snatch (v.)

early 13c., make a sudden snap or bite (at something), of uncertain origin; perhaps from an
unrecorded Old English *sn&#230;ccan or Middle Dutch snacken to snatch, chatter. Compare snack (n.).
Meaning lay hold of suddenly is from early 14c.; especially take from someone's hands (1580s).
Weight-lifting sense is attested from 1928. Related: Snatched; snatching.


snatcher (n.)

1570s, agent noun from snatch (v.).


snazzy (adj.)

stylish, flashy, 1932, U.S. colloquial, perhaps a blend of snappy and jazzy.


SNCC

1960, initialism (acronym) from Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, which was organized in
1960.


SNCF

French national railway, 1949, initialism (acronym) for Soci&eacute;t&eacute; Nationale des Chemins
de Fer.


sneak (v.)

1550s (implied in sneakish), perhaps from some dialectal survival of Middle English sniken to creep,
crawl (c.1200), related to Old English snican to sneak along, creep, crawl, from Proto-Germanic
*sneikanan, which is related to the root of snake (n.). Of feelings, suspicions, etc., from 1748.
Transitive sense, to partake of surreptitiously is from 1883. Related: Sneaking. Sneak-thief first
recorded 1859; sneak-preview is from 1938.


sneak (n.)

a sneaking person; mean, contemptible fellow, 1640s, from sneak (v.).


sneaker (n.)

1590s, one who sneaks, agent noun from sneak (v.). Meaning rubber-soled shoe is attested from 1895,
American English; earlier sneak (1862), so called because the shoe was noiseless. See also plimsoll;
another early name for them was tackies (1902), from tacky (adj.1).  The night-officer is generally
accustomed to wear a species of India-rubber shoes or goloshes on her feet. These are termed
'sneaks' by the women [of Brixton Prison]. [Female Life in Prison, 1862]    Related: Sneakers.


sneaky (adj.)

1833, from sneak (v.) + -y (2). Related: Sneakily; sneakiness. Sneaky Pete cheap liquor is from
1949.


sneer (v.)

1550s, to snort (of horses), perhaps from North Frisian sneere to scorn, related to Old English
fn&aelig;ran to snort, gnash one's teeth, of imitative origin (compare Danish sn&aelig;rre to grin
like a dog, Middle Dutch, Middle High German snarren to rattle). Meaning to smile contemptuously is
from 1670s; sense of to curl the upper lip in scorn is attested from 1775. Related: Sneered;
sneering. Sneer word is in E. Digby Baltzell (1987).


sneer (n.)

1707, from sneer (v.).


sneeze (v.)

late 15c., from Old English fneosan to snort, sneeze, from Proto-Germanic *fneusanan (compare:
Middle Dutch fniesen, Dutch fniezen to sneeze; Old Norse fnysa to snort; Old Norse hnjosa, Swedish
nysa to sneeze; Old High German niosan, German niesen to sneeze), from Proto-Germanic base *fneu-s-
sneeze, of imitative origin, as is PIE *pneu- to breathe (source of Greek pnein to breathe).
Other imitative words for it, perhaps in various ways related to each other, include Latin sternuere
(source of Italian starnutare, French &eacute;ternuer, Spanish estornudar), Breton strevia, Sanskrit
ksu-, Lithuanian &#269;iaudeti, Polish kicha&#263;, Russian &#269;ichat'.    English forms in sn-
might be due to a misreading of the uncommon fn- (represented in only eight words in Clark Hall,
mostly in words to do with breathing), or from Norse influence. OED suggests Middle English fnese
had been reduced to simple nese by early 15c., and sneeze is a strengthened form of this, assisted
by its phonetic appropriateness. Related: Sneezed; sneezing. To sneeze at to regard as of little
value (usually with negative) is attested from 1806.


sneeze (n.)

act of sneezing, 1640s, from sneeze (v.).


sneezy (adj.)

1800, from sneeze (n.) + -y (2).


snell (adj.)

Old English snel quick, active, cognate with Old Saxon, Dutch, Old High German snel, German schnell
swift, quick, Old Danish snel swift, fleet, Old Norse snjallr eloquent, able, bold. It survived as a
surname and in Scottish and northern English; used by Burns and Scott. Italian snello is from
Germanic.


snick (n.)

1962, American English, from common pronunciation of SNCC, initialism (acronym) for Student Non-
violent Co-ordinating Committee, black civil rights organization.


snick (v.)

cut, clip, snip, c.1700, back-formation from snickersnee.


snicker (v.)

1690s, possibly of imitative origin, similar to Dutch snikken to gasp, sob. Related: Snickered;
snickering.


snicker (n.)

a smothered laugh, 1835, from snicker (v.).


snickersnee (n.)

1690s, originally fight with knives, from snick-or-snee (1610s), from Dutch steken to thrust, stick
+ snijden to cut (compare German schneiden; see schnitzel).


snide (adj.)

1859, thieves' slang, counterfeit, sham, bad, spurious, of unknown origin. Of persons, cunning,
sharp, from 1883. Sense of sneering is first attested 1933, perhaps via sense of hypocrisy,
malicious gossip (1902). Related: Sneeringly.


sniff (v.)

mid-14c., of imitative origin; possibly related to snyvelen (see snivel). As an expression of scorn
or contempt from 1729. As a synonym for smell (v.) it dates from 1845. In reference to cocaine from
1925. Related: Sniffed; sniffing.


sniff (n.)

1767, from sniff (v.); the scornful sense is from 1859.


sniffer (n.)

the nose, 1858, agent noun from sniff (v.).


sniffle (v.)

1819, frequentative form of sniff (v.). Related: Sniffled; sniffling. The sniffles runny nose, head
cold is recorded from 1825. Sniffly (1897) tends to refer to physical symptoms, while sniffy (1858)
means scornful, disdainful and disagreeable. Snuffy annoyed is from 1670s.


snifter (n.)

1844, a drink of liquor, earlier a sniff, from a Scottish and northern English survival of an
obsolete verb snift meaning to sniff, snivel (mid-14c.), of imitative origin (compare sniff (v.)).
Meaning large bulbous stemmed glass for drinking brandy is from 1937. The association of drinking
liquor with words for inhaling, snuffling (such as snort (n.), snootful) is perhaps borrowed from
snuff-taking and the nasal reaction to it.


snigger (v.)

1706, variant form of snicker (v.). Related: Sniggered; sniggering. As a noun from 1823.


sniggler (n.)

1840, in reference to fishing (especially for eels), agent noun from sniggle (v.) attested in this
sense from 1670s, with verbal suffix -le + snig an eel (late 15c.), of obscure origin, but perhaps
related to snake (n.), sneak (v.).


snip (n.)

1550s, small piece of cut-out cloth, probably from Dutch or Low German snippen to snip, shred, of
imitative origin. Meaning cut made by scissors is from 1590s. As a nickname or cant word for a
tailor, 1590s. Snip-snap-snorum, the card game, is 1755, from Low German.


snip (v.)

to cut at one light, quick stroke, 1580s, from snip (n.). Related: Snipped; snipping.


snipe (v.)

shoot from a hidden place, 1773 (among British soldiers in India), in reference to hunting snipe as
game, from snipe (n.). Figurative use from 1892. Related: Sniped; sniping.


snipe (n.)

long-billed marsh bird, early 14c., from Old Norse -snipa in myrisnipa moor snipe; perhaps a common
Germanic term (compare Old Saxon sneppa, Middle Dutch snippe, Dutch snip, Old High German snepfa,
German Schnepfe snipe, Swedish sn&#228;ppa sandpiper), perhaps originally snipper. The Old English
name was snite, which is of uncertain derivation. An opprobrious term (see guttersnipe) since
c.1600.


sniper (n.)

sharpshooter; one who shoots from a hidden place, 1824, agent noun from snipe (v.). The birds were
considered a challenging target for an expert shooter:    Snipe Shooting is a good trial of the
gunner's skill, who often engages in this diversion, without the assistance of a dog of any kind; a
steady pointer, however, is a good companion. [Sportsman's Calendar, London, December 1818]


snippers (n.)

scissors, 1590s, plural agent noun from snip (v.).


snippet (n.)

1660s, from snip (n.) + diminutive suffix -et.


snippy (adj.)

1727, parsimonious; 1848, fault-finding, sharp; 1886, fragmentary; from snip (n.) + -y (2). Related:
Snippily; snippiness.


snips (n.)

small, stout-handled shears for metal-working, 1846, from snip (v.).


snit (n.)

state of agitation, fit of temper, 1939, American English, of unknown origin. First in Claire
Boothe's Kiss the Boys Good-bye, which gives it a U.S. Southern context.


snitch (n.)

informer, 1785, probably from underworld slang meaning the nose (1700), which apparently developed
from an earlier meaning fillip on the nose (1670s). Snitcher in same sense is from 1827.


snitch (v.)

1803, to inform, from snitch (n.). Meaning to steal, pilfer is attested from 1904, perhaps a variant
of snatch (v.). Related: Snitched; snitching.


snite (v.)

to blow or wipe the nose, c.1100, now Scottish and dialectal, from Old English snytan, related to
Old Norse snyta, Middle Dutch snuten, Old High German snuzen, German schneuzen to blow one's nose,
and to snot.


snivel (v.)

Old English *snyflan to run at the nose, related to snyflung running of the nose, snofl nasal mucus;
see snout. Meaning to be in an (affected) tearful state is from 1680s. Related: Snivelled;
snivelling. As a noun from 14c. Melville coined snivelization (1849). Middle English had
contemptuous term snivelard (n.).


snivelling (adj.)

mean-spirited, weak, 1640s, present-participle adjective from snivel (v.). Related: Snivellingly.


snob (n.)

1781, a shoemaker, a shoemaker's apprentice, of unknown origin. It came to be used in Cambridge
University slang c.1796, often contemptuously, for townsman, local merchant, and passed then into
literary use, where by 1831 it was being used for person of the ordinary or lower classes. Meaning
person who vulgarly apes his social superiors is by 1843, popularized 1848 by William Thackeray's
Book of Snobs. The meaning later broadened to include those who insist on their gentility, in
addition to those who merely aspire to it, and by 1911 the word had its main modern sense of one who
despises those considered inferior in rank, attainment, or taste.


snobbery (n.)

the class of snobs, 1833, from snob + -ery. Meaning snobbishness is from 1843.


snobbish (adj.)

1840, pertaining to snobs, from snob + -ish. Meaning with the character of a snob is from 1849.
Related: Snobbishly; snobbishness.


snobby (adj.)

1835, from snob + -y (2). Related: Snobbiness.


snobocracy (n.)

1853, from snob + -ocracy.


snog (v.)

to flirt, cuddle, 1945, British English slang, of unknown origin, perhaps a back-formation from
snogging. Related: Snogged.


snogging (n.)

kissing and cuddling, British English slang, 1945, of unknown origin, said to have originated in
British India.


snollygoster

1846, American English slang, fanciful coinage.


snood (n.)

Old English snod ribbon for the hair, from Proto-Germanic *snodo (cognates: Swedish snod string,
cord), from PIE root *(s)ne- to spin, sew (cognates: Lettish snate a linen cover, Old Irish snathe
thread; see needle (n.)). In the Middle Ages, typically worn by young unmarried girls, hence It was
held to be emblematic of maidenhood or virginity [Century Dictionary]. Modern fashion meaning bag-
like hair net first recorded 1938 (these also were worn by girls in the Middle Ages, but they are
not snoods properly).


snook (n.)

derisive gesture, 1791, of unknown origin.


snooker (n.)

1889, the game and the word said in an oft-told story to have been invented in India by British
officers as a diversion from billiards. The name is perhaps a reference (with regard to the rawness
of play by a fellow officer) to British slang snooker newly joined cadet, first-term student at the
R.M. Academy (1872). Tradition ascribes the coinage to Col. Sir Neville Chamberlain (not the later
prime minister of the same name), at the time subaltern in the Devonshire Regiment in Jubbulpore.
One of the first descriptions of the game is in A.W. Drayson's The Art  of Practical Billiards for
Amateurs (1889), which states in a footnote The rules of the game of snooker are the copyright of
Messrs. Burroughes &amp; Watts, from whom they may be obtained, they being manufacturers of billiard
tables.


snooker (v.)

to cheat, early 1900s, from snooker (n.). Related: Snookered; snookering.    One of the great
amusements of this game is, by accuracy in strength, to place the white ball so close behind a pool
ball that the next player cannot hit a pyramid ball, he being snookered from all of them. If he fail
to strike a pyramid ball, this failure counts one to the adversary. If, however, in attempting to
strike a pyramid ball off a cushion, he strike a pool ball, his adversary is credited with as many
points as the pool ball that is struck would count if pocketed by rule. [Maj.-Gen. A.W. Drayson, The
Art of Practical Billiards for Amateurs, 1889]


snookums (n.)

trivial term of endearment, 1919, from Snooks, proper name used in Britain for a hypothetical person
(1860), compare Joe Blow in U.S. As an actual proper name, Snooks dates back to the Domesday Book
and may be from Old English *snoc a projecting point of land (perhaps here with sense of a big
nose).


snoop (v.)

1832, to go around in a prying manner, American English, probably from Dutch snoepen to pry, also
eat in secret, eat sweets, sneak, probably related to snappen to bite, snatch (see snap (v.)).
Specific meaning to pry into other people's business is attested from 1921. Related: Snooped;
snooping.


snoop (n.)

1891, act of snooping,  from snoop (v.). Meaning one who snoops is from 1929; meaning detective is
from 1942. snooper one who pries or peeps is from 1889.


snoopy (adj.)

1895, from snoop (n.) + -y (2). The cartoon dog of that name in the Peanuts newspaper comic strip
debuted in 1950.


snoot (n.)

the nose, 1861, originally a Scottish variant of snout.


snootful (n.)

as much (liquor) as one can take, 1885, from snoot (n.) + -ful.


snooty (adj.)

proud, arrogant, 1918, noted that year as college slang, from snoot (n.) + -y (2). Probably with
suggestions of snouty (1858); the notion being of looking down one's nose. Related: Snootily;
snootiness.


snooze (v.)

1789, cant word, of unknown origin, perhaps echoic of a snore. Related: Snoozed; snoozing. The noun
meaning a short nap is from 1793. Snooze-alarm is from 1965.


snore (v.)

mid-15c., probably related to snort (v.) and both probably of imitative origin (compare Dutch
snorken, Middle High German snarchen, German schnarchen, Swedish snarka; see snout). Related:
Snored; snoring.


snore (n.)

mid-14c., a snort; c.1600, act of snoring, of imitative origin; see snore (v.).


snorkel (n.)

1944, airshaft for submarines, from German Schnorchel, from German navy slang Schnorchel nose,
snout, related to schnarchen to snore (see snore (n.)). So called from its resemblance to a nose and
its noise when in use. The anglicized spelling first recorded 1949. The meaning curved tube used by
a swimmer to breathe under water is first recorded 1951.


snort (v.)

late 14c., to snore, probably related to snore (v.). Meaning breathe through the nose with a harsh
sound first recorded 1520s. Sense of express contempt is from 1818. Meaning to inhale cocaine is
first attested 1935. Related: Snorted; snorting. American English snorter something fierce or
furious is from 1833.


snort (n.)

1808, act of snorting, from snort (v.). Meaning a drink of liquor (especially whiskey) is from 1889.


snot (n.)

late 14c., from Old English gesnot nasal mucus, from Proto-Germanic *snuttan (cognates: Old Frisian
snotta, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snotte, Middle Low German snute), from the same base as
snout. Old English also had a verb snite wipe or pick one's nose. Meaning despicable person is from
1809.


snotty (adj.)

1560s, full of snot, from snot + -y (2). Meaning impudent, curt, conceited is from 1870. Related:
Snottily; snottiness. Snotnose upstart is from 1941; snotty-nose contemptible fellow is from c.1600.


snout (n.)

early 13c., trunk or projecting nose of an animal, from Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snute
snout, from Proto-Germanic *snut- (cognates: German Schnauze, Norwegian snut, Danish snude snout),
which Watkins traces to a hypothetical Germanic root *snu- forming words having to do with the nose,
imitative of a sudden drawing of breath (compare Old English gesnot nasal mucus; German schnauben
pant, puff, snort (Austrian dialect), schnaufen breathe heavily, pant, Schnupfen cold in the head;
Old Norse snaldr snout (of a serpent), snuthra to sniff, snuffle). Of other animals and
(contemptuously) of humans from c.1300.


snow (n.)

Old English snaw snow, that which falls as snow; a fall of snow; a snowstorm, from Proto-Germanic
*snaiwaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German sneo, Old Frisian and Middle Low German sne,
Middle Dutch snee, Dutch sneeuw, German Schnee, Old Norse snjor, Gothic snaiws snow), from PIE root
*sniegwh- snow; to snow (cognates: Greek nipha, Latin nix (genitive nivis), Old Irish snechta, Irish
sneachd, Welsh nyf, Lithuanian sniegas, Old Prussian snaygis, Old Church Slavonic snegu, Russian
snieg', Slovak sneh snow). The cognate in Sanskrit, snihyati, came to mean he gets wet. As slang for
cocaine it is attested from 1914.


snow (v.)

c.1300, from the noun, replacing Old English sniwan, which would have yielded modern snew (which
existed as a parallel form until 17c. and, in Yorkshire, even later), from the root of snow (n.).
The Old English verb is cognate with Middle Dutch sneuuwen, Dutch sneeuwen, Old Norse snjova,
Swedish sn&#246;ga.  Also &thorn;ikke as snow &thorn;at snew,  Or al so hail &thorn;at stormes blew.
[Robert Mannyng of Brunne, transl. Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]    The figurative sense of overwhelm;
surround, cover, and imprison (as deep snows can do to livestock) is 1880, American English, in
phrase to snow (someone) under. Snow job strong, persistent persuasion in a dubious cause is World
War II armed forces slang, probably from the same metaphoric image.


snow-blind (adj.)

1748, from snow (n.) + blind (adj.).


snow-goose (n.)

1771, from snow (n.) + goose (n.).


snow-plow (n.)

also snowplow, snow-plough, 1792, first mentioned in a New Hampshire context, from snow (n.) + plow
(n.).


snow-shoe (n.)

also snowshoe, 1670s, from snow (n.) + shoe (n.). Related: Snowshoes.


snow-tire (n.)

1952, from snow (n.) + tire (n.). Earlier mud-and-snow tire (1948).


snow-white (adj.)

Old English snawhwit, from snow (n.) + white (adj.). Similar formation in Dutch sneeuwwit, Middle
Low German snewhit, German schneeweiss, Old Norse sn&#230;hvitr, Swedish sn&#246;hvit, Danish
snehvid. The fairy tale is so-called from 1885, translating German Schneewittchen in Grimm; the
German name used in English by 1858.


snowball (n.)

c.1400, from snow (n.) + ball (n.1). Similar formation in West Frisian sniebal, Middle Dutch
sneubal, German Schneeball, Danish snebold. Expression snowball's chance (in hell) no chance is
recorded by 1910.


snowball (v.)

to make snowballs, 1680s, from snowball (n.); sense of to throw snowballs at (someone) is from 1850.
Meaning to increase rapidly is attested from 1929, though the image of a snowball increasing in size
as it rolls along had been used since at least 1613, and a noun sense of a pyramid scheme is
attested from 1892. Related: Snowballed; snowballing.


snowbank (n.)

1779, from snow (n.) + bank (n.2).


snowbird (n.)

also snow-bird, from 1680s in reference to various types of birds associated with snow, from snow
(n.) + bird (n.1). From 1923 in reference to northern U.S. workers who went to the South in the
winter months to work; by 1979 in reference to tourists.


snowbound (adj.)

1814, from snow (n.) + bound (adj.1).


Snowdon

mountain in Caernarvonshire, northern Wales, from English snow (n.) + Old English dun hill, mountain
(see down (n.2); presumably translating a former Celtic name. The height is snow-covered much of the
year.


snowdrift (n.)

c.1300, from snow (n.) + drift (n.).


snowdrop (n.)

early flower, 1660s, from snow (n.) + drop (n.).


snowfall (n.)

1821, fall of snow, especially a quiet one (as distinguished from a snowstorm), from snow (n.) +
storm (n.). From 1875 as amount that falls at a place in a given time.


snowflake (n.)

1734, from snow (n.) + flake (n.).


snowman (n.)

also snow-man, 1827, from snow (n.) + man (n.).


snowmobile (n.)

1931, in reference to Admiral Byrd's expedition, from snow (n.) + ending from automobile, etc.


snowstorm (n.)

1771, from snow (n.) + storm (n.).


snowy (adj.)

Old English snawig; see snow (n.) + -y (2). Related: Snowiness. Similar formation in Middle Low
German sneig, Old High German snewac, German schneeig, Old Norse sn&#230;ugr, Swedish sn&#246;gig,
Danish sneig.


snub (v.)

mid-14c., to check, reprove, rebuke, from Old Norse snubba to curse, chide, snub, scold, reprove.
The ground sense is perhaps to cut off, and the word probably is related to snip. Compare Swedish
snobba lop off, snuff (a candle), Old Norse snubbotr snubbed, nipped, with the tip cut off. Meaning
treat coldly appeared early 18c. Related: Snubbed; snubbing.


snub (adj.)

short and turned up, 1725, in snub-nosed, from snub (v.). The connecting notion is of being cut
short.


snub (n.)

rebuke, intentional slight, 1530s, from snub (v.).


snudge (n.)

a miser, a mean avaricious person, 1540s, very common from c.1550-1610 [OED].


snuff (v.1)

to cut or pinch off the burned part of a candle wick, mid-15c., from noun snoffe burned part of a
candle wick (late 14c.), of unknown origin, perhaps related to snuff (v.2). The meaning to die is
from 1865; that of to kill is from 1932; snuff-film, originally an urban legend, is from 1975.


snuff (v.2)

draw in through the nose, 1520s, from Dutch or Flemish snuffen to sniff, snuff, related to Dutch
snuiven to sniff, from Proto-Germanic *snuf- (cognates: Middle High German snupfe, German Schnupfen
head-cold), imitative of the sound of drawing air through the nose (see snout). Related: Snuffed;
snuffing.


snuff (n.)

powdered tobacco to be inhaled, 1680s, from Dutch or Flemish snuf, shortened form of snuftabak snuff
tobacco, from snuffen to sniff, snuff (see snuff (v.2)). The practice became fashionable in England
c.1680. Slang phrase up to snuff knowing, sharp, wide-awake, not likely to be deceived is from 1811;
the exact sense is obscure unless it refers to the elevating properties of snuff.


snuff-box (n.)

1680s, from snuff (n.) + box (n.1).


snuffer (n.)

also snuffter, instrument for cropping the snuff of a candle, with a closed box to contain the burnt
smell and smoke, mid-15c., agent noun from snuff (v.1).


snuffle (v.)

1580s, from Dutch or Flemish snuffelen to sniff about, pry, related to Dutch and Flemish snuffen to
sniff (see snuff (v.2)). Related: Snuffled; snuffling.


snuffle (n.)

1764, sound made by snuffling, from snuffle (v.). Old English had snofl (n.) phlegm, mucus. The
snuffles troublesome mucous discharge from the nostrils is from 1770.


snug (adj.)

1590s, compact, trim (of a ship), especially protected from the weather, perhaps from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse snoggr short-haired, Old Swedish snygg, Old Danish sn&oslash;g neat, tidy,
perhaps from PIE *kes- (1) to scratch (see xyster). Sense of in a state of ease or comfort first
recorded 1620s. Meaning fit closely is first found 1838. Expression snug as a bug in a rug attested
by 1769; earlier snug as a bee in a box (1706).


snuggle (v.)

1680s, frequentative form of snug. Related: Snuggled; snuggling. As a noun from 1901.


so (adv.)

Old English swa, sw&aelig; (adv., conj., pron.) in this way, also to that extent; so as,
consequently, therefore, and purely intensive; from Proto-Germanic *swa (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle
Dutch, Old High German so, Old Norse sva, Danish saa, Swedish s&#229;, Old Frisian sa, Dutch zo,
German so so, Gothic swa as), from PIE reflexive pronomial stem *swo- so (cognates: Greek hos as,
Old Latin suad so, Latin se himself), derivative of *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and
reflexive (see idiom).    Old English swa frequently was strengthened by eall, and so also is
contained in compounds as, also, such. The -w- was eliminated by contraction from 12c.; compare two,
which underwent the same process but retained its spelling. As an introductory particle [OED] from
1590s. Used to add emphasis or contradict a negative from 1913. So in mid-20c. British slang could
mean homosexual (adj.). So? as a term of dismissal is attested from 1886 (short for is that so?,
etc.). So what as an exclamation of indifference dates from 1934. So-and-so is from 1596 meaning
something unspecified; first recorded 1897 as a euphemistic term of abuse. Abbreviating phrase and
so on is attested from 1724. So far so good is from 1721.


so long (interj.)

parting salutation, 1860, of unknown origin, perhaps from a German idiom (compare German parting
salutation adieu so lange, the full sense of which probably is something like farewell, whilst
(we're apart)); or perhaps from Hebrew shalom (via Yiddish sholom). Some have noted a similarity to
Scandinavian leave-taking phrases, such as Norwegian Adj&oslash; s&#229; lenge, Farvel s&#229;
lenge, Mor'n s&#229; lenge, literally bye so long, farewell so long, morning so long; and Swedish
Hej s&#229; l&auml;nge good-bye for now, with s&#229; l&auml;nge for now attested since 1850
according to Swedish sources. Most etymology sources seem to lean toward the German origin.
Earlier guesses that it was a sailors' corruption of a South Pacific form of Arabic salaam are not
now regarded as convincing. Dictionary of American Slang also adds to the list of candidates Irish
sl&aacute;n safe, said to be used as a salutation in parting. The phrase seems to have turned up
simultaneously in America, Britain, and perhaps Canada, originally among lower classes. First
attested use is in title and text of the last poem in Whitman's Leaves of Grass in the 1860 edition.
An unknown sphere, more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts awakening rays about me -- So long!
Remember my words -- I may again return,   I love you -- I depart from materials;   I am as one
disembodied, triumphant, dead.   Whitman's friend and fan William Sloane Kennedy wrote in 1923:
The salutation of parting -- 'So long!' -- was, I believe, until recent years, unintelligible to the
majority of persons in America, especially in the interior, and to members of the middle and
professional classes. I had never heard of it until I read it in Leaves of Grass, but since then
have quite often heard it used by the laboring class and other classes in New England cities. Walt
wrote to me, defining 'so long' thus: A salutation of departure, greatly used among sailors, sports,
&amp; prostitutes -- the sense of it is 'Till we meet again,' -- conveying an inference that somehow
they will doubtless so meet, sooner or later. ... It is evidently about equivalent to our 'See you
later.' The phrase is reported as used by farm laborers near Banff, Scotland. In Canada it is
frequently heard; 'and its use is not entirely confined to the vulgar.' It is in common use among
the working classes of Liverpool and among sailors at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and in Dorsetshire. ...
The London Globe suggests that the expression is derived from the Norwegian 'Saa laenge,' a common
form of 'farewell,' au revoir. If so, the phrase was picked up from the Norwegians in America, where
'So long' first was heard. The expression is now (1923) often used by the literary and artistic
classes.


so-called (adj.)

1650s, from so + past participle of call (v.). As a sneer word (1980, Safire, who lumps it with
self-proclaimed, would-be, and purported), from 1837.


so-so

1520s as an adverb, indifferently; as an adjective, mediocre, neither too good nor too bad, 1540s;
from so.


soak (v.)

Old English socian (intransitive) to soak, to lie in liquid, from Proto-Germanic *sukon (cognates:
West Flemish soken), possibly from PIE *sug-, from root *seue- (2) to take liquid (see sup (v.2)).
Transitive sense drench, permeate thoroughly is from mid-14c.; that of cause to lie in liquid is
from early 15c. Meaning take up by absorption is from 1550s. Slang meaning to overcharge first
recorded 1895. Related: Soaked; soaking. As a noun, mid-15c., from the verb.


soap (n.)

Old English sape soap, salve (originally a reddish hair dye used by Germanic warriors to give a
frightening appearance), from Proto-Germanic *saipon dripping thing, resin (cognates: Middle Low
German sepe, West Frisian sjippe, Dutch zeep, Old High German seiffa, German seife soap, Old High
German seifar foam, Old English sipian to drip), from PIE *soi-bon-, from root *seib- to pour out,
drip, trickle (cognates: Latin sebum tallow, suet, grease).    Romans and Greeks used oil to clean
skin; the Romance language words for soap (cognates: Italian sapone, French savon, Spanish jabon)
are from Late Latin sapo pomade for coloring the hair (first mentioned in Pliny), which is a
Germanic loan-word, as is Finnish saippua. The meaning flattery is recorded from 1853.


soap (v.)

1580s, from soap (n.). Related: Soaped; soaping.


soap opera (n.)

melodramatic radio serial (later extended to television), 1939; so-called because sponsors often
were soap manufacturers, from earlier horse opera a Western (1927). Shortened form soap for this
first attested 1943.


soap-box (n.)

also soapbox, 1650s, box for holding soap, later especially a wooden crate in which soap may be
packed; from soap (n.) + box (n.). Typical of a makeshift stand for a public orator since at least
1907. Also used by children to make racing carts, as in soap-box derby, annual race in Dayton, Ohio,
which dates to 1933.


soap-bubble (n.)

1800, from soap (n.) + bubble (n.).


soap-dish (n.)

1835 as a dish for a bar of soap; 1814 as a holder for shaving-soap, from soap (n.) + dish (n.).


soapstone (n.)

type of talc, 1680s, from soap (n.) + stone (n.). So called because it is occasionally used for
cleaning.


soapy (adj.)

c.1600, from soap (n.) + -y (2). Related: Soapily; soapiness.


soar (v.)

late 14c., from Old French essorer fly up, soar, from Vulgar Latin *exaurare rise into the air, from
Latin ex- out (see ex-) + aura breeze, air (see aura). Of mountains, buildings, etc., by 1812; of
prices, emotions, etc. from 1929. Related: Soared; soaring.


sob (v.)

c.1200, to cry with short breaths, probably of imitative origin, related to Old English seofian to
lament, Old High German sufan to draw breath, West Frisian sobje to suck. Related: Sobbed; sobbing.


sob (n.)

late 14c., from sob (v.). Sob story is from 1913. Sob sister female journalist who writes
sentimental stories or advice columns is from 1912.


sobeit (conj.)

1580s, from so be it, one of our few surviving subjunctives [Weekley].


sober (v.)

late 14c., reduce to a quiet condition (transitive), from sober (adj.). Meaning render grave or
serious is from 1726. Intransitive sense of become sober (since 1847 often with up) is from 1820.
Related: Sobered; sobering.


sober (adj.)

mid-14c., moderate in desires or actions, temperate, restrained, especially abstaining from strong
drink, also calm, quiet, not overcome by emotion, from Old French sobre decent; sober (12c.), from
Latin sobrius not drunk, temperate, moderate, sensible, from a variant of se- without (see se-) +
ebrius drunk, of unknown origin. Meaning not drunk at the moment is from late 14c.; also
appropriately solemn, serious, not giddy. Related: Soberly; soberness. Sobersides sedate, serious-
minded person is recorded from 1705.


soberly (adv.)

mid-14c., temperately; late 14c., gravely, from sober (adj.) + -ly (2).


sobriety (n.)

c.1400, moderation in indulgence, from Old French sobriete sobriety, moderation (Modern French
sobriet&eacute;) or directly from Latin sobrietatem (nominative sobrietas), from sobrius (see sober
(adj.)). Meaning steadiness, gravity is recorded from 1540s.


sobriquet (n.)

1640s, from French sobriquet nickname, from Middle French soubriquet (15c.), which also meant a
jest, quip, and is said to have meant literally a chuck under the chin [Gamillscheg]; of unknown
origin (first element perhaps from Latin sub under).


soccer (n.)

1889, socca, later socker (1891), soccer (1895), originally university slang (with jocular formation
-er (3)), from a shortened form of Assoc., abbreviation of association in Football Association (as
opposed to Rugby football); compare rugger. An unusual method of formation, but those who did it
perhaps shied away from making a name out of the first three letters of Assoc.


Sochi

Black Sea resort in Russia, ultimately from the name of the Cherkess (Circassian) people who live in
the region, whose name is of uncertain origin.


sociability (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French sociabilite, from Latin sociabilis (see sociable).


sociable (adj.)

1550s, enjoying the company of others, from Middle French sociable (16c.) and directly from Latin
sociabilis close, intimate, easily united, from sociare to join, unite, from socius companion, ally
(see social (adj.)).


social (adj.)

late 15c., devoted to or relating to home life; 1560s as living with others, from Middle French
social (14c.) and directly from Latin socialis of companionship, of allies; united, living with
others; of marriage, conjugal, from socius companion, ally, probably originally follower, from PIE
*sokw-yo-, suffixed form of root *sekw- (1) to follow, and thus related to sequi to follow (see
sequel). Compare Old English secg, Old Norse seggr companion, which seem to have been formed on the
same notion). Related: Socially.    Sense of characterized by friendliness or geniality is from
1660s. Meaning living or liking to live with others; companionable, disposed to friendly intercourse
is from 1720s. Meaning of or pertaining to society as a natural condition of human life first
attested 1695, in Locke. Sense of pertaining to fashionable society is from 1873.  Social climber is
from 1893; social work is 1890; social worker 1886. Social drinking first attested 1807. Social
studies as an inclusive term for history, geography, economics, etc., is attested from 1916. Social
security system of state support for needy citizens is attested from 1907 (the Social Security Act
was passed by U.S. Congress in 1935). Social butterfly is from 1867, in figurative reference to
flitting.   Social contract (1763) is from translations of Rousseau. Social Darwinism attested from
1887. Social engineering attested from 1899. Social science is from 1785.  In late 19c. newspapers,
social evil is prostitution. Social justice is attested by 1718; social network by 1971; social
networking by 1984; social media by 2008.


social (n.)

friendly gathering, 1870, from social (adj.). In late 17c. it meant a companion, associate.


socialisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of socialization; for spelling, see -ize.


socialism (n.)

1837, from French socialisme (1832) or formed in English (based on socialist) from social (adj.) +
-ism. Perhaps first in reference to Robert Owen's communes. Pierre Leroux (1797-1871), idealistic
social reformer and Saint-Simonian publicist, expressly claims to be the originator of the word
socialisme [Klein, also see OED discussion]. The word begins to be used in French in the modern
sense c.1835.


socialist (n.)

one who advocates socialism, 1827, from French socialiste, or else a native formation based on it,
in reference to the teachings of Comte de Saint-Simon, founder of French socialism. The word begins
to be used in French in the modern sense c.1835. Socialista, with a different sense, was applied
18c. to followers and pupils of Dutch jurist Grotius (1583-1645), from his use of socialistus.
Socialist realism attested from 1934.    I find that socialism is often misunderstood by its least
intelligent supporters and opponents to mean simply unrestrained indulgence of our natural
propensity to heave bricks at respectable persons. [George Bernard Shaw, An Unsocial Socialist,
1900]   <hr />   Prison is a Socialist's Paradise, where equality prevails, everything is supplied
and competition is eliminated. [Elbert Hubbard, The Note Book, 1927]


socialistic (adj.)

1839, from socialist + -ic. Related: Socialistically.


socialite (n.)

1928, first in Time magazine, from social (adj.) in the pertaining to high society sense, perhaps as
a play on social light, in imitation of words in -ite (1).


sociality (n.)

1640s, from French socialit&eacute; or directly from Latin socialitas fellowship, sociableness, from
socialis (see social (adj.)).


socialization (n.)

1839, in reference to personal associations; 1884 in reference to socialism; noun of action from
socialize.


socialize (v.)

1828, to render social, from social (adj.). Meaning to be sociable, to mingle is recorded from 1895.
Meaning to make socialistic is from 1846. Related: Socialized; socializing. The phrasing in
socialized medicine is by 1912.


societal (adj.)

1873, from society (adj.) + -al (1). Related: Societally. Earlier adjective was societarian (1822)
of or pertaining to society.


society (n.)

1530s, companionship, friendly association with others, from Old French societe company (12c.,
Modern French soci&#233;t&#233;), from Latin societatem (nominative societas) fellowship,
association, alliance, union, community, from socius companion (see social (adj.)).    Meaning
group, club is from 1540s, originally of associations of persons for some specific purpose. Meaning
people bound by neighborhood and intercourse aware of living together in an ordered community is
from 1630s. Sense of the more cultivated part of any community first recorded 1823, hence
fashionable people and their doings. The Society Islands were named 1769 by Cook on his third
Pacific voyage in honor of the Royal Society, which financed his travels across the world to observe
the transit of Venus.


Socinian

1640s (n.); 1690s (adj.), in reference to followers or doctrines of Faustus Socinus, Latinized name
of Fausto Sozzini (1539-1604), Italian anti-trinitarian theologian who held Christ to be human, if
divinely endowed, and the Holy Spirit to be divine energy, not a person. He broke with the Church
and organized the Polish Brethren.


socio-

word-forming element meaning social, of society; social and, also having to do with sociology, from
combining form of Latin socius companion, ally, associate, fellow, sharer (see social (adj.)).
Common in compounds since c.1880.


socio-economic (adj.)

also socioeconomic, 1875; see socio- + economic.


socio-political (adj.)

also sociopolitical, 1842, from socio- + political.


sociobiology (n.)

study of the biological basis of social behavior, 1946, from socio- + biology. Related:
Sociobiological.


sociological (adj.)

1861; see sociology + -ical. Related: Sociologically.


sociologist (n.)

1843, from sociology + -ist.


sociology (n.)

the science of social phenomena, 1842, from French sociologie, a hybrid coined 1830 by French
philosopher Isidore Auguste Comte (1798-1857), from Latin socius associate (see social (adj.)) +
Greek-derived suffix -logie (see -logy).


sociopath (n.)

1930, coined by psychologist G.E. Partridge from socio- on model of psychopath.


sock (n.1)

knitted or woven covering for the foot, short stocking, early 14c., from Old English socc slipper,
light shoe, from Latin soccus slipper, light low-heeled shoe, probably a variant of Greek sykchos,
word for a kind of shoe, perhaps from Phrygian or another Asiatic language. The Latin word was
borrowed generally in West Germanic (Middle Dutch socke, Dutch sok, Old High German soc, German
Socke). To knock the socks off (someone) beat thoroughly is recorded from 1845, American English
colloquial. Teen slang sock hop is c.1950, from notion of dancing without shoes.


sock (v.2)

to stash (money) away as savings, 1942, American English, from the notion of hiding one's money in a
sock (see sock (n.1)).


sock (v.1)

1700, to beat, hit hard, pitch into, of uncertain origin. To sock it to (someone) first recorded
1877.


sock (n.2)

a blow, a hit with the fist, 1700, from or related to sock (v.1).


sockdolager (n.)

1830, a decisive blow (also, figuratively a conclusive argument), fanciful formation from sock (v.1)
hit hard, perhaps via a comical mangling of doxology, on a notion of finality. The meaning something
exceptional is attested from 1838.   Sockdologising likely was nearly the last word President
Abraham Lincoln heard. During the performance of Tom Taylor's Our American Cousin, assassin John
Wilkes Booth (who knew the play well) waited for the laugh-line Well, I guess I know enough to turn
you inside out, you sockdologising old man-trap. Amid the noise as the audience responded, Booth
fired the fatal shot.


socket (n.)

c.1300, spearhead (originally one shaped like a plowshare), from Anglo-French soket spearhead,
plowshare (mid-13c.), diminutive of Old French soc plowshare, from Vulgar Latin *soccus, perhaps
from a Gaulish source, from Celtic *sukko- (cognates: Welsh swch plowshare, Middle Irish soc
plowshare), properly hog's snout, from PIE *su- pig (cognates: Latin sus swine; see sow (n.) female
pig).    Meaning hollow part or piece for receiving and holding something first recorded early 15c.;
anatomical sense is from c.1600; domestic electrical sense first recorded 1885. Socket wrench is
attested from 1837. The verb is 1530s, from the noun. Related: Socketed; socketing.


Socratic (adj.)

1630s (Socratical is from 1580s), of or pertaining to Greek philosopher Socrates (469-399 B.C.E.),
especially in reference to his method of eliciting truth by question and answer, from Latin
Socraticus, from Greek Sokratikos pertaining to Socrates or his school. His name is Greek Sokrates,
literally having safe might.


sod (n.1)

turf, slice of earth with grass on it, mid-15c., apparently from Middle Dutch sode turf, or Middle
Low German sode, both related to Old Frisian satha sod, all of uncertain origin. Perhaps the notion
is water saturation and the group is related to sog. The (old) sod Ireland is from 1812.


sod (n.2)

term of abuse, 1818, short for sodomite (also see sodomy). British colloquial sod-all nothing is
attested from 1958.


sod (v.1)

c.1400, to cover with sod, from sod (n.). Related: Sodded; sodding.


sod (v.2)

in sod off (1960), British slang term of dismissal; see sod (n.2).


soda (n.)

late 15c., sodium carbonate, an alkaline substance extracted from certain ashes (now made
artificially), from Italian sida (or Medieval Latin soda) a kind of saltwort, from which soda was
obtained, of uncertain origin. Perhaps it is from a Catalan sosa, attested from late 13c., of
uncertain origin. Proposed Arabic sources in a name of a variety of saltwort have not been attested
and that theory is no longer considered valid. Another theory, considered far-fetched in some
quarters, traces it to Medieval Latin sodanum a headache remedy, ultimately from Arabic suda
splitting headache.    Soda is found naturally in alkaline lakes, in deposits where such lakes have
dried, and from ash produced by burning various seaside plants. A major trading commodity in the
medieval Mediterranean, since commercial manufacture of it began in France in late 18c., these other
sources have been abandoned. Washing soda (sodium carbonate) is commonly distinguished from baking
soda (sodium bicarbonate). A soda-cracker (1863) has baking soda as an ingredient.     The meaning
carbonated water is first recorded 1834, a shortening of soda water (1802) water into which carbonic
acid has been forced under pressure. It rarely contains soda in any form; but the name originally
applied when sodium carbonate was contained in it has been retained [Century Dictionary, 1902].
Since 19c. typically flavored and sweetened with syrups.  First record of soda pop is from 1863, and
the most frequent modern use of the word is as a shortening of this or other terms for flavored,
sweetened soda water. Compare pop (n.1). Soda fountain is from 1824; soda jerk first attested 1915
(soda-jerker is from 1883). Colloquial pronunciation sody is represented in print from 1900 (U.S.
Midwestern).


sodality (n.)

companionship, fellowship, association with others, c.1600, from Middle French sodalit&eacute; or
directly from Latin sodalitatem (nominative sodalitas) companionship, a brotherhood, association,
fellowship, from sodalis companion, perhaps literally one's own, relative, related to suescere to
accustom, from PIE *swedh-, extended form of root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive
(see idiom). Especially of religious guilds in the Catholic Church.


sodbuster (n.)

pioneer farmer in a cattle-grazing region, originally in the U.S. West, 1897, from sod (n.1) + agent
noun from bust (v.).


sodden (adj.)

soaked or softened in water, 1820, earlier resembling something that has been boiled a long time
(1590s), originally boiled (c.1300), from Old English soden boiled, strong past participle of
seo&thorn;an to cook, boil (see seethe). For sense evolution from heat in water to immerse in water
compare bath.


sodium (n.)

metallic alkaline element, 1807, coined by English chemist Humphry Davy from soda; so called because
the element was isolated from caustic soda (sodium hydroxide). The chemical symbol Na is from
natrium, alternative name for the element proposed by Berzelius from natron, a name of a type of
soda.


Sodom (n.)

wicked or corrupt place, 1640s, from the sinful city in ancient Palestine, said to have been
destroyed, with neighboring Gomorrah, by fire from heaven (Gen. xviii-xix). From Hebrew s'dom, of
unknown origin.


sodomise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of sodomize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Sodomised; sodomising.


sodomite (n.)

late 14c., from Old French Sodomite inhabitant of Sodom; sodomite, also a general term of abuse, or
directly from Late Latin Sodomita, from Greek Sodomites inhabitant of Sodom (see Sodom, also
sodomy). Related: Sodomitical. Old English had adjective sodomitisc. The King James Bible (1611) has
fem. form sodomitesse in a marginal note to whore in Deut. xxiii:17.


sodomize (v.)

1859, to demoralize; see sodomy + -ize. By 1895 in a specific sexual sense (translating Greek
paiderastein). Related: Sodomized; sodomizing. In Dutch slang, besodemieteren means to deceive, and
evidently is built from the traditional notion of corruption in Sodom.


sodomy (n.)

c.1300, unnatural sexual relations, such as those imputed to the inhabitants of Biblical Sodom,
especially between persons of the same sex but also with beasts, from Old French sodomie, from Late
Latin peccatum Sodomiticum anal sex, literally the sin of Sodom, from Latin Sodoma. In Middle
English also synne Sodomyke (early 14c.).


soever (adv.)

1550s, from so + ever. A word generally used in composition to extend or render indefinite the sense
of such words as who, what, where, when, how, etc. .... [Century Dictionary].


sofa (n.)

1620s, raised section of a floor, covered with carpets and cushions, from Turkish sofa, from Arabic
suffah bench of stone or wood; a couch. Meaning long stuffed seat for reclining is recorded from
1717.


sofa-bed (n.)

1805, from sofa + bed (n.).


soffit (n.)

architectural term referring to under-faces, 1610s, from Italian soffita, fem. of soffitto ceiling,
noun use of adjective meaning fixed beneath, from Vulgar Latin *suffictus fastened below, from Latin
suffixus (see suffix (n.)).


Sofia

Bulgarian capital, Roman Serdica, from the Thracian Serdi people who lived thereabouts. Conquered by
the Bulgarians 9c. who altered the name by folk-etymology to Sredeti, which in their tongue meant
center, middle. It got its current name 14c. when the Turks conquered it and converted the 6c.
church of St. Sophia into a mosque; the name thence extended to the whole city.


soft (adj.)

Old English softe, earlier sefte, gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed;
luxurious, from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz level, even, smooth, gentle,
soft (cognates: Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and from a variant form with
-ch- for -f-, Middle Dutch sachte, Dutch zacht, German sacht), from root *som- fitting, agreeable.
From c.1200 of material things, not stiff, not coarse, fine; yielding to weight. From late 14c. of
wind, rain, etc. Of sounds, quiet, not loud, from early 13c. Of words, mild, restrained; courteous
mid-14c. From late 14c. as indulgent, also physically feeble; easily overcome, lacking manly
courage. From 1755 of water (relatively free from mineral salts), from 1789 of coal. Meaning
foolish, simple, silly is attested from 1620s; earlier easily moved or swayed; soft-hearted,
sympathetic; docile (early 13c.). In reference to drinks, non-alcoholic from 1880. As an adverb, Old
English softe gently; late 13c. as quietly. As an interjection from 1540s.   Soft landing is from
1958 and the U.S. space program. Adjective soft-core (in reference to pornography) is from 1966 (see
hardcore). Soft rock as a music style is attested from 1969. Soft sell is from 1955. Soft-shoe as a
dancing style is attested from 1927. Soft-boiled is from 1757 of eggs; of persons, ideas, etc., 1930
(compare half-baked). Soft-focus (adj.) of camera shots is from 1917. The softer sex women
collectively is from 1640s.


soft-hearted (adj.)

also softhearted, 1590s, from soft (adj.) tender + hearted. Related: Soft-heartedly; soft-
heartedness.


soft-pedal (v.)

to tone down, 1915, figurative use from the noun (1856) in reference to the left foot-lever of a
piano, which makes it quieter among other effects; from soft (adj.) + pedal (n.).


soft-shelled (adj.)

1611, from soft (adj.) + shell (n.).


soft-soap (n.)

1630s, from soft (adj.) + soap (n.). Figurative sense flattery is recorded from 1830.


soft-spoken (adj.)

c.1600, from soft (adj.) + spoken.


softball (n.)

baseball of larger than usual size, used in a scaled-down version of the game, 1914, from soft +
ball (n.1). The game itself so called from 1916, also known as playground baseball. The word earlier
was a term in sugar candy making (1894). Softball question, one that is easy to answer, is attested
from 1976.


soften (v.)

late 14c., to mitigate, diminish (transitive), from soft (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning to make
physically soft is from 1520s; intransitive sense of to become softer is attested from 1610s. Soften
up in military sense of weaken defenses is from 1940. Related: Softened; softening.


softener (n.)

c.1600, agent noun from soften.


softly (adv.)

early 13c., gently, from soft (adj.) + -ly (2).


softness (n.)

Old English softnes ease, comfort; state of being soft to the touch; luxury; see soft (adj.) +
-ness. Meaning weakness of character, effeminacy is from c.1600.


software (n.)

1851, soft wares, woolen or cotton fabrics, also, relatively perishable consumer goods, from soft +
ware (n.). The computer sense is a separate coinage from 1960, based on hardware.


softy (n.)

also softie, 1863, silly person, from soft (adj.) + -y (3). Meaning soft-hearted person is from
1886; that of weak, unmanly or effeminate man is from 1895. The Mister Softee soft ice-cream
operation began in Philadelphia, U.S., in 1956.


sog (n.)

soft or marshy place, 1530s, of unknown origin. Also as a verb, to become soaked; to soak (mid-
15c.), perhaps related to soak (v.) or from or related to similar words in Scandinavian.


soggy (adj.)

1722, perhaps from dialectal sog bog, swamp, or the verb sog become soaked, both of unknown origin,
+ -y (2). Related: Soggily; sogginess.


Soho

district in New York city, 1969, from South of Houston Street, but probably also echoing the name of
the London neighborhood (famous for vice by early 19c.), which was so called since at least 1630s,
originally So Ho, a hunting cry (c.1300) used in calling from a distant place to alert hounds and
other hunters; the West End district was so called from earlier association of this area with
hunting.


soi-disant (adj.)

self-named, so-called, would-be, 1752 (in Chesterfield), French, from soi oneself (from Latin se,
see se-) + present participle of dire to say (see diction).


soigne (adj.)

prepared with great attention to detail, 1821, from French soign&eacute; (fem. soign&eacute;e), from
past participle of soigner to take care of, from soin care, which is of unknown origin.


soil (v.)

early 13c., to defile or pollute with sin, from Old French soillier to splatter with mud, to foul or
make dirty, originally to wallow (12c., Modern French souillier), from souil tub, wild boar's
wallow, pigsty, which is from either Latin solium tub for bathing; seat, or Latin suculus little
pig, from sus pig. Literal meaning to make dirty, begrime is attested from c.1300 in English.
Related: Soiled; soiling.


soil (n.1)

c.1300, originally land, area, place, from Anglo-French soil piece of ground, place (13c.), from an
merger or confusion of Old French sol bottom, ground, soil (12c., from Latin solum soil, ground; see
sole (n.1)), Old French soeul, sueil threshold, area, place (from Latin solium seat), and Old French
soil, soille a miry place, from soillier (see soil (v.)).    Meaning place of one's nativity is from
c.1400. Meaning mould, earth, dirt (especially that which plants grow in) is attested from mid-15c.


soil (n.2)

filth, dirt, refuse matter, sewage, liquid likely to contain excrement, c.1600, earlier miry or
muddy place (early 15c.), from Old French soille miry place, from soillier (v.) to make dirty, and
in part a native formation from soil (v.). This is the sense in archaic night-soil.


soiree (n.)

an evening party, 1793, from French soir&eacute;e, from soir evening, from Old French soir evening,
night (10c.), from Latin sero (adv.) late, at a late hour, from serum late hour, neuter of serus
late, from PIE *se-ro-, suffixed form of root *se- (2) long, late (cognates: Sanskrit sayam in the
evening, Lithuanian sietuva deep place in a river, Old English si&eth; after, German seit since,
Gothic sei&thorn;us late, Middle Irish sith, Middle Breton hir long).


sojourn (v.)

late 13c., stay temporarily, reside for a time; visit; also reside permanently, dwell; from Old
French sojorner stay or dwell for a time, from Vulgar Latin *subdiurnare to spend the day (source
also of Italian soggiornare), from Latin sub- under, until (see sub-) + diurnare to last long, from
diurnus of a day, from diurnum day (see diurnal). Modern French s&eacute;journer formed via vowel
dissimilation. Related: Sojourned; sojourning.


sojourn (n.)

mid-13c., temporary stay, visit, from Anglo-French sojorn, variant of Old French sejorn, from
sejorner stay or dwell for a time (see sojourn (v.)).


sojourner (n.)

temporary resident, 15c., agent noun from sojourn (v.).


soke (n.)

right of jurisdiction, Old English socn jurisdiction, prosecution, literally seeking, from Proto-
Germanic *sokniz, from PIE *sag-ni-, from root *sag- to seek out (see seek). Related: Sokeman;
sokemanry.


Sol (n.)

the sun personified, mid-15c. (also in Old English), from Latin sol the sun, sunlight, from PIE
*s(e)wol-, variant of root *saewel- the sun (cognates: Sanskrit suryah, Avestan hvar sun, light,
heavens; Greek helios; Lithuanian saule; Old Church Slavonic slunice; Gothic sauil, Old English sol
sun, swegl sky, heavens, the sun; Welsh haul, Old Cornish heuul, Breton heol sun; Old Irish suil
eye).    The PIE element -*el- in the root originally was a suffix and had an alternative form
-*en-, yielding *s(u)wen-, source of English sun (n.). French soleil (10c.) is from Vulgar Latin
*soliculus, diminutive of sol; in Vulgar Latin diminutives had the full meaning of their principal
words.


sol-fa (n.)

syllables used in solmization taken collectively, 1540s, from Italian, from Medieval Latin sol and
fa, two notes of the musical scale (see gamut). As a verb from 1560s; compare solfeggio use the sol-
fa system (1774), from Italian solfeggiare.


solace (n.)

comfort in grief, consolation, late 13c., from Old French solaz pleasure, entertainment, enjoyment;
solace, comfort, from Latin solacium a soothing, assuaging; comfort, consolation, from solatus, past
participle of solari to console, soothe, from PIE *sol-a-, suffixed form of root *sele- of good
mood; to favor (cognates: Old English ges&aelig;lig happy; see silly). Adjectival form solacious is
attested 16c.-17c.


solace (v.)

comfort, console in grief, late 13c.; also in Middle English entertain, amuse, please, from Old
French solacier comfort, console (often with a sexual connotation) and directly from Medieval Latin
solatiare give solace, console (source also of Spanish solazar, Italian sollazzare), from Latin
solacium (see solace (n.)). Related: Solaced; solacing.


solar (adj.)

mid-15c., pertaining to the sun, from Latin solaris of the sun, from sol sun (see sol). Meaning
living room on an upper story is from Old English, from Latin solarium (see solarium). Old English
had sunlic solar.    Astrological sense from 1620s. Meaning operated by means of the sun is from
1740; solar power is attested from 1915, solar cell from 1955, solar panel from 1964. Solar system
is attested from c.1704; solar wind is from 1958. Solar plexus (1771) complex of nerves in the pit
of the stomach, apparently so called from its central position in the body (see plexus).


solarium (n.)

1891, part of a house arranged to receive the sun's rays, earlier sundial (1842), from Latin
solarium sundial, also a flat housetop, literally that which is exposed to the sun, from sol sun
(see sol).


sold

past tense and past participle of sell (v.); from Old English salde.


solder (v.)

mid-14c., sawd mend by soldering, from solder (n.). Modern form is a re-Latinization from early 15c.
Related: Soldered; soldering.


solder (n.)

early 14c., soudur, from Old French soldure, soudeure, from souder, originally solder, to
consolidate, close, fasten together, join with solder (13c.), from Latin solidare to make solid,
from solidus solid (see solid (adj.)).    Modern form in English is a re-Latinization from early
15c. The loss of Latin -l- in that position on the way to Old French is regular, as poudre from
pulverem, cou from collum, chaud from calidus. The -l- typically is sounded in British English but
not in American, according to OED, but Fowler wrote that solder without the l was The only
pronunciation I have ever heard, except from the half-educated to whom spelling is a final court of
appeal ... and was baffled by the OED's statement that it was American. Related: Soldered;
soldering. The noun is first attested late 14c.


soldier (n.)

c.1300, souder, from Old French soudier, soldier one who serves in the army for pay, from Medieval
Latin soldarius a soldier (source also of Spanish soldado, Italian soldato), literally one having
pay, from Late Latin soldum, extended sense of accusative of Latin solidus, name of a Roman gold
coin (see solidus).    The -l- has been regular in English since mid-14c., in imitation of Latin.
Willie and Joe always say sojer in the Bill Mauldin cartoons, and this seems to mirror 16c.-17c.
spellings sojar, soger, sojour. Modern French soldat is borrowed from Italian and displaced the
older French word; one of many military (and other) terms picked up during the Italian Wars in early
16c.; such as alert, arsenal, colonel, infantrie, sentinel.


soldier (v.)

to serve as a soldier, 1640s, from soldier (n.). Related: Soldiered; soldiering. To soldier on
persist doggedly is attested from 1954.


soldiery (n.)

1560s, from Middle French souderie or else a native formation from soldier + -y (1).


sole (n.1)

bottom of the foot (technically, the planta, corresponding to the palm of the hand, Century
Dictionary), early 14c., from Old French sole, from Vulgar Latin *sola, from Latin solea sandal,
bottom of a shoe; a flatfish, from solum bottom, ground, foundation, lowest point of a thing (hence
sole of the foot), of uncertain origin. In English, the meaning bottom of a shoe or boot is from
late 14c.


sole (adj.)

single, alone, having no husband or wife; one and only, singular, unique, late 14c., from Old French
soul only, alone, just, from Latin solus alone, only, single, sole; forsaken; extraordinary, of
unknown origin, perhaps related to se oneself, from PIE reflexive root *swo- (see so).


sole (n.2)

common European flatfish, mid-13c., from Old French sole, from Latin solea a kind of flatfish,
originally sandal (see sole (n.1)); so called from resemblance of the fish to a flat shoe.


sole (v.)

furnish (a shoe) with a sole, 1560s, from sole (n.1). Related: Soled; soling.


solecism (n.)

gross grammatical error; loosely any absurdity or incongruity, 1570s, from Middle French
sol&eacute;cisme (16c.), from Latin soloecismus mistake in speaking or writing, from Greek
soloikismos to speak (Greek) incorrectly, from soloikos ungrammatical utterance, properly a speaking
like the people of Soloi, an Athenian colony in Cilicia (modern Mezitli in Turkey), whose dialect
the Athenians considered barbarous. Related: Solecistic.


solely (adv.)

late 15c., from sole (adj.) + -ly (2).


solemn (adj.)

mid-14c., performed with due religious ceremony or reverence, sacred, devoted to religious
observances, also, of a vow, etc., made under religious sanction, binding, from Old French solempne
(12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin sollemnis annual, established, religiously
fixed, formal, ceremonial, traditional, perhaps related to sollus whole (see safe (adj.)).    The
explanation that Latin sollemnis was formed from sollus whole + annus year is not considered valid
[Barnhart], but some assimilation via folk-etymology is possible. In Middle English also famous,
important; imposing, grand, hence Chaucer's friar, a ful solempne man. Meaning marked by seriousness
or earnestness is from late 14c.; sense of fitted to inspire devout reflection is from c.1400.
Related: Solemnly.


solemnity (n.)

c.1300, observance of ceremony, from Old French solemnite, solempnete celebration, high festival,
church ceremony and directly from Latin solemnitatem (nominative solemnitas) a solemnity, from
sollemnis (see solemn). Meaning state of being solemn is from 1712. Related: Solemnities.


solemnization (n.)

mid-15c., act of celebrating, from Old French solemnisation, solempnisation, or directly from
Medieval Latin solempnizationem (nominative solempnizatio), from Latin sollemnis (see solemn).


solemnize (v.)

late 14c., honor by ceremonies, from Old French solemnisier, from Medieval Latin solemnizare, from
Latin solemnis (see solemn). Meaning render solemn is from 1726. Related: Solemnized; solemnizing.


solenoid (n.)

coil of insulated wire carrying an electrical current and having magnetic properties, 1827, from
French sol&eacute;no&#239;de, from Greek solenoeides pipe-shaped, from solen pipe, channel + comb.
form of eidos form, shape (see -oid). Related: Solenoidal.


soleus (n.)

muscle of the calf of the leg, 1670s, Modern Latin, from Latin solea sole (see sole (n.1)). So
called for its flatness.


solfege (adj.)

1912, from solfeggio (1774), from Italian solfeggio, from sol-fa, representing musical notes (see
sol-fa).


solicit (v.)

early 15c., to disturb, trouble, from Middle French soliciter (14c.), from Latin sollicitare to
disturb, rouse, trouble, harass; stimulate, provoke, from sollicitus agitated, from sollus whole,
entire + citus aroused, past participle of ciere shake, excite, set in motion (see cite). Related:
Solicited; soliciting.    Meaning entreat, petition is from 1520s. Meaning to further (business
affairs) evolved mid-15c. from Middle French sense of manage affairs. The sexual sense (often in
reference to prostitutes) is attested from 1710, probably from a merger of the business sense and an
earlier sense of to court or beg the favor of (a woman), attested from 1590s.


solicitate (v.)

1540s, from Latin solicitatus, past participle of sollicitare (see solicit). Related: Solicitated;
solicitating.


solicitation (n.)

late 15c., management, from Middle French solicitation and directly from Latin solicitationem
(nominative solicitatio) vexation, disturbance, instigation, noun of action from past participle
stem of solicitare (see solicit). Meaning action of soliciting is from 1520s. Specific sexual sense
is from c.1600.


solicitor (n.)

early 15c., one who urges, from Middle French soliciteur, from soliciter (see solicit). Meaning one
who conducts matters on behalf of another is from early 15c. As a name for a specific class of legal
practitioners in Britain, it is attested from 1570s. Both the fem. forms, solicitress (1630s) and
solicitrix (1610s), have been in the sexual sense, but the latter seems more common in non-
pejorative use.


solicitous (adj.)

1560s, from Latin sollicitus restless, uneasy, careful, full of anxiety (see solicit). Related:
Solicitously; solicitousness.


solicitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French solicitude (Modern French sollicitude), and directly from Latin
sollicitudinem (nominative solicitudo) anxiety, uneasiness of mind, noun of state from past
participle stem of solicitare (see solicit).


solid (adj.)

late 14c., not empty or hollow, from Old French solide firm, dense, compact, from Latin solidus
firm, whole, undivided, entire, figuratively sound, trustworthy, genuine, from PIE *sol-ido-,
suffixed form of root *sol- whole (cognates: Greek holos whole, Latin salus health, salvus safe; see
safe (adj.)).    Meaning firm, hard, compact is from 1530s. Meaning entirely of the same stuff is
from 1710. Of qualities, well-established, considerable c.1600. As a mere intensifier, 1830. Slang
sense of wonderful, remarkable first attested 1920 among jazz musicians. As an adverb, solidly,
completely, 1650s. Solid South in U.S. political history is attested from 1858. Solid state as a
term in physics is recorded from 1953; meaning employing solid transistors (as opposed to vacuum
tubes) is from 1959. Related: Solidly.


solid (n.)

late 14c., three-dimensional figure, from solid (adj.). Meaning a solid substance is from 1690s.
Compare also solidus; Latin solidus (adj.) was used as a noun meaning an entire sum; a solid body.


solidarity (n.)

1829, from French solidarit&eacute; communion of interests and responsibilities, mutual
responsibility, a coinage of the Encyclop&eacute;die (1765), from solidaire interdependent,
complete, entire, from solide (see solid (adj.)). With a capital S-, the name of an independent
trade union movement in Poland, formed September 1980, from Polish Solidarno&#347;&#263;.


solidary (adj.)

1818, from French solidaire (16c.), from solide (see solid (adj.)).


solidification (n.)

1800; noun of action from solidify; perhaps from French solidification. Earlier was solidation
(1540s).


solidify (v.)

1799 (transitive); 1837 (intransitive), from French solidifier, from Old French solide (see solid
(adj.)) + -fier (see -fy). Related: Solidified; solidifying.


solidity (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French solidit&eacute; or directly from Latin soliditatem (nominative
soliditas), from solidus (see solid (adj.)).


solidly (adv.)

1610s, firmly, securely, from solid (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning unanimously is from 1865, American
English.


solidus (n.)

late 14c., plural solidi, used of both English shilling and Roman gold coin, from Late Latin
solidus, an imperial Roman coin (worth about 25 denarii), from nummus solidus, literally solid coin,
properly a coin of thick or solid metal, not of thin plate (see solid (adj.)).


solifidian (n.)

one who believes in salvation by faith alone (based on Luther's translation of Rom. iii:28), 1590s,
Reformation coinage from Latin solus alone (see sole (adj.)) + fides faith (see faith). As an
adjective from c.1600. Related: Solifidianism


soliloquize (v.)

1759, from soliloquy + -ize. Related: Soliloquized; soliloquizing.


soliloquy (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin soliloquium a talking to oneself, from Latin solus alone (see sole (adj.)) +
loqui speak (see locution). Also used in translation of Latin Liber Soliloquiorum, a treatise by
Augustine, who is said to have coined the word, on analogy of Greek monologia (see monologue).
Related: Soliloquent.


solipsism (n.)

1871, coined from Latin solus alone (see sole (adj.)) + ipse self. The view or theory that self is
the only object of real knowledge or the only thing that is real. The identification of one's self
with the Absolute is not generally intended, but the denial of there being really anybody else
[Century Dictionary].


solipsistic (adj.)

1882, from solipsism + -istic. Related: Solipsist; solipsistically.


solitaire (n.)

c.1500, widow; 1716, solitary person, recluse, from French solitaire, from Latin adjective
solitarius alone, lonely, isolated (see solitary). Sense of a precious stone set by itself is from
1727. Meaning card game played by one person is first attested 1746.


solitary (adj.)

mid-14c., alone, living alone, from Old French solitaire, from Latin solitarius alone, lonely,
isolated, from solitas loneliness, solitude, from solus alone (see sole (adj.)). Meaning single,
sole, only is from 1742. Related: Solitarily; solitariness. As a noun from late 14c.; from 1854 as
short for solitary confinement (that phrase recorded from 1690s).


solitude (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French solitude loneliness (14c.) and directly from Latin solitudinem (nominative
solitudo) loneliness, a being alone; lonely place, desert, wilderness, from solus alone (see sole
(adj.)). Not in common use in English until the 17th c. [OED]  A man can be himself only so long as
he is alone; ... if he does not love solitude, he will not love freedom; for it is only when he is
alone that he is really free. [Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Idea, 1818] Solitudinarian
recluse, unsocial person is recorded from 1690s.


solmization (n.)

act of using certain syllables to name tones of a music scale, 1730, from French solmisation, from
solmiser, from sol + mi, two of the syllables so used (see gamut).


solo (n.)

1690s, piece of music for one voice or instrument, from Italian solo, literally alone, from Latin
solus alone (see sole (adj.)). As an adjective in English from 1712, originally in the non-musical
sense of alone, unassisted; in reference to aircraft flying from 1909. The verb is first attested
1858 in the musical sense, 1886 in a non-musical sense. Related: Soloed; soloing.


soloist (n.)

1839, from solo (n.) + -ist.


Solomon

masc. proper name, Biblical name of David's son, king of Judah and Israel and wisest of all men,
from Greek Solomon, from Hebrew Sh'lomoh, from shelomo peaceful, from shalom peace. The Arabic form
is Suleiman. The common medieval form was Salomon (Vulgate, Tyndale, Douai); Solomon was used in
Geneva Bible and KJV. Used allusively for a wise ruler since 1550s. Related: Solomonic; Solomonian.
The Solomon Islands were so named 1568 by Spanish explorers in hopeful expectation of having found
the source of the gold brought to King Solomon in I Kings ix:29.


solon (n.)

legislator, 1620s, from Greek Solon, name of early lawgiver of Athens, one of the seven sages.
Often, especially in U.S., applied (with perhaps a whiff of sarcasm) by journalists to Congressmen,
township supervisors, etc. It also is a useful short headline word.


solstice (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French solstice (13c.), from Latin solstitium point at which the sun seems to
stand still, especially the summer solstice, from sol sun (see sol) + past participle stem of
sistere to come to a stop, make stand still (see assist (v.)). In early use, Englished as sunstead
(late Old English sunstede).


solstitial (adj.)

1550s, from Latin solstitialis, from solstitium (see solstice).


solubility (n.)

1670s, from soluble + -ity.


soluble (adj.)

late 14c., capable of being dissolved, from Old French soluble expungable, eradicable (13c.), from
Late Latin solubilis that may be loosened or dissolved, from stem of Latin solvere loosen, dissolve
(see solve). Meaning capable of being solved is attested from 1705. Substances are soluble, not
solvable; problems can be either.


solum (n.)

Latin, ground, soil, of unknown origin.


solus (adj.)

Latin, alone (see sole (adj.)), used in stage directions by 1590s. Masculine; the fem. is sola, but
in stage directions solus typically serves for both. Also in phrases solus cum sola alone with an
unchaperoned woman and solus cum solo all on one's own, both literally meaning alone with alone.


solute (adj.)

1890, dissolved, from Latin solutus, past participle of solvere (see solve). In botany, free, not
adhering (1760).


solution (n.)

late 14c., a solving or being solved, from Old French solucion division, dissolving; explanation;
payment or directly from Latin solutionem (nominative solutio) a loosening or unfastening, noun of
action from past participle stem of solvere to loosen, untie, solve, dissolve (see solve). Meaning
liquid containing a dissolved substance is first recorded 1590s.


solvable (adj.)

1640s, from solve + -able.


solvation (n.)

1909, noun of action from solvate, a verb used in chemistry, from solvent + -ate (2).


solve (v.)

late 14c., to disperse, dissipate, loosen, from Latin solvere to loosen, dissolve; untie, release,
detach; depart; unlock; scatter; dismiss; accomplish, fulfill; explain; remove, from PIE *se-lu-,
from reflexive pronoun *s(w)e- (see idiom) + root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart (see lose). The
meaning explain, answer is attested from 1530s; for sense evolution, see solution. Mathematical use
is attested from 1737. Related: Solved; solving.


solvency (n.)

1727, from solvent + -cy.


solvent (adj.)

1650s, able to pay all one owes, from French solvent, from Latin solventem (nominative solvens),
present participle of solvere loosen, dissolve (see solve).


solvent (n.)

substance able to dissolve other substances, 1670s, from Latin solventem (see solvent (n.)).


solvitur ambulando

an appeal to practical experience for a solution or proof, Latin, literally (the problem) is solved
by walking, originally in reference to the proof by Diogenes the Cynic of the possibility of motion.


soma (n.)

name of an intoxicant used in ancient Vedic ritual, prepared from the juice of some East Indian
plant, 1785, from Sanskrit soma, from PIE *seu- juice, from root *seue- (2) to take liquid (see sup
(v.2)). In Brave New World (1932), the name of a state-dispensed narcotic producing euphoria and
hallucination.


Somalia

country named for the indigenous Somali people, whose name (attested in English by 1814) is of
unknown origin.


somatic (adj.)

pertaining to the body (as distinct from the soul, spirit, or mind), 1775, from French somatique and
directly from Greek somatikos of the body, from soma (genitive somatos) the body (see somato-).


somatization (n.)

1909 in biology (Rignano); 1920 in psychology; from somato-  body + -ization.


somato-

before vowels somat-, word-forming element meaning the body of an organism, from comb. form of Greek
soma (genitive somatos) the body, a human body dead or living, body as opposed to spirit; material
substance; mass; a person, human being; the whole body or mass of anything, of uncertain origin.


somatosensory (adj.)

1952, from somato- body + sensory.


somber (adj.)

1760 gloomy, shadowy (earlier sombrous, c.1730), from French sombre dark, gloomy, from Old French
sombre (14c.), from an adjective from Late Latin subumbrare to shadow, from sub under (see sub-) +
umbra shade, shadow, perhaps from a suffixed form of PIE *andho- blind, dark (see umbrage). Related:
Somberly; somberness.


sombre (adj.)

chiefly British English spelling of somber (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


sombrero (n.)

1770, from Spanish sombrero broad-brimmed hat, originally umbrella, parasol (a sense found in
English 1590s), from sombra shade, from Late Latin subumbrare (see somber).


some (adj.)

Old English sum some, a, a certain one, something, a certain quantity; a certain number; with
numerals out of (as in sum feowra one of four); from Proto-Germanic *suma- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Old High German sum, Old Norse sumr, Gothic sums), from PIE *smm-o-, suffixed form of root
*sem- (1) one, also as one (adv.), together with (see same). For substitution of -o- for -u-, see
come.  The word has had greater currency in English than in the other Teutonic languages, in some of
which it is now restricted to dialect use, or represented only by derivatives or compounds ....
[OED]    As a pronoun from c.1100; as an adverb from late 13c. Meaning remarkable is attested from
1808, American English colloquial. A possessive form is attested from 1560s, but always was rare.
Many combination forms (somewhat, sometime, somewhere) were in Middle English but often written as
two words till 17-19c. Somewhen is rare and since 19c. used almost exclusively in combination with
the more common compounds; somewho someone is attested from late 14c. but did not endure. Scott
(1816) has somegate somewhere, in some way, somehow, and somekins some kind of a is recorded from
c.1200. Get some have sexual intercourse is attested 1899 in a quote attributed to Abe Lincoln from
c.1840.


somebody (n.)

c.1300, indeterminate person, from some + body. Meaning important person, person of consequence is
from 1560s. Somebody else is from 1640s; meaning romantic rival is from 1911.


someday (adv.)

at some indefinite date in the future, 1768, from some + day.    MISS SOMEDAY.  Poor Charley wooed,
but wooed in vain,  From Monday until Sunday;  Still Cupid whisper'd to the swain  You'll conquer
Betsey Someday.     [The Port Folio, June 1816]


somedeal (adv.)

to some degree, somewhat, obsolete, but very common in Old English as sume d&aelig;le some portion,
somewhat, from some + deal (n.1).


somehow (adv.)

1660s, in some way not yet known, from some + how. First attested in phrase somehow or other.


someone (pron.)

c.1300, sum on; from some + one. Someone else romantic rival is from 1914.


someplace (adv.)

1853, from some + place (n.).


somersault (n.)

1520s, from Middle French sombresault, from Old Proven&ccedil;al sobresaut, from sobre over (from
Latin supra over; see supra-) + saut a jump, from Latin saltus, from the root of salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)). Sometimes further corrupted to somerset, etc.


somersault (v.)

1845, from somersault (n.). Related: Somersaulted; somersaulting.


Somerset

9c., Sumor s&aelig;ton, from Old English sumors&aelig;ta, short for *sumorton s&aelig;te the people
who live at (or depend upon) Somerton, a settlement attested from 8c. (Sumertone), literally summer
settlement. In 12c. it begins to be clearly meant as a place-name (Sumersetescir) not a collective
name for a set of people.


something (pron.)

Old English sum &thorn;inge; see some + thing. Hyphenated from c.1300; one word from 17c. Formerly
common as an adverb (as in something like). Meaning some liquor, food, etc. is from 1570s. Meaning a
thing worthy of consideration is from 1580s; emphatic form something else is from 1909. Phrase
something for nothing is from 1816. To make something of is from 1778.


sometime (adv.)

late 13c., at one time or another (adv.); as an adjective, late 15c. Meaning at some future time is
late 14c. From some + time (n.).


sometimes (adv.)

now and then, 1520s, from sometime + adverbial genitive -s.


somewhat (adv.)

c.1200, in a certain amount, to a certain degree, from some + what. Replaced Old English
sumd&aelig;l, sume d&aelig;le somewhat, some portion, literally some deal.


somewhere (adv.)

c.1200, from some + where.


somewhile (adv.)

mid-12c., from some + while (n.).


somewhither (adv.)

late 14c., from some + whither.


sommelier (n.)

wine waiter, 1889, from French sommelier a butler, originally an officer who had charge of
provisions (13c.), from somme pack (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *salma, corruption of sagma a pack-
saddle, later the pack on the saddle (Isidore of Seville). Also borrowed in 16c.


somnambulance (n.)

1825; see somnambulant + -ance.


somnambulant

1819 (n.); 1832 (adj.); see somnambulism + -ant.


somnambulate (v.)

1821, probably a back-formation from somnambulism. Related: Somnambulated; somnambulating.


somnambulation (n.)

1789, noun of action; see somnambulism.


somnambulism (n.)

1786, walking in one's sleep or under hypnosis, from French somnambulisme, from Modern Latin
somnambulus sleepwalker, from Latin somnus sleep (see Somnus) + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).
Originally brought into use during the excitement over animal magnetism; it won out over
noctambulation. A stack of related words came into use early 19c., such as somnambule sleepwalker
(1837, from French somnambule, 1690s), earlier somnambulator (1803); as adjectives, somnambulary
(1827), somnambular (1820).


somni-

before vowels somn-, word-forming element meaning sleep, from comb. form of Latin somnus (see
Somnus).


somniferous (adj.)

sleep-producing, c.1600, from Latin somnifer, from somni- sleep + ferre to bear (see infer). With
-ous.


somniloquy (n.)

talking in one's sleep, 1847, from somni-, sleep + -loquy, from Latin loqui to speak (see locution).
Related: Somniloquence (1814); somniloquent (1804, Coleridge); somniloquist; somniloquous;
somniloquize.


somnolence (n.)

late 14c., from Old French sompnolence (14c.), from Latin somnolentia sleepiness, from somnolentus,
from somnus sleep (see somnus). Related: Somnolency.


somnolent (adj.)

mid-15c., sompnolent, from Old French sompnolent (Modern French somnolent) or directly from Latin
somnolentus sleepy, drowsy, from somnus sleep (see Somnus). Respelled 17c. on Latin model.


Somnus (n.)

sleep personified; the god of sleep in Roman mythology, equivalent of Greek Hypnos, son of Night and
brother of Death, 1590s, from Latin somnus sleep, drowsiness, from PIE *swep-no-, from root *swep-
(1) to sleep (cognates: Sanskrit svapnah, Avestan kvafna-, Greek hypnos, Lithuanian sapnas, Old
Church Slavonic sunu, Old Irish suan, Welsh hun sleep, Latin sopor a deep sleep, Old English swefn,
Old Norse svefn a dream).


son (n.)

Old English sunu son, descendant, from Proto-Germanic *sunuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian
sunu, Old Norse sonr, Danish s&oslash;n, Swedish son, Middle Dutch sone, Dutch zoon, Old High German
sunu, German Sohn, Gothic sunus son). The Germanic words are from PIE *su(e)-nu- son (cognates:
Sanskrit sunus, Greek huios, Avestan hunush, Armenian ustr, Lithuanian sunus, Old Church Slavonic
synu, Russian and Polish syn son), a derived noun from root *seue- (1) to give birth (cognates:
Sanskrit sauti gives birth, Old Irish suth birth, offspring).   Son of _____ as the title of a
sequel to a book or movie is recorded from 1917 (Son of Tarzan). Most explanations for son of a gun
(1708) are more than a century after its appearance. Henley (1903) describes it as meaning
originally a soldier's bastard; Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book (1867) describes it as An epithet
conveying contempt in a slight degree, and originally applied to boys born afloat, when women were
permitted to accompany their husbands to sea ....


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


son-in-law (n.)

late 14c., from son + in-law.


sonant (adj.)

1846, from Latin sonantem (nominative sonans), present participle of sonare make a noise, (see
sonata). As a noun from 1849.


sonar (n.)

apparatus for detection underwater, 1946, from first letters of sound navigation ranging, on pattern
of radar.


sonata (n.)

1690s, from Italian sonata piece of instrumental music, literally sounded (i.e. played on an
instrument, as opposed to cantata sung), fem. past participle of sonare to sound, from Latin sonare
to sound, from PIE *swene-, from root *swen- to sound (see sound (n.1)). Meaning narrowed by mid-
18c. toward application to large-scale works in three or four movements.


sonatina (n.)

short or simplified sonata, 1801, a diminutive of sonata.


sone (n.)

unit of loudness, 1936, from Latin sonus (see sound (n.1)).


song (n.)

Old English sang voice, song, art of singing; metrical composition adapted for singing, psalm, poem,
from Proto-Germanic *sangwaz (cognates: Old Norse s&ouml;ngr, Norwegian song, Swedish s&#229;ng, Old
Saxon, Danish, Old Frisian, Old High German, German sang, Middle Dutch sanc, Dutch zang, Gothic
saggws), from PIE *songwh-o- singing, song, from *sengwh- to sing, make an incantation (see sing
(v.)).    Phrase for a song for a trifle, for little or nothing is from All's Well III.ii.9 (the
identical image, por du son, is in Old French. With a song in (one's) heart feeling joy is first
attested 1930 in Lorenz Hart's lyric. Song and dance as a form of vaudeville act is attested from
1872; figurative sense of rigmarole is from 1895.


song-bird (n.)

1774, from song (n.) + bird (n.1).


songbook (n.)

Old English sangboc church service book; see song (n.) + book (n.). Meaning collection of songs
bound in a book is from late 15c.


songcraft (n.)

Old English sangcr&#230;ft art of singing, composing poetry, or playing an instrument, from song
(n.) + craft (n.). Modern use (1855) is a re-formation.


songster (n.)

Old English sangystre female singer; see song (n.) + -ster. Also of men skilled in singing by mid-
14c. Separate fem. form songstress is attested from 1703.


sonic (adj.)

1923, from Latin sonus sound (see sound (n.1)) + -ic. Sonic boom is attested from 1952.


sonless (adj.)

late 14c., from son + -less.


sonnet (n.)

1557 (in title of Surrey's poems), from Middle French sonnet (1540s) or directly from Italian
sonetto, literally little song, from Old Proven&ccedil;al sonet song, diminutive of son song, sound,
from Latin sonus sound (see sound (n.1)).    Originally in English also any short lyric poem;
precise meaning is from Italian, where Petrarch (14c.) developed a scheme of an eight-line stanza
(rhymed abba abba) followed by a six-line stanza (cdecde, the Italian sestet, or cdcdcd, the
Sicilian sestet). Shakespeare developed the English Sonnet for his rhyme-poor native tongue: three
Sicilian quatrains followed by a heroic couplet (ababcdcdefefgg). The first stanza sets a situation
or problem, and the second comments on it or resolves it.


sonnetteer (n.)

minor or unimportant poet, 1660s, from Italian sonettiere, from sonetto (see sonnet). As a verb from
1797 (implied in sonnetteering.


sonny (n.)

small boy, 1833, from son + -y (3). As a familiar form of address to one younger or inferior, from
1852. The song Sonny Boy (Jolson) was popular 1928.


sonogram (n.)

1956, from comb. form of Latin sonus (see sound (n.1)) + -gram. Related: Sonograph (1951).


Sonora

Mexican state, from Spanish sonora sonorous (from Latin sonoros; see sonorous), supposedly so called
in reference to marble deposits there which rang when struck.


sonority (n.)

1620s, from French sonorit&eacute; and directly from Latin sonoritas fullness of sound, from sonorus
(see sonorous).


sonorous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin sonorus resounding, from sonor sound, noise, from sonare to sound (see sonata).
Related: Sonorously; sonorousness. Earlier was sonouse (c.1500), from Medieval Latin sonosus;
sonourse having a pleasing voice (c.1400), from sonor + -y (2).


sook (n.)

variant of souk.


soon (adv.)

Old English sona at once, immediately, directly, forthwith, from Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;no
(cognates: Old Frisian son, Old Saxon sana, Old High German san, Gothic suns soon). Sense softened
early Middle English to within a short time (compare anon). American English. Sooner for Oklahoma
native is 1930 (earlier one who acts prematurely, 1889), from the 1889 opening to whites of what was
then part of Indian Territory, when many would-be settlers sneaked onto public land and staked their
claims sooner than the legal date and time.


soot (n.)

Old English sot soot, from Proto-Germanic *sotam soot (cognates: Old Norse sot, Old Dutch soet,
North Frisian sutt), literally what settles, from PIE *sod-o- (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
sa&#382;da, Lithuanian suod&#382;iai, Old Irish suide, Breton huzel soot), suffixed form of root
*sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


sooterkin (n.)

1680s, imaginary rat-like after-birth believed to be gotten by Dutch women by sitting over stoves,
1680s.


sooth (n.)

Old English so&eth; truth, justice, righteousness, rectitude; reality, certainty, noun use of
so&eth; (adj.) true, genuine, real; just, righteous, originally *son&eth;-, from Proto-Germanic
*santhaz (cognates: Old Norse sannr, Old Saxon soth, Old High German sand true, Gothic sunja truth).
The group is related to Old English synn sin and Latin sontis guilty (truth is related to guilt via
being the one; see sin (v.)), from PIE *es-ont- being, existence, thus real, true, from present
participle of root *es-, the s-form of the verb to be (see be), preserved in Latin sunt they are and
German sind. Archaic in English, it is the root of modern words for true in Swedish (sann) and
Danish (sand). In common use until mid-17c., then obsolete until revived as an archaism early 19c.
by Scott, etc. Used for Latin pro- in translating compounds into Old English, such as so&eth;tacen
prodigy, so&eth;fylgan prosequi.


soothe (v.)

Old English so&eth;ian show to be true, from so&eth; true (see sooth). Sense of quiet, comfort,
mollify is first recorded 1690s, via notion of to assuage one by asserting that what he says is true
(i.e. to be a yes-man), a sense attested from 1560s (and compare Old English geso&eth; a parasite,
flatterer). Meaning reduce the intensity (of a pain, etc.) is from 1711. Related: Soothed; soothing.


soothfast (adj.)

truthful, Old English so&#240;f&#230;st true, trustworthy, honest, just righteous; see sooth (n.) +
-fast. Related: Old English so&#240;f&#230;stnes truthfulness, fairness, fidelity;
so&#240;f&#230;stlic true, sincere; so&#240;f&#230;stlice truly, honestly.


soothing (adj.)

1590s, flattering, from present participle of soothe. Sense of mollifying is from 1746. Related:
Soothingly.


soothsay (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from soothsayer. As a noun from 1540s.


soothsayer (n.)

mid-14c., zo&#254; ziggere (Kentish), one who speaks truth,; late 14c., sothseggere, fortune-teller;
see sooth + say. Old English had so&eth;sagu act of speaking the truth.


sooty (adj.)

mid-13c., from soot + -y (2). Related: Sootily; sootiness.


sop (n.)

Old English sopp- bread soaked in some liquid, (in soppcuppe cup into which sops are put), from
Proto-Germanic *supp-, related to Old English verb suppan (see sup (v.2)), probably reinforced by
Old French soupe (see soup (n.)). Meaning something given to appease is from 1660s, a reference to
the sops given by the Sibyl to Cerberus in the Aeneid.


sop (v.)

Old English soppian, from the source of sop (n.). Related: Sopped; sopping.


sopaipilla (n.)

also sopapilla, by 1983, from Mexican Spanish, ultimately from Old Spanish sopa food soaked in
liquid, from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *sup- (see sup (v.2)).


soph (n.)

shortened form of sophomore, 1778; from 1660s as short for sophister.


Sophia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophia skill, knowledge of, acquaintance with; sound judgement,
practical wisdom; cunning, shrewdness; philosophy, also wisdom personified, abstract noun from
sophos wise (see sophist). Saint Sophia in ancient church names and place names in the East is not
necessarily a reference to a person; the phrase also is the English translation of the Greek for
divine wisdom, holy wisdom, to which churches were dedicated.


Sophie

French form of Sophia (q.v.).


sophism (n.)

early 15c., earlier sophime (mid-14c.), specious but fallacious argument devised for purposes of
deceit or to exercise one's ingenuity, from Old French sophime a fallacy, false argument (Modern
French sophisme), from Latin sophisma, from Greek sophisma clever device, skillful act, stage-trick,
from stem of sophizesthai become wise (see sophist).


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


sophistic (adj.)

1540s, from Latin sophisticus, from Greek sophistikos like a sophist, sophistical, from sophistes
(see sophist). Related: Sophistical (late 15c.); sophistically (late 14c.).


sophisticate (v.)

c.1400, make impure by admixture, from Medieval Latin sophisticatus, past participle of sophisticare
(see sophistication). From c.1600 as corrupt, delude by sophistry; from 1796 as deprive of
simplicity. Related: Sophisticated; sophisticating. As a noun meaning sophisticated person from
1921.


sophisticated (adj.)

c.1600, mixed with a foreign substance, impure; no longer simple or natural, past participle
adjective from sophisticate (v.). Of persons, with a positive sense, worldly-wise, discriminating,
cultured, from 1895.


sophistication (n.)

early 15c., use of sophistry; fallacious argument intended to mislead; adulteration; an adulterated
or adulterating substance, from Medieval Latin sophisticationem (nominative sophisticatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of sophisticare adulterate, cheat quibble, from Latin sophisticus
of sophists, from Greek sophistikos of or pertaining to a sophist, from sophistes a wise man,
master, teacher (see sophist). Meaning wordly wisdom, refinement, discrimination is attested from
1850.


sophistry (n.)

specious but fallacious reasoning, mid-14c., from Old French sophistrie (Modern French sophisterie),
from Medieval Latin sophistria, from Latin sophista, sophistes (see sophist). Sophistry applies to
reasoning as sophism to a single argument [Century Dictionary].


Sophocles

Athenian tragic poet (c.496-406 B.C.E.), the name is Greek Sophokles, literally famed for wisdom,
from sophos wise (see sophist) + *-kles fame (see Damocles). Related: Sophoclean.


sophomore (n.)

1680s, student in the second year of university study, literally arguer, altered from sophumer
(1650s, from sophume, archaic variant form of sophism), probably by influence of folk etymology
derivation from Greek sophos wise + moros foolish, dull. The original reference might be to the
dialectic exercises that formed a large part of education in the middle years. At Oxford and
Cambridge, a sophister (from sophist with spurious -er as in philosopher) was a second- or third-
year student (what Americans would call a junior might be a senior sophister).


sophomoric (adj.)

characteristic of a sophomore (regarded as self-assured and opinionated but crude and immature),
1806, from sophomore + -ic.


Sophronia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophronia, from sophron (genitive sophronos) discreet, prudent,
sensible, having control over sensual desires, moderate, chaste, literally of sound mind, from sos
safe, sound, whole + phren midriff, heart, mind (see phreno-).


sophrosyne (n.)

the quality of wise moderation; Greek, prudence, moderation in desires, discretion, temperance, from
sophron of sound mind, prudent, temperate (see Sophronia).


sopor (n.)

Latin, deep sleep, lethargy, from PIE *swep-os-, suffixed form of root *swep- (1) to sleep (see
Somnus).


soporific (adj.)

tending to produce sleep, 1680s, from French soporifique (17c.), formed in French from Latin sopor
(genitive soporis) deep sleep (see sopor). As a noun from 1722. Earlier as an adjective was
soporiferous (1580s as characterized by excessive sleep, c.1600 as soporific).


sopping (adj.)

very wet, 1877, from sop (v.) to drench with moisture (1680s), from sop (n.).


soppy (adj.)

very wet, 1823, from sop + -y (2). Meaning sentimental first recorded 1918. Related: Soppiness.


soprano (n.)

1738, the highest singing voice, ranging easily through the two octaves above middle C, from Italian
soprano the treble in music, literally high, from sopra above, from Latin supra, fem. ablative
singular of super (see super-). Meaning a singer having a soprano voice is from 1738. As an
adjective from 1730. Soprano saxophone is attested from 1859.


sora (n.)

small, short-billed North American bird species, the Carolina rail, 1705, probably from a native
name.


Sorb (n.)

1843, from German Sorbe, from Slavic Serb, the national designation. Slavic people surviving in
Lusatia, eastern Saxony, also known as Wends. Related: Sorbian (1836); earlier Sorabian (1788), from
Medieval Latin Sorabi.


sorb (n.)

fruit of the service tree, 1520s, from French sorbe, from Latin sorbum service-berry (small, edible
fruit of the European mountain ash), from sorbus, of uncertain origin.


sorbet (n.)

1580s, cooling drink of fruit juice and water, from French sorbet (16c.), probably from Italian
sorbetto, from Turkish serbet (see sherbet). Perhaps influenced in form by Italian sorbire to sip.
Meaning semi-liquid water ice as a dessert first recorded 1864.


sorbic (adj.)

1815, in sorbic acid, so called because it was first isolated from the berries of the mountain ash
(see sorb).


Sorbonne

1560, from Sorbon, place name in the Ardennes. Theological college in Paris founded early 13c. by
Robert de Sorbon (b.1201), chaplain and confessor of Louis IX. Influential 16c.-17c., suppressed
during the Revolution.


sorcerer (n.)

early 15c., from earlier sorcer (late 14c.), from Old French sorcier, from Medieval Latin sortarius
teller of fortunes by lot; sorcerer (also source of Spanish sortero, Italian sortiere-; see
sorcery). With superfluous -er, as in poulterer, upholsterer. Sorcerer's apprentice translates
l'apprenti sorcier, title of a symphonic poem by Paul Dukas (1897) based on a Goethe ballad (Der
Zauberlehrling, 1797), but the common figurative use of the term (1952) comes after Disney's
Fantasia (1940).


sorceress (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French sorceresse, from sorcer (see sorcerer).


sorcerous (adj.)

1540s, from sorcery + -ous.


sorcery (n.)

c.1300, from Old French sorcerie, from sorcier sorcerer, wizard, from Medieval Latin sortiarius
teller of fortunes by lot; sorcerer, literally one who influences fate or fortune, from Latin sors
(genitive sortis) lot, fate, fortune (see sort (n.)).


sord (n.)

flock of mallards, 15c., perhaps from sord (v.) to take flight, from Old French sordre arise, stand
up, from Latin surgere to rise (see surge (n.)).


sordid (adj.)

early 15c., festering, from Latin sordidus dirty, filthy, foul, vile, mean, base, from sordere be
dirty, be shabby, related to sordes dirt, filth, from PIE *swrd-e-, from root *swordo- black, dirty
(cognates: Old English sweart black). Sense of foul, low, mean first recorded 1610s. Related:
Sordidly; sordidness.


sore (adj.)

Old English sar painful, grievous, aching, sad, wounding, influenced in meaning by Old Norse sarr
sore, wounded, from Proto-Germanic *saira- suffering, sick, ill (cognates: Old Frisian sar painful,
Middle Dutch seer, Dutch zeer sore, ache, Old High German ser painful, Gothic sair pain, sorrow,
travail), from PIE root *sai- (1) suffering (cognates: Old Irish saeth pain, sickness).    Adverbial
use (as in sore afraid) is from Old English sare but has mostly died out (replaced by sorely), but
remains the main meaning of German cognate sehr very. Slang meaning angry, irritated is first
recorded 1738.


sore (n.)

Old English sar bodily pain or injury, wound; sickness, disease; state of pain or suffering, from
root of sore (adj.). Now restricted to ulcers, boils, blisters. Compare Old Saxon ser pain, wound,
Middle Dutch seer, Dutch zeer, Old High German ser, Old Norse sar, Gothic sair.


sorehead (n.)

mean, discontented person, 1848, American English, from sore (adj.) + head (n.). Especially in 19c.
U.S. political slang, a person who is dissatisfied through lack of recognition or reward for party
service (1862).


sorely (adv.)

Old English sarlice grievously, mournfully, bitterly, painfully; see sore (adj.) + -ly (2).


sorghum (n.)

Indian millet, 1590s, from Modern Latin Sorghum, the genus name, from Italian sorgo a tall cereal
grass, probably from Medieval Latin surgum, suricum (12c.), perhaps a variant of Latin syricum
Syrian, as in Syricum (gramen) (grass) of Syria, from Syria, a possible source of the plant or its
grain in ancient times.


Soroptimist

international society of business women and women executives, first club formed 1921 in Oakland,
Calif., U.S., from sorority + optimist, probably after the Optimist Club.


sororal (adj.)

1650s, from Latin soror sister (see sister) + -al (1).


sorority (n.)

1530s, a society of women, body of women united for some purpose, from Medieval Latin sororitas
sisterhood, of or pertaining to sisters, from Latin soror sister (see sister). Sense of women's
society in a college or university attested by 1887 (Alpha Delta Pi claims founding in 1851).


sorosis (n.)

consolidated fleshy multiple fruit (such as a pineapple), 1831, from Modern Latin, from Greek soros
a heap.


sorrel (adj.)

reddish brown, especially of horses, mid-14c., from Old French sorel, from sor yellowish-brown,
probably from Frankish *saur dry, or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *sauza-
(cognates: Middle Dutch soor dry, Old High German soren to become dry, Old English sear withered,
barren; see sere). Perhaps a diminutive form in French.


sorrel (n.)

small perennial plant, late 14c., from Old French surele (12c., Modern French surelle), from sur
sour, from Frankish *sur or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates:
Old High German, Old English sur sour; see sour (adj.)). So called for the taste of its leaves.


sorrow (n.)

Old English sorg grief, regret, trouble, care, pain, anxiety, from Proto-Germanic *sorg- (cognates:
Old Saxon sorga, Old Norse sorg, Middle Dutch sorghe, Dutch zorg, Old High German soraga, German
sorge, Gothic saurga), perhaps from PIE *swergh- to worry, be sick (cognates: Sanskrit surksati
cares for, Lithuanian sergu to be sick, Old Church Slavonic sraga sickness, Old Irish serg
sickness). Not connected etymologically with sore (adj.) or sorry.


sorrow (v.)

Old English sorgian, from sorg (see sorrow (n.)). Related: Sorrowed; sorrowing. Compare Dutch
zorgen, German sorgen, Gothic saurgan.


sorrowful (adj.)

Old English sorgful sad, anxious, careful; distressing, doleful; see sorrow (n.) + -ful. Related:
Sorrowfully; sorowfulness.


sorry (adj.)

Old English sarig distressed, grieved, full of sorrow (not found in the physical sense of sore),
from Proto-Germanic *sairiga- painful (cognates: Old Saxon serag, Middle Dutch seerigh sore; sad,
sorry, Dutch zeerig sore, full of sores, Old High German serag, Swedish s&#229;rig sore, full of
sores), from *sairaz pain (physical and mental); related to *saira- suffering, sick, ill (see sore
(adj.)). Meaning wretched, worthless, poor first recorded mid-13c. Spelling shift from -a- to -o- by
influence of sorrow. Apologetic sense (short for I'm sorry) is attested from 1834; phrase sorry
about that popularized 1960s by U.S. TV show Get Smart. Related: Sorrily; sorriness.


sort (n.)

late 14c., group of people, animals, etc.; kind or variety of person or animal, from Old French
sorte class, kind, from Latin sortem (nominative sors) lot; fate, destiny; share, portion; rank,
category; sex, class, oracular response, prophecy, from PIE root *ser- (3) to line up (cognates:
Latin serere to arrange, attach, join; see series). The sense evolution in Vulgar Latin is from what
is allotted to one by fate, to fortune, condition, to rank, class, order. Later (mid-15c.) group,
class, or category of items; kind or variety of thing; pattern, design. Out of sorts not in usual
good condition is attested from 1620s, with literal sense of out of stock.


sort (v.)

mid-14c., to arrange according to type or quality, from Old French sortir allot, sort, assort, from
Latin sortiri draw lots, divide, choose, from sors (see sort (n.)). In some senses, the verb is a
shortened form of assort.


sortie (n.)

attack of the besieged upon the besiegers, 1778, from French sortie (16c.), literally a going out,
noun use of fem. past participle of sortir go out, from Vulgar Latin *surctire, from Latin
surrectus, past participle of surgere rise up (see surge (n.)).


SOS

1910, from International Morse code letters, chosen arbitrarily as being easy to transmit and
difficult to mistake. Not an initialism (acronym) for save our ship or anything else. Won out over
alternative suggestion C.Q.D., which is said to mean come quickly, distress, or CQ, general call for
alerting other ships that a message follows, and D for danger. SOS is the telegraphic distress
signal only; the oral equivalent is mayday.


sot (n.)

late Old English sott stupid person, fool, from Old French sot, from Gallo-Roman *sott- (probably
related to Medieval Latin sottus, c.800), of uncertain origin, with cognates from Portugal to
Germany. Surviving meaning one who is stupefied with drink first recorded 1590s. As a verb, it is
attested from c.1200, but usually besot.


soteriological (adj.)

1879, from German soteriologisch; see soteriology.


soteriology (n.)

1847, in reference to health; 1864 in reference to salvation, from German soteriologie, from Greek
soteria preservation, salvation, from soizein save, preserve, related to sos safe, healthy, of
uncertain origin. With -ology.


Sothic (adj.)

as in Sothic cycle, a period of 1,460 years, 1828, from French Sothique, from Greek Sothis, an
Egyptian name of the star Sirius. The Sothic year is determined by the heliacal rising of Sirius.


sottish (adj.)

1560s, foolish, from sot (-) + -ish. From 1630s as drunken. Related: sottishly; sottishness.


sotto voce

1737, Italian, literally under voice, from sotto, from Latin subtus below (source also of French
sous; see sub-) + voce, from Latin vocem (nominative vox); see voice (n.).


sou (n.)

small French coin, 1550s, back-formation from sous, plural of Old French soul, formerly a coin worth
one-twentieth of a livre, from Latin solidus (see solidus).


soubrette (n.)

1753, theatrical jargon word for lady's maid characters in plays and operas, who typically were
pert, flirtatious, and intriguing, from French soubrette, from Proven&ccedil;al soubreto affected,
conceited, fem. of soubret coy, reserved, from soubra to set aside, originally to exceed, from Old
Proven&ccedil;al sobrar, from Latin superare to rise above, overcome, from super over, above, beyond
(see super-).


souffle (n.)

light dish, sometimes savory but usually sweet, 1813, from French souffl&eacute;, noun use of past
participle of souffler to puff up, from Latin sufflare, from sub- under, up from under (see sub-) +
flare to blow (see blow (v.1)).


souffre-douleur (n.)

1845, French, literally suffer sorrow; one who is in a subservient position and must listen to or
share another's troubles, specifically a woman who acts as a paid companion to an older woman.


sough (v.)

to make a moaning or murmuring sound, Old English swogan to sound, roar, howl, rustle, whistle, from
Proto-Germanic *swoganan (cognates: Old Saxon swogan to rustle, Gothic gaswogjan to sigh), from PIE
imitative root *(s)wagh- (cognates: Greek echo, Latin vagire to cry, roar, sound). The noun is late
14c., from the verb.


sought

past tense and past participle of seek, from Old English sohte. Sought-after is from 1881 (sought-
for in same sense is from c.1600).


souk (n.)

Arab bazaar, 1826, from French souk, from Arabic suq marketplace.


soul (n.1)

A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks and wills
[Century Dictionary], Old English sawol spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence;
life, living being, from Proto-Germanic *saiwalo (cognates: Old Saxon seola, Old Norse sala, Old
Frisian sele, Middle Dutch siele, Dutch ziel, Old High German seula, German Seele, Gothic saiwala),
of uncertain origin.    Sometimes said to mean originally coming from or belonging to the sea,
because that was supposed to be the stopping place of the soul before birth or after death
[Barnhart]; if so, it would be from Proto-Germanic *saiwaz (see sea). Klein explains this as from
the lake, as a dwelling-place of souls in ancient northern Europe.    Meaning spirit of a deceased
person is attested in Old English from 971. As a synonym for person, individual, human being (as in
every living soul) it dates from early 14c. Soul-searching (n.) is attested from 1871, from the
phrase used as a past participle adjective (1610s). Distinguishing soul from spirit is a matter best
left to theologians.


soul (n.2)

instinctive quality felt by black persons as an attribute, 1946, jazz slang, from soul (n.1). Also
from this sense are soul brother (1957), soul sister (1967), soul food (1957), etc. Soul music,
essentially gospel music with girl, etc., in place of Jesus, first attested 1961; William James used
the term in 1900, in a spiritual/romantic sense, but in reference to inner music.


soulful (adj.)

full of feeling, 1860, from soul (n.1) + -ful. Meaning expressive of characteristic Black feeling is
from 1964 (see soul (n.2)). Earlier as a noun (1640s), as much as a soul can hold.


soulless (adj.)

Old English sawolleas dead, lifeless; see soul (n.1) + -less. Modern use (1550s) likely is a re-
formation.


soulmate (n.)

1822 (as soul mate), first attested in Coleridge, from soul (n.1) + mate (n.). One-word form is from
early 20c.


sound (n.1)

noise, what is heard, sensation produced through the ear, late 13c., soun, from Old French son
sound, musical note, voice, from Latin sonus sound, a noise, from PIE *swon-o-, from root *swen- to
sound (cognates: Sanskrit svanati it sounds, svanah sound, tone; Latin sonare to sound; Old Irish
senim the playing of an instrument; Old English geswin music, song, swinsian to sing; Old Norse
svanr, Old English swan swan, properly the sounding bird).    The terminal -d was established
c.1350-1550 as part of a tendency to add -d- after -n-. First record of sound barrier is from 1939.
Sound check is from 1977; sound effects is 1909, originally live accompaniments to silent films.
The experts of Victor ... will ... arrange for the synchronized orchestration and sound effects for
this picture, in which airplane battles will have an important part. [Exhibitor's Herald &amp;
Moving Picture World, April 28, 1928]


sound (adj.)

free from special defect or injury, c.1200, from Old English gesund sound, safe, having the organs
and faculties complete and in perfect action, from Proto-Germanic *sunda-, from Germanic root *swen-
to- healthy, strong (cognates: Old Saxon gisund, Old Frisian sund, Dutch gezond, Old High German
gisunt, German gesund healthy, as in the post-sneezing interjection gesundheit; also Old English
swi&eth; strong, Gothic swin&thorn;s strong, German geschwind fast, quick), with connections in
Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic. Meaning right, correct, free from error is from mid-15c. Meaning
financially solid or safe is attested from c.1600; of sleep, undisturbed, from 1540s. Sense of
holding accepted opinions is from 1520s.


sound (v.2)

fathom, probe, measure the depth of, mid-14c. (implied in sounding), from Old French sonder, from
sonde sounding line, perhaps from the same Germanic source that yielded Old English sund water, sea
(see sound (n.2)). Barnhart dismisses the old theory that it is from Latin subundare. Figurative use
from 1570s.


sound (n.2)

narrow channel of water, c.1300, from Old Norse sund a strait, swimming, or from cognate Old English
sund act of swimming, stretch of water one can swim across, a strait of the sea, both from Proto-
Germanic *sundam-, from *swum-to-, suffixed form of Germanic root *swem- to move, stir, swim (see
swim (v.)).


sound (v.1)

early 13c., sounen to be audible, produce vibrations affecting the ear, from Old French soner
(Modern French sonner) and directly from Latin sonare to sound (see sonata). From late 14c. as cause
something (an instrument, etc.) to produce sound. Related: Sounded; sounding.


sound-proof (adj.)

1853, from sound (n.1) + proof (n.).


Soundex (n.)

phonetic coding system, 1959, from sound (n.1) + brand-name suffix -ex.


soundless (adj.)

c.1600 from sound (n.1) + -less. Related: Soundlessly; soundlessness.


soundly (adv.)

c.1400, safely; also deeply (of sleep), from sound (adj.) + -ly (2). From 1570s as thoroughly.


soundness (n.)

late 14c., from sound (adj.) + -ness.


soundtrack (n.)

1929, from sound (n.1) + track (n.).


soup (n.)

liquid food, 1650s, from French soupe soup, broth (13c.), from Late Latin suppa bread soaked in
broth, from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch sop sop, broth), from Proto-Germanic *sup-, from
PIE *sub-, from root *seue- (2) to take liquid (see sup (v.2)).   Primordial soup is from a concept
first expressed 1929 by J.B.S. Haldane. Soup to nuts everything is from 1910. Soup-kitchen, public
establishment supported by voluntary contributions, for preparing and serving soup to the poor at no
cost is attested from 1839. In Ireland, souper meant Protestant clergyman seeking to make proselytes
by dispensing soup in charity (1854).


soup (v.)

increase the horsepower of an engine, 1921, probably from soup (n.) in slang sense of narcotic
injected into horses to make them run faster (1911), influenced by supercharge (v.).


soupcon (n.)

a slight trace or suggestion, 1766, from French soup&ccedil;on suspicion, from Old French
sospe&ccedil;on suspicion, worry, anxiety (12c.), from Late Latin suspectionem (see suspicion).


soupy (adj.)

like soup; wet, 1828 (noted then as a Yorkshire word), from soup (n.) + -y (2). Related: Soupiness.


sour (adj.)

Old English sur sour, tart, acid, fermented, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates: Old Norse
surr, Middle Dutch suur, Dutch zuur, Old High German sur, German Sauer), from PIE root *suro- sour,
salty, bitter (cognates: Old Church Slavonic syru, Russian syroi moist, raw; Lithuanian suras salty,
suris cheese).    Meaning having a peevish disposition is from early 13c. Sense in whisky sour
(1885) is with lemon added (1862). Sour cream is attested from 1855. French sur sour, tart (12c.) is
a Germanic loan-word.


sour (v.)

c.1300, from sour (adj.). Compare Old High German suren, German s&#228;uern. Related: Soured;
souring.


sourball (n.)

1900 as constantly grumbling person; 1914 as a type of candy; from sour (adj.) + ball (n.1).


source (n.)

mid-14c., support, base, from Old French sourse a rising, beginning, fountainhead of a river or
stream (12c.), fem. noun taken from past participle of sourdre to rise, spring up, from Latin
surgere to rise (see surge (n.)). Meaning a first cause is from late 14c., as is that of fountain-
head of a river. Meaning written work (later also a person) supplying information or evidence is
from 1788.


source (v.)

obtain from a specified source, 1972, from source (n.). Related: Sourced; sourcing.


sourdough (n.)

early 14c., leavened bread, also leaven (late 14c.), from sour (adj.) + dough. Meaning fermented
dough is from 1868. The meaning Arctic prospector or pioneer is from 1898 Yukon gold rush, from the
practice of saving a lump of fermented dough as leaven for raising bread baked during the winter.


sourly (adv.)

1530s, from sour (adj.) + -ly (2).


sourness (n.)

Old English surnes; see sour (adj.) + -ness.


sourpuss (n.)

1937, from sour (adj.) + puss (n.2) face.


sous chef (n.)

early 19c., from French sous, from Old French soz (10c.), from Latin subtus under, below (see sub-)
+ chef.


sousaphone (n.)

1903, named for U.S. bandleader and composer John Philip Sousa (1854-1932).  The first sousaphone
was made by C.G. Conn in 1899 expressly for Sousa's band and its bell opened directly upward. The
present bell-front type was first made in 1908. [International Cyclopedia of Music, 1939]


souse (v.)

late 14c., to pickle, steep in vinegar, from Old French sous (adj.) preserved in salt and vinegar,
from Frankish *sultja or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon sultia salt water, Old High
German sulza brine), from Proto-Germanic *salt- (see salt (n.)). Related: Soused; sousing.


souse (n.)

something steeped in pickle, especially pig parts preserved and pickled, mid-15c., earlier liquid
for pickling (late 14c.), from souse (v.) or from its French source.


soused (adj.)

drunk, 1610s, from past participle of souse (v.), on notion of one pickled in liquor.


soutane (n.)

long, buttoned gown or frock with sleeves, outer garment of Roman Catholic ecclesiastics, 1838, from
French soutane, from Old French sotane undershirt, from Medieval Latin subtana an under-cassock,
from Latin subtus beneath, under, below (see sub-).


souteneur (n.)

man who lives on the earnings of one or more prostitutes under his protection, pimp, 1906, French,
literally protector, from soutenir to sustain (see sustain).


souter (n.)

maker or mender of shoes, Old English sutere, from Latin sutor shoemaker, from suere to sew, stitch
(see sew).


south (adv.)

Old English su&eth; southward, to the south, southern, in the south, from Proto-Germanic *sunthaz,
perhaps literally sun-side (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian suth southward, in the south, Middle
Dutch suut, Dutch zuid, German S&uuml;den), and related to base of *sunnon sun (see sun (v.)). Old
French sur, sud (French sud), Spanish sur, sud are loan-words from Germanic, perhaps from Old Norse
su&eth;r.    As an adjective from c.1300; as a noun, one of the four cardinal points, also southern
region of a country, both late 13c. The Southern states of the U.S. have been collectively called
The South since 1779 (in early use this often referred only to Georgia and South Carolina). South
country in Britain means the part below the Tweed, in England the part below the Wash, and in
Scotland the part below the Forth. South Sea meant the Mediterranean (late 14c.) and the English
Channel (early 15c.) before it came to mean (in plural) the South Pacific Ocean (1520s). The
nautical coat called a sou'wester (1836) protects the wearer against severe weather, such as a gale
out of the southwest.


South Africa

1815 as a name for a distinct region that had been partly settled by Europeans; 1910 as the name of
a nation.


southbound (adj.)

1872, originally in railroading, from south + bound (adj.2).


southeast (adv.)

Old English su&#240;east; see south + east. Related: Southeasterly; southeastern.


southerly

1550s (adj.); 1570s (adv.); from southern + -ly. Related: Southerliness.


southern

Old English su&eth;erne, from su&eth; south (see south) + -erne, suffix denoting direction. A common
Germanic compound (Old Frisian suthern, Old Norse su&eth;roenn, Old High German sundroni). The
constellation Southern Cross so called in English by 1756.


southerner (n.)

1817, American English, from southern. Contrasted with Yankee by 1828.


southernmost (adj.)

1725, from southern + -most.


southland (n.)

Old English su&#240;land, see south + land (n.).


southmost (adj.)

Old English su&#240;mest; see south + -most.


southpaw (n.)

lefthander, 1885, originally baseball slang, of pitchers, often said to have been coined by Finley
Peter Dunne (Mr. Dooley), Chicago sports journalist and humorist, in the days when, it is said,
baseball diamonds regularly were laid out with home plate to the west. But south paw a person's left
hand is attested from 1848 in the slang of pugilism.


Southron (n.)

inhabitant of the southern part of a country, late 15c., variant (originally Scottish and northern
English) of southren (late 14c.), on analogy of Briton, Saxon, from Old English su&eth;erne or Old
Norse su&eth;r&aelig;nn southern (see southern). Popularized in English by Jane Porter's enormously
popular historical novel Scottish Chiefs (1810), and adopted in U.S. by many in the Southern states.
She also used it as an adjective. Old English had su&eth;mann Southman.    But the moment I heard he
was in arms, I grasped at the opportunity of avenging my country, and of trampling on the proud
heart of the Southron villain who had dared to inflict disgrace upon the cheek of Roger Kirkpatrick.
[Scottish Chiefs]


southward (adj.)

Old English su&#240;weard; see south + -ward.


southwest (adv.)

Old English su&#240;-west; see south + west. As a noun from early 12c. Related: Southwester;
southwesterly.


southwestern (adj.)

Old English su&#240;westerne; see southwest + -ern. In reference to a section of the U.S., from
1806, when it meant Mississippi and Alabama.


souvenir (n.)

1775, a remembrance or memory, from French souvenir (12c.), from Old French noun use of souvenir
(v.) to remember, come to mind, from Latin subvenire come to mind, from sub- up from below (see
sub-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning token of remembrance, memento is first recorded 1782.


souvlaki (n.)

1959, from Modern Greek soublaki, from soubla skewer, in classical Greek awl, akin to Latin subula,
from PIE *syu- (see sew (v)).


sovereign (n.)

late 13c., superior, ruler, master, from Old French soverain sovereign, lord, ruler, noun use of
adjective meaning highest, supreme, chief (see sovereign (adj.)). Meaning gold coin worth 22s 6d
first recorded late 15c.; value changed 1817 to 1 pound.


sovereign (adj.)

early 14c., great, superior, supreme, from Old French soverain highest, supreme, chief, from Vulgar
Latin *superanus chief, principal (source also of Spanish soberano, Italian soprano), from Latin
super over (see super-). Spelling influenced by folk-etymology association with reign. Milton
spelled it sovran, as though from Italian sovrano. Of remedies or medicines, potent in a high
degree, from late 14c.


sovereignty (n.)

mid-14c., pre-eminence, from Anglo-French sovereynete, Old French souverainete, from soverain (see
sovereign (adj.)). Meaning authority, rule, supremacy of power or rank is recorded from late 14c.;
sense of existence as an independent state is from 1715.


soviet (n.)

1917, from Russian sovet governing council, literally council, from Old Russian suvetu assembly,
from su with (from *su(n)- with, together, from PIE *ksun- with) + vetu counsel. The whole is a
loan-translation of Greek symboulion council of advisers. As an adjective from 1918.


Soviet Union

informal name of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; in use in U.S. newspapers by October 1919.


sow (v.)

Old English sawan to scatter seed upon the ground or plant it in the earth, disseminate (class VII
strong verb; past tense seow, past participle sawen), from Proto-Germanic *sean (cognates: Old Norse
sa, Old Saxon saian, Middle Dutch sayen, Dutch zaaien, Old High German sawen, German s&auml;en,
Gothic saian), from PIE root *se- (1) to sow (cognates: Latin sero, past tense sevi, past participle
satum to sow; Old Church Slavonic sejo, sejati; Lithuanian seju, seti to sow), source of semen,
season (n.), seed (n.), etc. Figurative sense was in Old English.


sow (n.)

Old English sugu, su female of the swine, from Proto-Germanic *su- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High
German su, German Sau, Dutch zeug, Old Norse syr), from PIE root *su- (cognates: Sanskrit sukarah
wild boar, swine; Avestan hu wild boar; Greek hys swine; Latin sus swine, swinus pertaining to
swine; Old Church Slavonic svinija swine; Lettish sivens young pig; Welsh hucc, Irish suig swine;
Old Irish socc snout, plowshare), possibly imitative of pig noise, a notion reinforced by the fact
that Sanskrit sukharah means maker of (the sound) 'su.'  Related to swine. As a term of abuse for a
woman, attested from c.1500. Sow-bug hog louse is from 1750.


sower (n.)

Old English sawere, agent noun from sow (v.).


Soweto (n.)

black African community outside Johannesburg, South Africa, formed from first letters of South
Western Townships. Related: Sowetan.


sown

past participle of sow (v.).


sox (n.)

altered plural of sock (n.1), 1905, originally in commercial jargon.


soy (n.)

1670s, saio soybean-based Asian fish sauce, from Dutch soya, from Japanese soyu, variant of shoyu
soy, from Chinese shi-yu, from shi fermented soy beans + yu oil. Etymology reflects Dutch presence
in Japan before English and American merchants began to trade there.


soya (n.)

soy, 1670s; see soy. Soyaburger is attested from 1953.


soybean (n.)

1795, from soy + bean (n.).


sozzled (adj.)

drunk, 1886, from sozzle to mix or mingle sloppily (1836).


spa (n.)

medicinal or mineral spring, 1620s, from the name of the health resort in eastern Belgium, known
since 14c., that features mineral springs believed to have curative properties. The place name is
from Walloon espa spring, fountain. As commercial establishment offering health and beauty
treatments, 1960.


space (n.)

c.1300, extent or area; room (to do something), a shortening of Old French espace period of time,
distance, interval (12c.), from Latin spatium room, area, distance, stretch of time, of unknown
origin (also source of Spanish espacio, Italian spazio).    From early 14c. as a place, also amount
or extent of time. From mid-14c. as distance, interval of space; from late 14c. as ground, land,
territory; extension in three dimensions; distance between two or more points. From early 15c. as
size, bulk, also an assigned position. Typographical sense is attested from 1670s (typewriter space-
bar is from 1876, earlier space-key, 1860).    Astronomical sense of stellar depths apparently is
first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, common from 1890s. Space age is attested from 1946. Many
compounds first appeared in science fiction and speculative writing, such as spaceship (1894, A
Journey in Other Worlds, John Jacob Astor); spacecraft (1928, Popular Science); space travel (1931);
space station (1936, Rockets Through Space); spaceman (1942, Thrilling Wonder Stories). Space race
attested from 1959. Space shuttle attested by 1970.    Space isn't remote at all. It's only an
hour's drive away if your car could go straight upwards. [Sir Fred Hoyle, London Observer, 1979]


space (v.)

1540s, to make of a certain extent; 1680s in typography; 1703 as to arrange at set intervals, from
space (n.). Meaning to be in a state of drug-induced euphoria is recorded from 1968. Space cadet
eccentric person disconnected with reality (often implying an intimacy with hallucinogenic drugs) is
a 1960s phrase, probably traceable to 1950s U.S. sci-fi television program Tom Corbett, Space Cadet,
which was watched by many children who dreamed of growing up to be one and succeeded. Related:
Spaced; spacing.


space (adj.)

c.1600, from space (n.). Meaning having to do with outer space is from 1894.


spacecraft (n.)

1928, from space (n.) + craft (n.).


spaceman (n.)

1942 in the astronaut sense, from space (n.) + man (n.). Earlier it meant journalist paid by the
length of his copy (1892). Spacewoman recorded from 1960.


spacer (n.)

typewriter mechanism and key, 1882, agent noun from space (v.).


spaceship (n.)

1894, from space (n.) + ship (n.). Spaceship earth is from 1966.


spacesuit (n.)

also space-suit, 1920, from space (n.) + suit (n.).


spacewalk (n.)

also space-walk, 1965, from space (n.) + walk (n.).


spacing (n.)

allowing and gauging of intervals between words in setting type, 1680s, verbal noun from space (v.).


spacious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French spacios, espacios roomy, spacious, extensive (12c., Modern French
spacieux), or directly from Latin spatiosus roomy, ample (Medieval Latin spaciosus), from spatium
room, space (see space (n.)). Related: Spaciously; spaciousness.


Spackle (n.)

proprietary name for a surfacing compound, 1927, probably based on German spachtel putty knife,
mastic, filler. The verb is attested from 1940. Related: Spackled; spackling.


spacy (adj.)

also spacey, 1852, large, roomy, spacious, from space (n.) + -y (2). Meaning felt as characteristic
of outer space (especially with reference to electronic music) is attested from 1971, probably
influenced by spaced-out (1965, American English slang), a reference to the behavior of people using
hallucinogenic drugs (see space (v.)).


Spad (n.)

French biplane fighter of World War I, 1917, from French spad, from acronym of Societ&eacute; pour
Aviation et ses D&eacute;riv&eacute;s.


spade (n.1)

tool for digging, Old English spadu spade, from Proto-Germanic *spadan (cognates: Old Frisian spada
a spade, Middle Dutch spade a sword, Old Saxon spado, Middle Low German spade, German Spaten), from
PIE *spe-dh-, from root *spe- (2) long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe wooden blade,
paddle, Old English spon chip of wood, splinter, Old Norse spann shingle, chip; see spoon (n.)).
A spade differs from a two-handed shovel chiefly in the form and thickness of the blade [Century
Dictionary]. To call a spade a spade use blunt language, call things by right names (1540s)
translates a Greek proverb (known to Lucian), ten skaphen skaphen legein to call a bowl a bowl, but
Erasmus mistook Greek skaphe trough, bowl for a derivative of the stem of skaptein to dig, and the
mistake has stuck [see OED].


spade (n.2)

black figure on playing cards, 1590s, probably from Italian spade, plural of spada the ace of
spades, literally sword, spade, from Latin spatha broad, flat weapon or tool, from Greek spathe
broad blade (see spade (n.1)). Phrase in spades in abundance first recorded 1929 (Damon Runyon),
probably from bridge, where spades are the highest-ranking suit.    The invitations to the musicale
came sliding in by pairs and threes and spade flushes. [O.Henry, Cabbages &amp; Kings, 1904]
Derogatory meaning black person is 1928, from the color of the playing card symbol.


spado (n.)

castrated person, early 15c., from Latin spado, from Greek spadix, related to spadon eunuch, span to
draw, tear away (see spay).


spae (v.)

c.1300, foretell, devine, predict from signs, Scottish, from Old Norse spa, cognate with Danish spaa
prophesy; related to Old Saxon spahi, Old High German spahi wise, skillful, Old High German spehon
to spy (see spy (v.)). Related: Spae-book book containing directions for telling fortunes; spaeman;
spaewife.


spaghetti (n.)

1849 (as sparghetti, in Eliza Acton's Modern Cookery), from Italian spaghetti, plural of spaghetto
string, twine, diminutive of spago cord, of uncertain origin. Spaghetti Western (one filmed in
Italy) first attested 1969. Spaghetti strap is from 1972.


Spain

c.1200, from Anglo-French Espayne, from Late Latin Spania, from Latin Hispania (see Spaniard). The
usual Old English form was Ispania.


spake

archaic or poetic past tense of speak.


spald (v.)

c.1400, to splinter, chip (transitive; spalding-knife is from mid-14c.), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Middle Dutch spalden, cognate with Middle Low German spalden, Old High German spaltan,
German spalten to split (see spill (v.)). The later form of the verb is spall (1758), from or by
influence of the noun. Related: Spalled; spalling.


spall (n.)

chip of stone, mid-15c., from Middle English verb spald to split open.


spam (n.)

proprietary name registered by Geo. A. Hormel &amp; Co. in U.S., 1937; probably a conflation of
spiced ham. Soon extended to other kinds of canned meat.    In the sense of Internet junk mail it
was coined by Usenet users after March 31, 1993, when Usenet administrator Richard Depew
inadvertently posted the same message 200 times to a discussion group. The term had been used in
online text games, and ultimately it is from a 1970 sketch on the British TV show Monty Python's
Flying Circus wherein a reading of a restaurant's menu devolves into endless repetitions of spam.


span (n.1)

distance between two objects, from Old English span distance between the thumb and little finger of
an extended hand (as a measure of length, roughly nine inches), probably related to Middle Dutch
spannen to join, fasten (see span (v.)).    The Germanic word was borrowed into Medieval Latin as
spannus, hence Italian spanna, Old French espan hand's width, span as a unit of measure, French
empan. As a measure of volume (early 14c.), what can be held in two cupped hands. Meaning length of
time first attested 1590s; that of space between abutments of an arch, etc. is from 1725. Meaning
maximum lateral dimension of an aircraft is first recorded 1909.


span (v.)

Old English spannan to join, link, clasp, fasten, bind, connect; stretch, span, from Proto-Germanic
*spannan (cognates: Old Norse spenna, Old Frisian spanna, Middle Dutch spannen, Dutch spannan
stretch, bend, hoist, hitch, Old High German spannan, German spannen to join, fasten, extend,
connect), from PIE root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Latin pendere to hang, to cause
to hang, pondus weight (perhaps the notion is the weight of a thing measured by how much it
stretches a cord), pensare to weigh, consider; Greek ponos toil, ponein to toil; Lithuanian spendziu
lay a snare; Old Church Slavonic peti stretch, strain, pato fetter, pina I span; Old English spinnan
to spin; for other cognates, see spin (v.)).    The meaning to encircle with the hand(s) is from
1781; in the sense of to form an arch over (something) it is first recorded 1630s. Related: Spanned;
spanning.


span (n.2)

two animals driven together, 1769, American English, from Dutch span, from spannen to stretch or
yoke, from Middle Dutch spannan, cognate with Old English spannan to join (see span (v.)). Also used
in South African English.


spanandry (n.)

extreme scarcity of males in a population, 1924, from French spananderie (1913), from Greek spanis
scarcity + aner man.


Spandex (n.)

synthetic fiber, 1959, American English, proprietary name, an arbitrary formation from expand +
commercial suffix -ex.


spandrel (n.)

triangular space between the outer curve of an arch and the molding enclosing it, late 15c.,
apparently a diminutive of Anglo-French spaundre (late 14c.), which is of uncertain origin, perhaps
a shortening of Old French espandre to expand, extend, spread, from Latin expandre (see expand).


spangle (n.)

early 15c., small piece of glittering metal, diminutive of spang glittering ornament, spangle,
probably from Middle Dutch spange brooch, clasp, cognate with Old English spang buckle, clasp, from
Proto-Germanic *spango, from an extended form of the root of span (v.).


spangle (v.)

1540s, cover with spangles, from spangle (n.). Intransitive meaning glitter, glisten is from 1630s.
Related: Spangled; spangling.


Spanglish (n.)

Spanish deformed by English words and idioms, by 1967, probably a nativization of Spanish Espanglish
(1954); ultimately from Spanish (n.) + English.


spangly (adj.)

1753, from spangle (n.) + -y (2).


Spaniard (n.)

c.1400, from Old French Espaignart, from Espaigne Spain, from Latin Hispania, from Greek Hispania
Spain, Hispanos Spanish, a Spaniard, probably from Celt-Iberian, in which language (H)i- represents
a definite article [Klein, who compares Hellenistic Greek Spania]. The earlier English noun was
Spaynol (mid-14c.), from Old French Espaignol. The Latin adjectives are Hispanus, Hispanicus,
Hispaniensis.


spaniel (n.)

late 13c., as a surname meaning Spaniard; as a name for a breed of dog supposedly of Spanish origin,
late 14c., from Old French (chien) espagneul, literally Spanish (dog), from Vulgar Latin
*Hispaniolus of Spain, diminutive of Latin Hispanus Spanish, Hispanic (see Spaniard). Used
originally to start game; the breed was much-developed in England in 17c. Whether it is actually
originally Spanish is uncertain.


Spanish (adj.)

c.1200, Spainisc, from Spaine Spain, from Old French Espaigne (see Spaniard) + -ish. Replaced Old
English Speonisc. Altered 16c. by influence of Latin. As a noun, the Spanish language, from late
15c.    For Spanish Main see main. Spanish moss is attested from 1823. Spanish fly, the fabled
aphrodisiac (ground-up cantharis blister-beetles), is attested from c.1600. Spanish-American War was
so called in British press speculations early 1898, even before it began in April. For Spanish
Inquisition (by c.1600), see Inquisition.


spank (v.)

1727, to strike forcefully with the open hand, especially on the buttocks, possibly imitative of the
sound of spanking. Related: Spanked; spanking. The noun is from 1785.


spanking (adj.)

1660s, very big or fine, later (especially of horses) moving at a lively pace (1738), of uncertain
origin; perhaps from a Scandinavian source (OED compares Danish spanke to strut). Probably also
related to spanker something striking (for size, etc.), 1751; as a kind of sail from 1794.


spanking (n.)

act of striking with the open hand, especially as a punishment administered to children, 1854,
verbal noun from spank (v.).


spanner (n.)

1630s, a tool for winding the spring of a wheel-lock firearm, from German Spanner, from spannen (see
span (v.)). Meaning wrench is from 1790. Figurative phrase spanner in the works attested from 1921
(Wodehouse).


spar (n.1)

early 14c., rafter; late 14c., stout pole, from or cognate with Middle Low German or Middle Dutch
sparre, from Proto-Germanic *sparron (cognates: Old English *spere spear, lance, Old Norse sperra
rafter, beam, German Sparren spar, rafter), from PIE root *sper- (1) spear, pole (see spear (n.1)).
Nautical use, in reference to one used as a mast, yard, boom, etc., dates from 1630s. Also borrowed
in Old French as esparre, which might be the direct source of the English word.


spar (v)

late 14c., go quickly, rush, dart, spring; c.1400, to strike or thrust, perhaps from Middle French
esparer to kick (Modern French &#233;parer), from Italian sparare to fling, from Latin ex- (see ex-)
+ parare make ready, prepare, hence ward off, parry (see pare). Etymologists consider a connection
with spur unlikely. Used in 17c. in reference to preliminary actions in a cock fight; figurative
sense of to dispute, bandy with words is from 1690s. Extension to humans, in a literal sense, with
meaning to engage in or practice boxing is attested from 1755. Related: Sparred; sparring.


spar (n.2)

crystalline mineral that breaks easily into fragments with smooth surfaces, 1580s, from Low German
Spar, from Middle Low German *spar, *sper, cognate with Old English sp&aelig;r- in sp&aelig;rstan
gypsum.


sparagmos (n.)

ritual death of a hero in tragedy or myth, 1913, from Greek sparagmos, literally tearing, rending.


spare (adj.)

kept in reserve, not used, provided or held for extra need, late 14c., from or from the same root as
spare (v.). Old English had sp&#230;r sparing, frugal. Also compare Old Norse sparr (to be) spared.
In reference to time, from mid-15c.; sense of lacking in substance; lean, gaunt; flimsy, thin; poor,
is recorded from 1540s. Spare part is attested from 1888. Spare tire is from 1894 of bicycles; 1903
of automobiles; 1961 of waistlines.


spare (v.)

Old English sparian to refrain from harming, be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly, from
the source of Old English sp&aelig;r sparing, frugal, from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (cognates: Old
Saxon sparon, Old Frisian sparia, Old Norse spara, Dutch sparen, Old High German sparon, German
sparen to spare). Meaning to dispense from one's own stock, give or yield up, is recorded from early
13c. Related: Spared; sparing.


spare (n.)

extra thing or part, 1640s, from spare (adj.). The Middle English noun sense was a sparing, mercy,
leniency (early 14c.). Bowling game sense of an advantage gained by a knocking down of all pins in
two bowls is attested from 1843, American English.


spare-ribs (n.)

1590s, formerly also spear-ribs, from spare (adj.), here indicating probably absence of fat; or
perhaps from Middle Low German ribbesper spare ribs, from sper spit, and meaning originally a spit
thrust through pieces of rib-meat [Klein]; if so, it is related to spar (n.1).


sparingly (adv.)

mid-15c., from sparing, attested from late 14c. as a present participle adjective from spare (v.), +
-ly (2).


spark (n.)

Old English spearca glowing or fiery particle thrown off, from Proto-Germanic *spark- (cognates:
Middle Low German sparke, Middle Dutch spranke, not found in other Germanic languages). Electrical
sense dates from 1748. Old French esparque is from Germanic.    Slang sense of a gallant, a showy
beau, a roisterer (c.1600) is perhaps a figurative use, but also perhaps from cognate Old Norse
sparkr lively. Spark plug first recorded 1902 (sparking plug is from 1899); figurative sense of one
who initiates or is a driving force in some activity is from 1941.


spark (v.)

c.1200, to emit sparks, from spark (n.). Meaning to affect by an electrical spark is from 1889.
Figurative meaning stimulate, to trigger first attested 1912. Meaning to play the gallant, to court
is from the 17c. secondary sense of the noun. Related: Sparked; sparking.


sparkle (n.)

early 14c., from sparkle (v.), or a diminutive of spark (n.).


sparkle (v.)

c.1200, to shine as if giving off sparks, frequentative verb form of Middle English sparke (see
spark (v.)). Meaning emit sparks is from late 15c. Related: Sparkled; sparkling.


sparkler (n.)

1713, what sparkles (often of gems, wits, or women), agent noun from sparkle (v.). In the modern
hand-held fireworks sense, from 1905.    The New York Board of Fire Underwriters has issued a
warning against the storage, sale and use of a new form of fireworks now on the market. These are
known as electric sparklers, are made in Germany, and come to this country in metal lined cases each
containing 120 dozen of pasteboard boxes with 12 sparklers in each box. The Board's warning says
that while the sparklers appear harmless, the solid incandescent mass is intensely hot and readily
communicates fire to any inflammable substance it may touch. [The Standard (weekly insurance
newspaper), Boston, May 4, 1907]


sparkling (adj.)

early 13c., present participle adjective from sparkle (v.). Of eyes and wines from early 15c.; of
conversation from 1640s. Related: Sparklingly.


sparkly (adv.)

1922, from sparkle (n.) + -y (2). Related: Sparkliness.


sparrow (n.)

small brownish-gray bird (Passer domesticus), Old English spearwa, from Proto-Germanic *sparwan
(cognates: Old Norse sp&ouml;rr, Old High German sparo, German Sperling, Gothic sparwa), from PIE
*spor-wo-, from root *sper- (3), forming names of small birds (cognates: Cornish frau crow; Old
Prussian spurglis sparrow; Greek spergoulos small field bird, psar starling). In use, with
qualifying words, of many small, sparrow-like birds. Sparrowfarts (1886) was Cheshire slang for very
early morning.


sparrowhawk (n.)

hawk that preys on small birds, c.1400, replacing forms from Old English spearhafoc; see sparrow +
hawk (n.).


sparse (adj.)

1727, from Latin sparsus scattered, past participle of spargere to scatter, spread, from PIE root
*(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (cognates: Sanskrit parjanya- rain, rain god, Avestan fra-sparega
branch, twig, literally that which is jerked off a tree, Old Norse freknur freckles, Swedish
dialectal sprygg brisk, active, Lithuanian sprogti shoot, bud, Old Irish arg a drop). The word is
found earlier in English as a verb, to scatter abroad (16c.). Related: Sparsely; sparseness.


Sparta

capital of Laconia in ancient Greece, famed for severity of its social order, the frugality of its
people, the valor of its arms, and the brevity of its speech. Also for dirty boys, men vain of their
long hair, boxing girls, iron money, and insufferable black broth. The name is said to be from Greek
sparte cord made from spartos, a type of broom, from PIE *spr-to-, from root *sper- (2) to turn,
twist (see spiral (adj.)). Perhaps the reference is to the cords laid as foundation markers for the
city. Or the whole thing could be folk etymology.


Spartacist (n.)

German Bolshevik of November 1918 uprising, 1919, from German Spartakist, from Spartacus (d.71
B.C.E.), Thracian leader of Roman Servile War (73-71 B.C.E.), ultimately from Sparta; the name was
adopted 1916 as a pseudonym by Karl Liebknecht in his political tracts; thence Spartacist for the
socialist revolutionary group he founded with Rosa Luxemburg and Franz Mehring.


Spartan (n.)

early 15c., citizen of the ancient Greek city of Sparta (q.v.), from Latin Spartanus. As an
adjective from 1580s; meaning characterized by frugality or courage is from 1640s.


spasm (n.)

late 14c., sudden violent muscular contraction, from Old French spasme (13c.) and directly from
Latin spasmus a spasm, from Greek spasmos a spasm, convulsion, from span draw up, tear away,
contract violently, pull, pluck, from PIE *spe- stretch. Figurative sense of a sudden convulsion (of
emotion, politics, etc.) is attested from 1817.


spasm (v.)

1900, from spasm (n.). Related: Spasmed; spasming.


spasmatic (adj.)

c.1600, from French spasmatique, from Medieval Latin spasmaticus, from Latin spasm (see spasm).
Related: Spasmatical.


spasmodic (adj.)

1680s, from French spasmodique, from Medieval Latin spasmodicus, from Greek spasmodes of the nature
of a spasm, from spasmos (see spasm) + -odes like (see -oid). Related: Spasmodically.


spastic (adj.)

1753, from Latin spasticus, from Greek spastikos afflicted with spasms, literally drawing, pulling,
stretching, from span draw up (see spasm (n.)). The noun meaning a person affected with spastic
paralysis is attested from 1896, used insultingly by 1960s. Related: Spastically; spasticity.


spat (n.1)

petty quarrel, 1804, American English, of unknown origin; perhaps somehow imitative (compare spat
smack, slap, attested from 1823).


spat (n.2)

short gaiter covering the ankle (usually only in plural, spats), 1779, shortening of spatterdash
long gaiter to keep trousers or stockings from being spattered with mud (1680s), from spatter and
dash (v.).


spat (n.3)

spawn of a shellfish, especially spawn of an oyster, also a young oyster, 1660s, of unknown origin,
perhaps from the past tense of spit (v.1).


spate (n.)

early 15c., originally Scottish and northern English, a sudden flood, especially one caused by heavy
rains or a snowmelt, of unknown origin. Perhaps from Old French espoit flood, from Dutch spuiten to
flow, spout; related to spout (v.). Figurative sense of unusual quantity is attested from 1610s.


spathic (adj.)

1788, from French spathique, from spath, from German Spath (see feldspar).


spatial (adj.)

1840 (spacial is from 1838), occupying space, from Latin spatium + adjectival suffix -al (1); formed
in English as an adjective to space (n.), to go with temporal. Meaning of or relating to space is
from 1857. Related: Spatially.


spatter (v.)

1570s (implied in spattering), possibly a frequentative verb from the stem of Dutch or Low German
spatten to spout, burst, of imitative origin. Related: Spattered. As a noun from 1797.


spatterdash (n.)

see spat (n.2).


spatula (n.)

1520s (from early 15c. as a type of medical instrument), from Latin spatula broad piece, spatula,
diminutive of spatha broad, flat tool or weapon, from Greek spathe broad flat blade (used by
weavers) (see spade (n.1)). Erroneous form spattular is attested from c.1600.


spatulate (adj.)

1760, from Modern Latin spatulatus, from spatula (see spatula).


spavin (n.)

disease of the hock joint of a horse, early 15c., from Middle French espavain (Modern French
&#233;pavin, cognate with Italian spavenio, Spanish esparavan); in most sources said to be perhaps
from Frankish *sparwan sparrow (see sparrow), on the supposition that a horse affected with spavin
moved with a walk that reminded people of the bird's awkward gait. This seems a stretcher, and
Century Dictionary admits it rests on mere resemblance of form.


spawn (v.)

c.1400, intransitive, from Anglo-French espaundre, Old French espandre to spread out, pour out,
scatter, strew, spawn (of fish) (Modern French &#233;pandre), from Latin expandere (see expand). The
notion is of a spreading out of fish eggs released in water. The transitive meaning to engender,
give rise to is attested from 1590s. Related: Spawned; spawning.


spawn (n.)

late 15c., fish eggs, from spawn (v.); figurative sense of brood, offspring, and, insultingly, of
persons, is from 1580s.


spay (v.)

early 15c., stab with a sword, kill, also remove the ovaries of (a hunting dog), from Anglo-French
espeier cut with a sword, from Middle French espeer, from Old French espee sword (French
&eacute;p&eacute;e), from Latin spatha broad, flat weapon or tool, from Greek spathe broad blade
(see spade (n.1)). Compare Greek spadon eunuch. Related: Spayed; spaying.


spaz (n.)

also spazz, by 1965, U.S. teen slang put-down, apparently a derogatory shortening of spastic (n.).
Also used as a verb. Related: Spazzed; spazzing (often with out (adv.)).


speak (v.)

Old English specan, variant of sprecan to speak, utter words; make a speech; hold discourse (with
others) (class V strong verb; past tense spr&aelig;c, past participle sprecen), from Proto-Germanic
*sprek-, *spek- (cognates: Old Saxon sprecan, Old Frisian spreka, Middle Dutch spreken, Old High
German sprehhan, German sprechen to speak, Old Norse spraki rumor, report), from PIE root *spreg-
(1) to speak, perhaps identical with PIE root *spreg- (2) to strew, on notion of speech as a
scattering of words.    The -r- began to drop out in Late West Saxon and was gone by mid-12c.,
perhaps from influence of Danish spage crackle, also used in a slang sense of speak (compare crack
(v.) in slang senses having to do with speech, such as wisecrack, cracker, all it's cracked up to
be). Elsewhere, rare variant forms without -r- are found in Middle Dutch (speken), Old High German
(spehhan), dialectal German (sp&#228;chten speak).    Not the primary word for to speak in Old
English (the Beowulf author prefers ma&thorn;elian, from m&aelig;&thorn;el assembly, council, from
root of metan to meet; compare Greek agoreuo to speak, explain, originally speak in the assembly,
from agora assembly).


speak (n.)

c.1300, talk, speech, from speak (v.). Survived in Scottish English and dialect, but modern use in
compounds probably is entirely traceable to Orwell (see Newspeak).


speakable (adj.)

late 15c., from speak (v.) + -able. Also see unspeakable. Old English had sprecendlic that should be
spoken.


speakeasy (n.)

unlicensed saloon, 1889 (in the New York Voice), from verbal phrase, from speak (v.) + easy (adv.);
so called from the practice of speaking quietly about such a place in public, or when inside it, so
as not to alert the police and neighbors. The word gained wide currency in U.S. during Prohibition
(1920-1932). In early 19c. Irish and British dialect, a speak softly shop meant smuggler's den.


speaker (n.)

c.1300, one who speaks, agent noun from speak (v.). Similar formation in Old Frisian spreker, Old
High German sprahhari, German Sprecher. First applied to person who presides over an assembly
c.1400, from similar use in Anglo-French (late 14c.) in reference to the English Parliament; later
extended to the U.S. House of Representatives, etc. The electric amplifier so called from 1926,
short for loud-speaker.


spear (n.1)

weapon with a penetrating head and a long wooden shaft, meant to be thrust or thrown, Old English
spere spear, javelin, lance, from Proto-Germanic *speri (cognates: Old Norse spj&ouml;r, Old Saxon,
Old Frisian sper, Dutch speer, Old High German sper, German Speer spear), from PIE root *sper- (1)
spear, pole (cognates: Old Norse sparri spar, rafter, and perhaps also Latin sparus hunting spear).


spear (n.2)

sprout of a plant, 1640s, earlier church spire (c.1500); variant of spire (n.).


spear (v.)

1755, from spear (n.1). Related: Speared; spearing.


spear-head (n.)

c.1400, from spear (n.1) + head (n.). Figurative sense of leading element (of an attack, movement,
etc.) is attested from 1893; the verb in this sense is recorded from 1938. Related: Spearheaded;
spearheading.


spearmint (n.)

1530s, from spear (n.2) + mint (n.1). Said to be a corruption of spire-mint, with reference to the
pyramidal inflorescence [Century Dictionary].


spec (n.)

short for specification, 1956. Related: Specs.


special (adj.)

c.1200, better than ordinary, from Old French special, especial special, particular, unusual (12c.,
Modern French sp&#233;cial) and directly from Latin specialis individual, particular (source also of
Spanish especial, Italian speziale), from species appearance, kind, sort (see species).    Meaning
marked off from others by some distinguishing quality is recorded from c.1300; that of limited as to
function, operation, or purpose is from 14c. Special effects first attested 1951. Special interests
in U.S. political sense is from 1910. Special pleading first recorded 1680s, a term that had a sound
legal meaning once but now is used generally and imprecisely. Special education in reference to
those whose learning is impeded by some mental or physical handicap is from 1972.


special (n.)

sweetheart, lover; special person or thing, c.1300, from special (adj.) or from noun use of the
adjective in Old French. Meaning special train is attested from 1866.


specialisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of specialization. For spelling, see -ize.


specialist (n.)

1852 (originally in the medical sense and much scorned by the GPs); see special (adj.) + -ist.
Perhaps immediately from French sp&#233;cialiste (1842). In general use in English by 1862. Related:
Specialism.


speciality (n.)

early 15c., a special quality or thing; mid-15c. as quality of being special, from Old French
specialte, especialte nature, special quality, particularity; special point, distinction, and
directly from Latin specialitatem (nominative specialitas) peculiarity, particularity from specialis
individual, particular (see special (adj.)). French form sp&eacute;cialit&eacute; (especially in
reference to restaurant dishes) is recorded in English from 1839.


specialization (n.)

1837, act of becoming specialized, noun of action from specialize. Biological sense from 1862. In
science and scientific education, a direction of time and energies in one particular channel to the
exclusion of others, by 1880.


specialize (v.)

1610s, to indicate specially, from special (adj.) + -ize, perhaps on model of French
sp&#233;cialiser. Sense of engage in a special study or line of business is first attested 1881;
biological sense is from 1851. Related: Specialized; specializing.


specially (adv.)

late 13c., from special (adj.) + -ly (2). A doublet of especially.


specialty (n.)

c.1300, particular affection; special attachment or favor, partiality, from Old French especialte,
more vernacular form of specialite (see speciality). Compare personalty/personality; realty/reality.
From early 15c. as unusual, or extraordinary thing; specialized branch of learning; peculiar
quality, distinctive characteristic.


speciation (n.)

1906; see species + -ation. The verb speciate is a back-formation attested by 1961.


specie (n.)

coin, money in the form of coins, metallic money as a medium of exchange (as opposed to paper money
or bullion), 1670s, from phrase in specie in the real or actual form (1550s), from Latin in specie
in kind (in Medieval Latin, in coin), from ablative of species kind, form, sort (see species).


species (n.)

late 14c. as a classification in logic, from Latin species a particular sort, kind, or type (opposed
to genus), originally a sight, look, view, appearance, hence also a spectacle; mental appearance,
idea, notion; a look; a pretext; a resemblance; a show or display, typically in passive senses; in
Late Latin, a special case; related to specere to look at, to see, behold, from PIE *spek- (see
scope (n.1)). From 1550s as appearance, outward form; 1560s as distinct class (of something) based
on common characteristics. Biological sense is from c.1600. Endangered species first attested 1964.


speciesism (n.)

discrimination against certain animals based on assumption of human superiority, first attested 1975
in Richard D. Ryder's Victims of Science, from species + -ism.


specific (adj.)

1630s, having a special quality, from French sp&eacute;cifique and directly from Late Latin
specificus constituting a kind or sort (in Medieval Latin specific, particular), from Latin species
kind, sort (see species). Earlier form was specifical (early 15c.). Meaning definite, precise first
recorded 1740. Related: Specifically; specificness.


specific (n.)

a specific quality or detail, 1690s, from specific (adj.).


specification (n.)

1610s, act of investing with some quality, from Medieval Latin specificationem (nominative
specificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin specificare mention
particularly, from Latin specificus, (see specific). With Latin -ficus, unstressed comb. form of
facere to make, do. Meaning technical particular is attested from 1833; short form spec first
attested 1956.


specificity (n.)

1829, from French sp&eacute;cificit&eacute; or else a native formation from specific + -ity.


specify (v.)

early 14c., to speak; mid-14c. to name explicitly, from Old French specifier, especefier (13c.) and
directly from Late Latin specificare mention particularly, from specificus (see specific). Related:
Specified; specifying.


specimen (n.)

1610s, pattern, model, from Latin specimen indication, mark, example, sign, evidence; that by which
a thing is known, means of knowing, from specere to look at (see scope (n.1)). Meaning single thing
regarded as typical of its kind first recorded 1650s.


specious (adj.)

late 14c., pleasing to the sight, fair, from Latin speciosus good-looking, beautiful, fair, also
showy, pretended, plausible, specious, from species appearance, form, figure, beauty (see species).
Meaning seemingly desirable, reasonable or probable, but not really so; superficially fair, just, or
correct in English is first recorded 1610s. Related: Speciously; speciosity; speciousness.


speck (n.)

Old English specca small spot, stain, of unknown origin; probably related to Dutch speckel speck,
speckle, Middle Dutch spekelen to sprinkle (compare speckle (v.)). Meaning tiny bit developed
c.1400. As a verb, 1570s, from the noun. Related: Specked.


speckle (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in speckled), probably related to Old English specca small spot, speck (see speck)
or from a related Middle Dutch or Middle High German word. Related: Speckled; speckling. The noun is
first attested mid-15c.


specs (n.)

short for spectacles, 1807.


spectacle (n.)

mid-14c., specially prepared or arranged display, from Old French spectacle sight, spectacle, Roman
games (13c.), from Latin spectaculum a public show, spectacle, place from which shows are seen, from
spectare to view, watch, behold, frequentative form of specere to look at, from PIE *spek- to
observe (see scope (n.1)).


spectacles (n.)

glass lenses to help a person's sight, early 15c., from plural of spectacle. Earlier in singular
form (late 14c.).


spectacular (adj.)

1680s, from Latin spectaculum a sight, show (see spectacle) + -ar. As a noun, first attested 1890.
Related: Spectacularly.


spectate (v.)

to attend (a sporting event, etc.) to watch, not participate, 1929, back-formation from spectator.
Related: Spectated; spectating. Related: Spectation.


spectator (n.)

1580s, from Latin spectator viewer, watcher, from past participle stem of spectare to view, watch
(see spectacle). Spectator sport is attested from 1943. Related: Spectatorial. Fem. form spectatress
(1630s) is less classically correct than spectatrix (1610s).


specter (n.)

c.1600, frightening ghost, from French spectre an image, figure, ghost (16c.), from Latin spectrum
appearance, vision, apparition (see spectrum). Figurative sense object of dread is from 1774.


spectral (adj.)

1718, capable of seeing spectres; 1815, ghostly; from spectre + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to a
spectrum is 1832, from stem of spectrum + -al (1). Related: Spectrally.


spectre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of specter (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


spectro-

word-forming element meaning of or by a spectroscope, also of radiant energy, from comb. form of
spectrum.


spectrogram (n.)

photograph of a spectrum, 1890, from spectro- + -gram.


spectrograph (n.)

1876, from spectro- + -graph instrument for recording; something written. Related: Spectrographic;
spectrography.


spectrometer (n.)

1863, from German Spectrometer (Moritz Meyerstein, 1863); see spectro- + -meter.


spectroscope (n.)

1861, from spectro- + -scope. A Greek-Latin hybrid, both elements from the same PIE root. Related:
Spectroscopic; spectroscopy.


spectrum (n.)

1610s, apparition, specter, from Latin spectrum (plural spectra) an appearance, image, apparition,
specter, from specere to look at, view (see scope (n.1)). Meaning visible band showing the
successive colors, formed from a beam of light passed through a prism first recorded 1670s.
Figurative sense of entire range (of something) is from 1936.


specular (adj.)

1570s, reflective (like a mirror), from Latin specularis, from speculum a mirror (see speculum).
Meaning assisting in vision; affording a view is from 1650s, from Latin speculari to spy (see
speculation).


speculate (v.)

1590s, view mentally, contemplate (transitive), back-formation from speculation. Also formerly view
as from a watchtower (1610s). Intransitive sense of pursue truth by conjecture or thinking is from
1670s. Meaning to invest money upon risk for the sake of profit is from 1785. Related: Speculated;
speculating.


speculation (n.)

late 14c., intelligent contemplation, consideration; act of looking, from Old French speculacion
close observation, rapt attention, and directly from Late Latin speculationem (nominative
speculatio) contemplation, observation, noun of action from Latin speculatus, past participle of
speculari observe, from specere to look at, view (see scope (n.1)).    Meaning pursuit of the truth
by means of thinking is from mid-15c. Disparaging sense of mere conjecture is recorded from 1570s.
Meaning buying and selling in search of profit from rise and fall of market value is recorded from
1774; short form spec is attested from 1794.


speculative (adj.)

late 14c., contemplative, also purely scientific, in theory only (opposed to practical), from Old
French speculatif worth great attention; theoretical, or directly from Late Latin speculativus, from
past participle stem of speculari (see speculation). Meaning given to (financial) speculation is
from 1763. Related: Speculatively.


speculator (n.)

1550s, one who engages in mental speculation, from Latin speculator a looker-out, spy, scout,
explorer; investigator, examiner, agent noun from speculari (see speculation). The financial sense
is from 1778. Formerly also observer, onlooker, especially an occult seer (1650s). Fem. form
speculatrix attested from 1610s. Related: Speculatory.


speculum (n.)

1590s, in surgery and medicine, instrument for rendering a part accessible to observation, from
Latin speculum reflector, looking-glass, mirror (also a copy, an imitation), from specere to look
at, view (see scope (n.1)). As a type of telescope attachment from 1704.


sped

past tense and past participle of speed (v.); Old English spedde.


speech (n.)

Old English sp&aelig;c act of speaking; power of speaking; manner of speaking; statement, discourse,
narrative, formal utterance; language, variant of spr&aelig;c, from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, *spek-
(cognates: Danish sprog, Old Saxon spraca, Old Frisian spreke, Dutch spraak, Old High German
sprahha, German Sprache speech; see speak (v.))    The spr- forms were extinct in English by 1200.
Meaning address delivered to an audience first recorded 1580s.    And I honor the man who is willing
to sink  Half his present repute for the freedom to think,  And, when he has thought, be his cause
strong or weak,  Will risk t' other half for the freedom to speak,  Caring naught for what vengeance
the mob has in store,  Let that mob be the upper ten thousand or lower.   [James Russell Lowell, A
Fable for Critics, 1848]


speechify (v.)

talk in a pompous, pontifical way, 1723, from speech + -ify. Related: Speechifying; speechification.


speechless (adj.)

Old English sp&aelig;cleas permanently mute; see speech + -less. Meaning mute by effect of
astonishment is from late 14c. Related: Speechlessly; speechlessness.


speed (n.)

Old English sped success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck; opportunity,
advancement, from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (cognates: Old Saxon spod success, Dutch spoed haste,
speed, Old High German spuot success, Old Saxon spodian to cause to succeed, Middle Dutch spoeden,
Old High German spuoten to haste), from PIE *spo-ti-, from root *spe- (1) to thrive, prosper
(cognates: Sanskrit sphayate increases, Latin sperare to hope, Old Church Slavonic spechu endeavor,
Lithuanian speju to have leisure).    Meaning rapidity of movement, quickness, swiftness emerged in
late Old English (at first usually adverbially, in dative plural, as in spedum feran). Meaning rate
of motion or progress (whether fast or slow) is from c.1200. Meaning gear of a machine is attested
from 1866. Meaning methamphetamine, or a related drug, first attested 1967, from its effect on
users.   Speed limit is from 1879 (originally of locomotives); speed-trap is from 1908. Speed bump
is 1975; figurative sense is 1990s. Full speed is recorded from late 14c. Speed reading first
attested 1965. Speedball mix of cocaine and morphine or heroin is recorded from 1909.


speed (v.)

Old English spedan (intransitive) to succeed, prosper, grow rich, advance, from the stem of speed
(n.). Compare Old Saxon spodian, Middle Dutch spoeden hasten, Old High German spuoton to succeed,
prosper, German sputen make haste, hurry. Meaning to go hastily from place to place, move rapidly is
attested from c.1200. Transitive meaning cause to advance toward success is from mid-13c.; that of
send forth with quickness, give a high speed to is first recorded 1560s; that of to increase the
work rate of (usually with up) is from 1856. Meaning drive an automobile too fast is from 1908.
Related: Speeded; sped; speeding.


speed-trap (n.)

1908, from speed (n.) + trap (n.).


speeder (n.)

one who drives fast, 1891, agent noun from speed (v.).


speeding (n.)

c.1300, success; c.1400 action of aiding; verbal noun from speed (v.). Meaning action of driving an
automobile too fast is from 1908. Speeding ticket is from 1940.


Speedo

trademark name of a brand of swimwear, 1928, originally made by McRae Hosiery Manufacturers,
Australia. From speed.


speedometer (n.)

1904, from speed + -meter. A Germanic-Greek hybrid and thus much execrated.    [T]he ancient Greeks
&amp; Romans knew what speed was, &amp; yet no-one supposes they called it speed, whence it follows
that speedo- &amp; speedometer are barbarisms. [Fowler]    The correct classical formation is
tachometer.


speedway (n.)

1892, American English, from speed (n.) + way (n.).


speedy (adj.)

Old English spedig prosperous, wealthy, from speed (n.) + -y (2). Meaning moving swiftly is from
late 14c. Related: Speedily; speediness. Speedy Gonzales, Warner Brothers studios talking cartoon
mouse, debuted in a 1953 short directed by Bob McKimson.


spell (v.1)

early 14c., read letter by letter, write or say the letters of; c.1400, form words by means of
letters, apparently a French word that merged with or displaced a native Old English one; both are
from the same Germanic root, but the French word had evolved a different sense. The native word is
Old English spellian to tell, speak, discourse, talk, from Proto-Germanic *spellam (cognates: Old
High German spellon to tell, Old Norse spjalla, Gothic spillon to talk, tell), from PIE *spel- (2)
to say aloud, recite.    But the current senses seem to come from Anglo-French espeller, Old French
espelir mean, signify, explain, interpret, also spell out letters, pronounce, recite, from Frankish
*spellon to tell or some other Germanic source, ultimately identical with the native word.
Related: Spelled; spelling. In early Middle English still to speak, preach, talk, tell, hence such
expressions as hear spell hear (something) told or talked about, spell the wind talk in vain (both
15c.). Meaning form words with proper letters is from 1580s. Spell out explain step-by-step is first
recorded 1940, American English. Shakespeare has spell (someone) backwards reverse the character of,
explain in a contrary sense, portray with determined negativity.


spell (n.1)

Old English spell story, saying, tale, history, narrative, fable; discourse, command, from Proto-
Germanic *spellam (see spell (v.1)). Compare Old Saxon spel, Old Norse spjall, Old High German spel,
Gothic spill report, discourse, tale, fable, myth; German Beispiel example. From c.1200 as an
utterance, something said, a statement, remark; meaning set of words with supposed magical or occult
powers, incantation, charm first recorded 1570s; hence any means or cause of enchantment.    The
term 'spell' is generally used for magical procedures which cause harm, or force people to do
something against their will -- unlike charms for healing, protection, etc. [Oxford Dictionary of
English Folklore]    Also in Old English, doctrine; a sermon; religious instruction or teaching; the
gospel; a book of the Bible; compare gospel.


spell (v.2)

work in place of (another), 1590s, earlier spele, from Old English spelian to take the place of, be
substitute for, represent, related to gespelia substitute, of uncertain origin. Perhaps related to
spilian to play (see spiel). Related: Spelled; spelling.


spell (n.2)

1620s, a turn of work in place of another, from spell (v.2); compare Old English gespelia a
substitute. Meaning shifted toward continuous course of work (1706), probably via notion of shift
work (as at sea) where one man or crew regularly spelled another. Hence continuous stretch of
something (weather, etc.), recorded by 1728. Hence also, via the notion in give a spell (1750)
relieve another by taking a turn of work came the sense interval of rest or relaxation (1845), which
took the word to a sense opposite what it had at the start.


spell-check (v.)

to use a computer's spell checker application on a document, by 1985. The applications themselves
date to the late 1970s. Related: Spell-checked; spell-checking.


spellbind (v.)

to bind by or as if by spell, 1808, probably a back-formation from spellbound. Related:
Spellbinding; spellbinder.


spellbound (adj.)

to be bound by or as if by a spell, 1742, from spell (n.1) + bound (adj.1) fastened, past participle
of bind (v.).


speller (n.)

c.1200, a preacher; mid-15c. apparently in the sense a person who reads letter by letter; 1864 of a
book to teach orthography. Agent noun from spell (v.1).


spelling (n.)

mid-15c., action of reading letter by letter, verbal noun from spell (v.1). Meaning manner of
forming words with letters is from 1660s; meaning a way a word has been spelled is from 1731.
Spelling bee is from 1878 (see bee; earlier spelling match, 1845; the act of winning such a
schoolroom contest is described 1854 as to spell (someone) down).


spelt (n.)

type of grain, Old English spelt spelt, corn, perhaps an early borrowing from Late Latin spelta
spelt (noted as a foreign word), which is perhaps from Germanic *spilt-, from PIE *speld-, extended
form of root *spel- (1) to split, to break off (probably in reference to the splitting of its husks
in threshing); see spill (v.).    The word had little currency in English, and its history is
discontinuous. Widespread in Romanic languages (Italian spelta, Spanish espelta, Old French spelte,
Modern French &eacute;peautre). The word also is widespread in Germanic (Old High German spelta,
German Spelt), and a Germanic language is perhaps the source of the Late Latin word.


spelunk (n.)

a cave, cavern, a vault, c.1300, from Old French spelonque (13c.) or directly from Latin spelunca a
cave, cavern, grotto, from Greek spelynx (accusative spelynga, genitive spelyngos) a cave, cavern,
from spelos a cave. An adjective, speluncar of a cave is recorded from 1855.


spelunker (n.)

a cave bug; one who explores caves as a hobby, 1942, agent noun formed from obsolete spelunk cave,
cavern. The verb spelunk explore caves and the verbal noun spelunking are attested from 1946 and
appear to be back-formations.


Spencer (n.)

surname attested from late 13c. (earlier le Despenser, c.1200), literally one who dispenses or has
charge of provisions in a household. Middle English spence meant larder, pantry, and is short for
Old French despense (French d&eacute;pense) expense, from despenser to distribute (see dispense).
Another form of the word is spender, which also has become a surname.    As a type of repeating
rifle used in the American Civil War, 1863, named for U.S. gunsmith Christopher Spencer, who, with
Luke Wheelock, manufactured them in Boston, Mass.


Spencerian (adj.)

1863, pertaining to the penmanship system devised by American penman Platt R. Spencer, the Father of
American Writing (1800-1864), who c.1840 began promoting an elliptical cursive style that became the
standard U.S. business hand from 1850s to early 20c. It had an assured but joyous elegance lacking
in the later Palmer letters. The word also can be a reference to English philosopher Herbert Spencer
(1820-1903).


spend (v.)

to pay out or away (money or wealth), Old English -spendan (in forspendan use up), from Medieval
Latin spendere, a shortening of Latin expendere to weigh out money, pay down (see expend) or
possibly of dispendere to pay out. A general Germanic borrowing (Old High German spendon, German and
Middle Dutch spenden, Old Norse spenna). In reference to labor, thoughts, time, etc., attested from
c.1300. Intransitive sense exhaust, wear (oneself) out is from 1590s (see spent).


spending (n.)

late Old English, verbal noun from spend (v.). Spending-money is from 1590s.


spendthrift (n.)

c.1600, from spend (v.) + thrift (n.) in sense of savings, profits, wealth. Replaced earlier
scattergood (1570s) and spend-all (1550s). From c.1600 as an adjective.


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


spent (adj.)

consumed, mid-15c., past participle adjective from spend. Of time, passed, over, from 1520s; as worn
out, exhausted from overwork, 1560s.


sperate (adj.)

of debts, having some likelihood of recovery, 1550s, from Latin speratus, past participle of sperare
to hope, denominative of spes hope, from PIE *spe-is-, from root spe- (1) to thrive, prosper (see
speed (n.)).


sperm (n.)

male seminal fluid, late 14c., probably from Old French esperme seed, sperm (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin sperma seed, semen, from Greek sperma the seed of plants, also of animals, literally that
which is sown, from speirein to sow, scatter, from PIE *sper-mn-, from root *sper- (4) to strew (see
sprout (v.)). Sperm bank is attested from 1963. For sperm whale see spermaceti.


spermaceti (n.)

waxy, fatty stuff in the head of certain whales, late 15c., from Medieval Latin sperma ceti sperm of
a whale (it has when fresh something of the appearance of sperm), from Latin sperma (see sperm) +
ceti, genitive of cetus whale, large sea animal (see Cetacea). The substance in olden times was
credited with medicinal properties, as well as being used for candle oil.    Use ... Sperma Cete ana
with redd Wyne when ye wax old. [Sir George Ripley, The Compound of Alchemy, 1471]    Scientists
still are not sure exactly what it does. Sperm whale, short for spermaceti whale, is from 1830.


spermatic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French spermatique and directly from Late Latin spermaticus, from sperma (see
sperm).


spermato-

before vowels spermat-, word-forming element meaning seed, sperm, used from 1880s in scientific
compounds, from comb. form of Greek sperma (genitive spermatos; see sperm).


spermatogenesis (n.)

1877, earlier in German, from comb. form of Greek sperma (see sperm) + genesis.


spermatozoa (n.)

plural of spermatozoon, 1836.


spermatozoon (n.)

(plural spermatozoa), male sexual cell, 1836, from spermato- + Greek zoion animal (see zoo-).
Related: Spermatozoal.


spermicide (n.)

1929; see sperm + -cide. Earlier was spermacide (1908) and spermaticide (1923), from French, where
it is recorded by 1876.


spessartite (n.)

manganese garnet, 1853, earlier spessartine (1837), from French spessartine (1832), from Spessart,
district in Bavaria where it is found.


spew (v.)

Old English spiwan spew, spit, from Proto-Germanic *spiew- (cognates: Old Saxon spiwan, Old Norse
spyja, Old Frisian spiwa, Middle Dutch spijen, Dutch spuwen, Old High German spiwan, German speien,
Gothic spiewan to spit), from PIE *sp(y)eu- to spew, spit, probably ultimately of imitative origin
(cognates: Latin spuere; Greek ptuein, Doric psyttein; Old Church Slavonic pljuja, Russian plevati;
Lithuanian spiauti). Also in Old English as a weak verb, speowan. Related: Spewed; spewing.


spew (n.)

vomited matter, c.1600, from spew (v.).


sphagnum (n.)

genus of mosses, peat-moss, 1741, Modern Latin, from Latin sphagnos, a kind of lichen, from Greek
sphagnos a spiny shrub, a kind of moss, of unknown origin. Related: Sphagnous.


spheno-

before vowels sphen-, word-forming element meaning wedge, from comb. form of Greek sphen a wedge,
probably cognate with Old Norse spann splinter, Old English spon chip of wood (see spoon (n.)).


sphenoid (adj.)

1732, from spheno- + -oid. As a noun from 1828. Related: Sphenoidal.


sphere (n.)

mid-15c., Latinized spelling of Middle English spere (c.1300) cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow
globe about the world, from Anglo-French espiere, Old French espere (13c., Modern French
sph&#232;re), from Latin sphaera globe, ball, celestial sphere (Medieval Latin spera), from Greek
sphaira globe, ball, playing ball, terrestrial globe, of unknown origin.    From late 14c. in
reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos
believed to revolve around the earth and contain the planets and the fixed stars; the supposed
harmonious sound they made rubbing against one another was the music of the spheres (late 14c.).
Also from late 14c. as a globe; object of spherical form, a ball, and the geometric sense solid
figure with all points equidistant from the center. Meaning range of something, place or scene of
activity is first recorded c.1600 (as in sphere of influence, 1885, originally in reference to
Anglo-German colonial rivalry in Africa).


spherical (adj.)

1520s, from sphere + -ical. Related: Spherically.


spheroid (n.)

body resembling, but not identical with, a sphere, 1560s, from Latin sphaeroides, from Greek
sphairoeides ball-like, spherical, from sphaira (see sphere) + -oeides form (see -oid). As an
adjective from 1767. Related: Spheroidal.


sphincter (n.)

1570s, from Middle French sphincter, from Late Latin sphincter contractile muscle, from Greek
sphinkter band, lace, anything that binds tight, from sphingein to squeeze, bind, of unknown origin.
First used in anatomical sense by Galen. There are several in the body; the one usually meant is the
sphincter ani.


sphinx (n.)

monster of Greek mythology having a lion's (winged) body and a woman's head; she waylaid travelers
around Thebes and devoured those who could not answer her questions; Oedipus solved the riddle and
the Sphinx killed herself. In English from early 15c., from Latin Sphinx, from Greek Sphinx, said to
mean literally the strangler, a back-formation from sphingein to squeeze, bind (see sphincter).
There also was an Egyptian form (usually male and wingless); in reference to this it is attested in
English from 1570s; specific reference to the colossal stone one near the pyramids as Giza is
attested from 1610s. Transferred sense of person or thing of mysterious nature is from c.1600. The
proper plural would be sphinges. As adjectives in English, sphingal, sphingian, sphingine,
sphinxian, sphinxine, and sphinx-like all have been tried.


sphygmo-

word-forming element meaning pulse, from comb. form of Greek sphygmos a pulse, from sphyzein to
throb, pulse, beat.


sphygmomanometer (n.)

1891, from sphygmo- pulse + manometer.


spic (n.)

derogatory for Latino person, 1913, from cliche protestation, No spick English. Earlier spiggoty
(1910 speak-a the ...); the term is said to have originated in Panama during the canal construction.
But it also was applied from an early date to Italians, and some have suggested an alteration of
spaghetti.


Spica (n.)

1728, bright star in constellation Virgo, from Latin, literally ear of grain (see spike (n.2));
corresponding to Greek stakhys. As the ancients visualized the constellation, she held an ear of
grain.


spicate (adj.)

1660s, having spikes, from Latin spicatus, past participle of spicare to furnish with spikes, from
spica (see spike (n.2)).


spice (n.)

c.1200, something added to food or drink to enhance the flavor, vegetable substance aromatic or
pungent to the taste, also a spice used as a medication or an alchemical ingredient, from Old French
espice (Modern French &#233;pice), from Late Latin species (plural) spices, goods, wares, in
classical Latin kind, sort (see species). From c.1300 as an aromatic spice, also spices as
commodities; from early 14c. as a spice-bearing plant. Figurative sense of attractive or enjoyable
variation is from 13c.; that of slight touch or trace of something is recorded from 1530s. Meaning
specimen, sample is from 1790. Early druggists recognized four types of spices: saffron, clove,
cinnamon, nutmeg.


spice (v.)

to season with spices, early 14c. (implied in spiced), from spice (n.), or from Old French espicier,
from the French noun. Figurative sense of to vary, diversify is from 1520s.


spice-box (n.)

1520s, from spice (n.) + box (n.1).


spice-cake (n.)

early 15c., from spice (n.) + cake (n.).


spick-and-span (adj.)

also spic-and-span, 1660s, from spick-and-span-new (1570s), literally new as a recently made spike
and chip of wood, from spick nail (see spike (n.1)) + span-new very new (c.1300), from Old Norse
span-nyr, from spann chip (see spoon (n.)) + nyr new. Imitation of Dutch spiksplinter nieuw spike-
splinter new.


spicule (n.)

1785, from French spicule, from Latin spiculum, diminutive of spica (see spike (n.2)). Related:
Spicular.


spicy (adj.)

1560s, from spice (n.) + -y (2). In reference to flowers, breezes, etc., sweet-smelling, from 1640s.
Figurative sense of racy, salacious dates from 1844. Related: Spiciness.


spider (n.)

late 14c., spydyr, from earlier spi&#254;re, spi&#254;ur, spi&#254;er (14c.), from Old English
spi&#240;ra, from Proto-Germanic *spin-thron- (cognate with Danish spinder), literally the spinner,
from *spen-wo- to spin (see spin (v.)) + formative or agential *-thro. The connection with the root
is more transparent in other Germanic cognates (such as Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Middle High
German, German spinne, Dutch spin spider).    The male is commonly much smaller than the female, and
in impregnating the female runs great risk of being devoured. The difference in sizes is as if the
human female should be some 60 or 70 feet tall. [Century Dictionary]    Not the common word in Old
English, which identified the creatures as loppe, lobbe, also atorcoppe, and, from Latin, renge.
Another Old English word was gangewifre a weaver as he goes, and Middle English had araine spider
(14c.-15c., from French). In literature, often a figure of cunning, skill, and industry as well as
poisonous predation. As the name for a type of two-pack solitaire, it is attested from 1890. Spider
plant is from 1852; spider crab is from 1710, used of various species; spider monkey is from 1764,
so called for its long limbs.


spider-web (n.)

1640s, earlier spider's web (1530s), from spider + web (n.).


spidery (adj.)

1823, long and thin, from spider + -y (2).


spiel (n.)

glib speech, pitch, 1896, probably from verb (1894) meaning to speak in a glib manner, earlier to
play circus music (1870, in a German-American context), from German spielen to play, from Old High
German spilon (cognate with Old English spilian to play). The noun also perhaps from German Spiel
play, game.


spiff (v.)

make neat or spruce, 1877 (with up or out), probably from spiffy (q.v.). Spiffing excellent was very
popular in 1870s slang.


spiffy (adj.)

1853, of uncertain origin, probably related to spiff well-dressed man. Uncertain relationship to
spiff (n.) percentage allowed by drapers to their young men when they effect sale of old fashioned
or undesirable stock (1859), or to spiflicate confound, overcome completely, a cant word from 1749
that was common in the 19th century [OED], preserved in American English and yielded slang
spiflicated drunk, first recorded in that sense 1902.


spigot (n.)

late 14c., plug used to stop the hole of a cask, according to Barnhart probably from Old French
*espigot (compare Gascony dialect espigot core of a fruit, small ear of grain), diminutive of Old
Proven&ccedil;al espiga ear of grain, from Latin spica ear of grain (see spike (n.2)). Meaning valve
for controlling the flow of a liquid is from 1520s; the connecting notion is that which controls or
restrains.


spike (v.)

1620s, to fasten with spikes, from spike (n.1). Meaning to rise in a spike is from 1958. Military
sense (1680s) means to disable guns by driving a large nail into the touch-hole. Figurative use of
this sense is from 1823. Meaning to lace (a drink) with liquor is from 1889. Journalism sense of to
kill a story before publication (1908) is from the metal spindle in which old-time editors filed
hard copy of stories after they were set in type, or especially when rejected for publication.
Related: Spiked; spiking.


spike (n.1)

large nail, mid-14c., perhaps from or related to a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse spik
splinter, Middle Swedish spijk nail, from Proto-Germanic *spikaz (cognates: Middle Dutch spicher,
Dutch spijker nail, Old English spicing large nail, Old English spaca, Old High German speihha
spoke), from PIE root *spei- sharp point (cognates: Latin spica ear of corn, spina thorn, prickle,
backbone, and perhaps pinna pin (see pin (n.)); Greek spilas rock, cliff; Lettish spile wooden fork;
Lithuanian speigliai thorns, spitna tongue of a buckle, Old English spitu spit).    The English word
also might be influenced by and partly a borrowing of Latin spica (see spike (n.2)), from the same
root. Slang meaning needle is from 1923. Meaning pointed stud in athletic shoes is from 1832.
Electrical sense of pulse of short duration is from 1935.


spike (n.2)

ear of grain, c.1300, from Latin spica ear of grain, from PIE *spei-ko-, from suffixed form of root
*spei- sharp point (see spine).


spiked (adj.)

laced with alcohol, 1909, past participle adjective spike (v.).


spikenard (n.)

mid-14c., aromatic substance from an Indian plant, famous perfumed unguent of the ancients, from
Medieval Latin spica nardi (see spike (n.2)), rendering Greek nardou stakhys, in which the other
element probably ultimately from Sanskrit nalada-, the name of the plant.


spiky (adj.)

1720, from spike (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Spikiness.


spile (n.)

tap or spout for drawing maple sugar, 1844, from Northern English dialect spile splinter (1510s),
from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German spile splinter, skewer, bar, spindle, German Speiler skewer;
perhaps related to spike (n.1).


spill (v.)

Old English spillan destroy, mutilate, kill, also in late Old English to waste, variant of spildan
destroy, from Proto-Germanic *spilthjan (cognates: Old High German spildan to spill, Old Saxon
spildian destroy, kill, Old Norse spilla to destroy, Danish spilde lose, spill, waste, Middle Dutch
spillen to waste, spend), from PIE *spel- (1) to split, break off (cognates: Middle Dutch spalden,
Old High German spaltan to split; Greek aspalon skin, hide, spolas flayed skin; Lithuanian spaliai
shives of flax; Old Church Slavonic rasplatiti to cleave, split; Middle Low German spalden, Old High
German spaltan to split; Sanskrit sphatayati splits).    Sense of let (liquid) fall or run out
developed mid-14c. from use of the word in reference to shedding blood (early 14c.). Intransitive
sense to run out and become wasted is from 1650s. Spill the beans recorded by 1910 in a sense of
spoil the situation; 1919 as reveal a secret. To cry for spilt milk (usually with negative) is
attested from 1738. Related: Spilled; spilt; spilling.


spill (n.)

1845, originally a throw or fall from a horse, from spill (v.). Meaning the spilling of a liquid,
amount of spilled stuff is from 1848.


spillage (n.)

1838, from spill (v.) + -age. Shakespeare used spilth that which has spilled, act of spilling
(Timon, 1607), which was picked up by Browning, etc.


spillover (n.)

1940, from verbal phrase, from spill (v.) + over (adv.). From 1953 as an adjective.


spillway (n.)

1889, from spill + way (n.).


spilth (n.)

that which is spilled, c.1600, from spill (v.) + -th (2). Used, once, by Shakespeare.


spin (v.)

Old English spinnan (transitive) draw out and twist fibers into thread, strong verb (past tense
spann, past participle spunnen), from Proto-Germanic *spenwan (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian
spinna, Danish spinde, Dutch spinnen, Old High German spinnan, German spinnen, Gothic spinnan), from
PIE *spen-wo-, from root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Armenian henum I weave; Greek
patos garment, literally that which is spun; Lithuanian pinu I plait, braid, spandau I spin; Middle
Welsh cy-ffiniden spider; see span (v.)).    Intransitive senses of to form threads from fibrous
stuff; to twist, writhe developed in late Old English. Transitive sense of cause to turn rapidly is
from 1610s; intransitive meaning revolve, turn around rapidly first recorded 1660s. Meaning attempt
to influence reporters' minds after an event has taken place but before they have written about it
seems to have risen to popularity in the 1984 U.S. presidential campaign; as in spin doctor, first
attested 1984.


spin (n.)

1831, a rapid revolving motion, from spin (v.). Meaning fairly rapid ride is from 1856. Sense of a
twisting delivery in throwing or striking a ball is from 1851. Sense in physics is from 1926.
Meaning act of playing a phonograph record is from 1977. Meaning influence imparted by a media
source is from 1984.


spinach (n.)

c.1400 (late 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French spinache, Old French espinache (14c., Modern
French &eacute;pinard, from a form with a different suffix), from Old Proven&ccedil;al espinarc,
which perhaps is via Catalan espinac, from Andalusian Arabic isbinakh, from Arabic isbanakh, from
Persian aspanakh spinach. But OED is not convinced the Middle Eastern words are native, and based on
the plethora of Romanic forms pronounces the origin doubtful.    Popeye, the spinach-eating
superman, debuted in 1929. Old folk etymology connected the word with Latin spina (see spine) or
with Medieval Latin Hispanicum olus. For pronunciation, see cabbage. In 1930s colloquial American
English, it had a sense of nonsense, rubbish, based on a famous New Yorker cartoon of Dec. 8, 1928.
Related: spinaceous.


spinal (adj.)

1570s, from Late Latin spinalis of or pertaining to a thorn or the spine, from Latin spina (see
spine). Spinal tap recorded from 1960.


spindle (n.)

early 13c., with intrusive -d-, from Old English spinel small wooden bar used in hand-spinning,
properly an instrument for spinning, from stem of spinnan (see spin (v.)) + instrumental suffix -le
(compare handle, thimble, etc.    Related to Old Saxon spinnila, Old Frisian spindel, Old High
German spinnila, German Spindel. As a type of something slender, it is attested from 1570s. As with
distaff, sometimes formerly used as a metonym for the female sex, as in Old English spinelhealf
female line of descent, distinguished from sperehealf male line of descent.


spindly (adj.)

1650s, from spindle + -y (2). Related: Spindliness.


spindrift (n.)

spray of salt water blown along the surf of the sea in heavy winds, c.1600, Scottish formation from
verb spene, alteration of spoon to sail before the wind (1570s, of uncertain origin) + drift (n.).
Common in English writers from c 1880, probably at first under the influence of W. Black's novels
[OED].


spine (n.)

c.1400, backbone, later thornlike part (early 15c.), from Old French espine thorn, prickle;
backbone, spine (12c., Modern French &eacute;pine), from Latin spina backbone, originally thorn,
prickle (figuratively, in plural, difficulties, perplexities), from PIE *spe-ina-, from root *spei-
sharp point (see spike (n.1)). Meaning the back of a book is first attested 1922.


spine-chiller (n.)

mystery film, 1940, from spine + agent noun from chill (v.). Spine-tingler in same sense is from
1942.


spineless (adj.)

1827 of animals (1805 of plants), from spine + -less. Meaning lacking moral force is from 1885.
Related: Spinelessly; spinelessness.


spinet (n.)

1660s, spinette, small harpsichord, from Middle French espinette (16c., Modern French
&#233;pinette), from Italian spinetta, said by Scaliger to be a diminutive of spina thorn, spine,
from Latin spina thorn (see spine), so called because the strings were plucked with thorn-like
quills [Barnhart]. The other theory (favored by Klein and assigned greater probability by OED) dates
to early 17c. and claims the word is from the name of the Venetian inventor, Giovanni Spinetti (fl.
c.1503). As small, upright piano from 1936.


spinnaker (n.)

large triangular sail, 1866, either a derivative of spin in the sense of go rapidly or a corrupt
pronunciation of Sphinx, which was the name of the first yacht known to carry this type of sail.


spinner (n.)

early 13c., spider, agent noun from spin (v.). Meaning person who spins textile thread is from late
14c.


spinneret (n.)

silk-spinning organ of a silkworm or spider, coined 1826, diminutive of spinner.


spinney (n.)

copse, thicket, 1590s, from Old French espinoi briar-patch, place full of thorns and brambles (13c.,
Modern French &eacute;pinaie), from espine or from Latin spinetum thorn hedge, thicket (see spine).


spinning (n.)

late 13c., verbal noun from spin (v.). Spinning wheel attested from c.1400. Spinning-jenny is from
1783 (see jenny); invented by James Hargreaves c.1764-7, patented 1770.


spinoff (n.)

also spin-off, 1951 of corporate entities;  by 1967 of television shows, from spin + off. As a
figurative verbal phrase, by 1957. As an adjective, from 1966.


spinster (n.)

mid-14c., female spinner of thread, from Middle English spinnen (see spin) + -stere, feminine suffix
(see -ster). Unmarried women were supposed to occupy themselves with spinning, hence the word came
to be the legal designation in England of all unmarried women from a viscount's daughter downward
[Century Dictionary] in documents from 1600s to early 1900s, and by 1719 the word was being used
generically for woman still unmarried and beyond the usual age for it.   Spinster, a terme, or an
addition in our Common Law, onely added in Obligations, Euidences, and Writings, vnto maids
vnmarried. [John Minsheu, Ductor in Linguas, 1617]    Strictly in reference to those who spin,
spinster also was used of both sexes (compare webster, baxter, brewster) and so a double-feminine
form emerged, spinstress a female spinner (1640s), which by 1716 also was being used for maiden
lady. Related: Spinsterhood.


spiny (adj.)

1580s, from spine + -y (2). Related: Spininess.


spiracle (n.)

air hole, 1610s, from Latin spiraculum breathing hole, from spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)).
Related: Spiracular.


spiral (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French spiral (16c.), from Medieval Latin spiralis winding around a fixed center,
coiling (mid-13c.), from Latin spira a coil, fold, twist, spiral, from Greek speira a winding, a
coil, twist, wreath, anything wound or coiled, from PIE *sper-ya-, from base *sper- (2) to turn,
twist. Related: Spirally. Spiral galaxy first attested 1913.


spiral (v.)

1726 (implied in spiraled), transitive, from spiral (n.). Intransitive use by 1834. Transferred and
figurative sense by 1922. Related: Spiraling.


spiral (n.)

1650s, from spiral (adj.). U.S. football sense is from 1896. Figurative sense of progressive
movement in one direction is by 1897. Of books, spiral-bound (adj.) is from 1937.


spirant (n.)

breathy consonant, 1862, from Latin spirantem (nominative spirans) breathing, present participle of
spirare to breathe, blow (see spirit (n.)).


spire (n.)

Old English spir a sprout, shoot, spike, blade, tapering stalk of grass, from Proto-Germanic *spiraz
(cognates: Old Norse spira a stalk, slender tree, Dutch spier shoot, blade of grass, Middle Low
German spir a small point or top), from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)). Meaning tapering
top of a tower or steeple first recorded 1590s (a sense attested in Middle Low German since late
14c. and also found in the Scandinavian cognates).


spire (v.)

early 14c., send up shoots, from spire (n.). Related: Spired; spiring.


spirillum (n.)

(plural spirilla), 1875, Modern Latin, diminutive of Latin spira (see spiral (adj.)). So called for
their structure.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


spirit (v.)

1590s, to make more active or energetic (of blood, alcohol, etc.), from spirit (n.). The meaning
carry off or away secretly (as though by supernatural agency) is first recorded 1660s. Related:
Spirited; spiriting.


spirited (adj.)

lively, energetic, 1590s, from spirit (v.) in its older sense. Milton uses it to mean possessed by a
spirit. Related: Spiritedly; spiritedness.


spiritless (adj.)

1560s, dead, from spirit (n.) + -less. Meaning having no vigor or vivacity is from 1650s. Related:
Spiritlessly.


spiritual (adj.)

c.1300, of or concerning the spirit (especially in religious aspects), from Old French spirituel,
esperituel (12c.) or directly from a Medieval Latin ecclesiastical use of Latin spiritualis of or
pertaining to breath, breathing, wind, or air; pertaining to spirit, from spiritus of breathing, of
the spirit (see spirit (n.)). Meaning of or concerning the church is attested from mid-14c. Related:
Spiritually.


spiritual (n.)

African-American religious song, 1866, from spiritual (adj.). Earlier a spiritual thing (1660s).


spiritual-minded (adj.)

1526 (Tindale), from spiritual (adj.) + minded. Related: Spiritual-mindedness.


spiritualism (n.)

1796, advocacy of a spiritual view (opposed to materialism), from spiritual + -ism. Table-rapping
sense is from 1853.


spiritualist (n.)

1852, one who believes in the ability of the living to communicate with the dead via a medium, from
spiritual + -ist (also see spirit (n.)). Earlier (1640s) one with regard for spiritual things.
Related Spiritualistic.    Every two or three years the Americans have a paroxysm of humbug -- ...
at the present time it is Spiritual-ism. [J.Dix, Transatlantic Tracings, 1853]


spirituality (n.)

early 15c., the clergy, also ecclesiastical property; things pertaining to the Church, from Middle
French spiritualite, from Late Latin spiritualitatem (nominative spiritualitas), from Latin
spiritualis (see spiritual). Meaning quality of being spiritual is from c.1500; seldom-used sense of
fact or condition of being a spirit is from 1680s. An earlier form was spiritualty (late 14c.).
English is blessed with multiple variant forms of many words. But it has made scant use of them; for
every pair historic/historical; realty/reality, or luxuriant/luxurious there is a
spiritualty/spirituality or a specialty/speciality, with two distinct forms, two senses requiring
differentiation, hundreds of years gone by, and but little progress made in in sorting them out.


spiritualize (v.)

1630s, from spiritual (adj.) + -ize, or from French spiritualiser. Related: Spiritualize;
spiritualizing; spiritualization.


spiritualty (n.)

late 14c., spirituality, quality of being spiritual; from c.1400 as the clergy, from Old French
espiritualte, espirituaute, variants of spiritualite, from Late Latin spiritualitatem (see
spirituality).


spirituous (adj.)

1590s, spirited, animated, from Latin spiritus (see spirit (n.)) + -ous, or else from Middle French
spiritueux (16c.), from Vulgar Latin *spirituosus, from Latin spiritus. Meaning containing alcohol
is from 1680s. Related: Spiritously; spiritousness.


spiro-

word-forming element meaning twisted, spiraled, whorled, from comb. form of Latin spira a coil,
twist, from Greek speira (see spiral (adj.)).


spirochete (n.)

1877, from Modern Latin Spiroch&aelig;ta, the genus name, from spiro- Modern Latin comb. form of
Greek speira a coil (see spiral (adj.)) + Greek khaite hair (see chaeto-).


spirometer (n.)

contrivance for measuring lung capacity, 1846, formed irregularly from Latin spirare to breathe (see
spirit (n.)) + -meter. Related: Spirometry.


spissitude (n.)

density, thickness, compactness, mid-15c., from Latin spissitudo thickness, density, from spissus
thick, dense, compact, close (source of Italian spesso, Spanish espeso, Old French espes, French
&eacute;pais). Related: Spissated.


spit (v.1)

expel saliva, Old English spittan (Anglian), sp&aelig;tan (West Saxon), transitive and intransitive,
past tense *spytte, from Proto-Germanic *spitjan, from PIE *sp(y)eu-, of imitative origin (see spew
(v.)). Not the usual Old English word for this; sp&aelig;tlan (see spittle) and spiwan are more
common; all are from the same root. To spit as a gesture of contempt (especially at someone) is in
Old English. Related: Spat; spitting.


spit (n.1)

saliva, early 14c., from spit (v.1). Meaning the very likeness in modern use is attested from 1825
(as in spitting image, attested from 1887); compare French crach&eacute; in same sense. Spit-curl
(1831) was originally considered colloquial or vulgar. Military phrase spit and polish first
recorded 1895.


spit (n.2)

sharp-pointed rod for roasting meat, late Old English spitu a spit, from Proto-Germanic *spituz
(cognates: Middle Dutch and Dutch spit, Swedish spett (which perhaps is from Low German), Old High
German spiz, German Spie&szlig; roasting spit, German spitz pointed), from PIE *spei- sharp point
(see spike (n.1)). This is also the source of the word meaning sandy point (1670s). Old French
espois, Spanish espeto spit are Germanic loan-words. The verb meaning to put on a spit is recorded
from c.1200.


spit (v.2)

c.1200, put on a spit, thrust with a spit, from late Old English sputtian to spit (for cooking),
from spit (n.2). Meaning pierce with a weapon, transfix, impale is from early 15c. Related: Spitted;
spitting. Nares' Glossary has spit-frog a small sword.


Spitalfields

district east of London, famed for the work of refugee Huguenot weavers who took up residence there,
from St. Mary Spital, from spital, a Middle English shortened form of hospital, sometimes also
spittle, hence spittle-man one who lives in a hospital.


spitball (n.)

1846 in the schoolboy sense, bit of paper chewed and rounded as a missile; 1904 in the baseball
sense, from spit (n.1) + ball (n.1).


spite (n.)

c.1300, shortened form of despit malice (see despite). Corresponding to Middle Dutch spijt, Middle
Low German spyt, Middle Swedish spit. In 17c. commonly spelled spight. Phrase in spite of is
recorded from c.1400, literally in defiance or contempt of, hence notwithstanding. Spite-fence
barrier erected to cause annoyance is from 1889.


spite (v.)

c.1400, dislike, regard with ill will, from spite (n.). Meaning treat maliciously is from 1590s (as
in cut off (one's) nose to spite (one's) face); earlier fill with vexation, offend (1560s). Related:
Spited; spiting.


spiteful (adj.)

mid-15c., from spite (n.) + -ful. Related: Spitefully; spitefulness.


spitfire (n.)

1610s, a cannon, from spit (v.) + fire (n.); c.1600 as an adjective. Meaning irascible, passionate
person is from 1670s. Replaced earlier shitfire (similar formation in Florentine cacafuoco).


spittle (n.)

saliva, spit, late 15c., probably an alteration (by influence of spit (n.1)) of Old English
sp&aelig;tl, spatl, from Proto-Germanic *spait- (cognates: Old English sp&aelig;tan to spit), from
PIE root *sp(y)eu- to spew, spit (see spew (v.)).


spittoon (n.)

also spitoon, 1811, American English, from spit (n.1) + -oon. A rare instance of a word formed in
English using this suffix (octoroon is another). Replaced earlier spitting box (1680s).


Spitz (n.)

breed of small Pomeranian dog, 1842, from German Spitz, Spitzhund, from spitz pointed (see spit
(n.2)). So called from the tapering shape of its muzzle.


spiv (n.)

petty crook who will turn his hand to anything so long as it does not involve honest work, 1934,
British slang, probably dating back to late 19c. and connected with spiff (see spiffy) in one of its
various senses. Being a flashy dresser was a spiv characteristic.    The spiv reached his apotheosis
during World War II and the succeeding years, when the disrupted economic conditions allowed ample
scope for unofficial trading (a pair of nylons here, a few packets of cigarettes there) and other
petty crime. He became a stock figure in the English social comedy, represented on screen by such
stereotypes as 'Flash Harry' (played by George Cole) in the St. Trinian's films and Pte. Walker in
Dad's Army. [Ayto, 20th Century Words]


splanchnic (adj.)

1690s, pertaining to the viscera, from medical Latin splanchnicus, from Greek splankhnon (see
splanchno-) + -ic.


splanchno-

before vowels splanchn-, word-forming element meaning viscera, from  Greek splankhnon, usually in
plural, splankhna the innards, entrails (including heart, lungs, liver, kidneys); related to splen
(see spleen).


splash (v.)

1715 (intransitive); 1722 (transitive), probably an alteration of plash with an intensive s-.
Related: Splashed; splashing. Splash-board attested from 1826. Splash-down (n.) in the spacecraft
sense is attested from 1961.


splash (n.)

1736, water or liquid thrown upon anything, from splash (v.). Meaning striking or ostentatious
display is first attested 1804. Sense of small quantity of soda water, etc., added to a drink is
from 1922. Of color or light, 1832.


splashy (adj.)

1727, full of puddles, from splash (n.) + -y (2). Meaning sensational first attested 1836. Related:
Splashily; splashiness.


splat (v.)

to land with a smacking sound, 1897, probably of imitative origin. As a noun from 1958.


splatter (v.)

1784 (but earlier in splatterdash (1772), variant of spatterdash); perhaps a blend of spatter and
splash.


splay (v.)

early 14c., unfold, unfurl; c.1400, to spread out, shortened form of desplayen (see display (v.)).
Meaning to spread out awkwardly is from 1848. Past participle adjective splayed spread out is
attested from 1540s.


spleen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French esplen, from Latin splen, from Greek splen the milt, spleen, from PIE
*spelgh- spleen, milt (cognates: Sanskrit plihan-, Avestan sperezan, Armenian p'aicaln, Latin lien,
Old Church Slavonic slezena, Lithuanian blu&#382;nis, Old Prussian blusne, Old Irish selg spleen).
Regarded in medieval physiology as the seat of morose feelings and bad temper. Hence figurative
sense of violent ill-temper (1580s, implied in spleenful); and thence spleenless free from anger,
ill-humor, malice, or spite (1610s).


splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


splendidly (adv.)

1650s, from splendid + -ly (2).


splendiferous (adj.)

considered a playful elaboration since its re-birth in 1843, but in 15c. it was good English, from
Medieval Latin splendorifer, from splendor (see splendor) + ferre to bear (see infer). Compare 15c.
splendidious, also splendacious (1843). Bartlett (1859) offers this, allegedly from An itinerant
gospeller ... holding forth to a Kentuckian audience on the kingdom of heaven:    Heaven, my beloved
hearers, said he, is a glorious, a beautiful, a splendiferous, an angeliferous place. Eye hath not
seen, ear hath not heard, it has not entered into the imagination of any Cracker in these here
diggings what carryings on the just made perfect have up thar.


splendor (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French esplendour, Anglo-French esplendour (Old French splendeur, splendor,
12c.) or directly from Latin splendor brilliance, brightness, from splendere be bright, shine (see
splendid).


splendorous (adj.)

1590s, from splendor + -ous. Related: Splendorously; splendorousness.


splendour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of splendor; for ending see -or. Related: Splendourous;
splendourously.


splenetic (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to the spleen, from Late Latin spleneticus, from splen (see spleen). Meaning
irritably morose is from 1590s. Alternative splenic (1610s) is from French spl&#233;nique (16c.).
Gloomy, Sullen, Sulky, Morose, Splenetic. These words are arranged in the order of their intensity
and of their degree of activity toward others. [Century Dictionary]


spleno-

before vowels splen-, word-forming element meaning spleen, spleen and, from comb. form of Greek
splen (see spleen).


splenomegaly (n.)

enlargement of the spleen, 1900, from spleno- + Greek megas great (fem. megale; see mickle).


splice (v.)

1520s, originally a sailors' word, from Middle Dutch splissen to splice (Dutch splitsen), from
Proto-Germanic *spli-, from PIE root *(s)plei- to split, splice (see flint). The Dutch word was
borrowed in French as &eacute;pisser. Used of motion picture film from 1912; of DNA from 1975.
Related: Spliced; splicing; splicer.


splice (n.)

1620s (implied in splicing), first recorded in writing of Capt. John Smith, from splice (v.). Motion
picture film sense is from 1923. In colloquial use, marriage union, wedding (1830).


spliff (n.)

conical cannabis cigarette, 1936, a West Indian word, of unknown origin.


spline (n.)

long, thin piece of wood or metal, 1756, from East Anglian dialect, of uncertain origin. Perhaps
from older Danish splind or North Frisian splinj. Especially one fitted into a groove on a wheel and
a shaft to keep them revolving together (1864).


splint (n.)

c.1300, overlapping plate or strip in armor (made of metal splints), probably from Middle Low German
splinte, splente thin piece of iron, related to Middle Dutch splinte splint, probably literally thin
piece cut off, and from a Germanic offshoot of PIE *(s)plei- to split, splice (see flint). Cognate
with Danish splint splinter, Swedish splint wooden peg, wedge. Meaning slender, flexible slip of
wood is recorded from early 14c.; specific surgical sense is attested from c.1400.


splinter (n.)

early 14c., from Middle Dutch splinter, splenter a splinter, related to splinte (see splint). The
adjective (in splinter party, etc.) is first recorded 1935, from the noun.


splinter (v.)

1580s (transitive), from splinter (n.). Figurative sense from c.1600. Intransitive use from 1620s.
Middle English had splinder (v.) to shatter (of a spear, etc.), mid-15c. Related: Splintered;
splintering.


split (v.)

1580s (transitive and intransitive), not found in Middle English, probably from a Low German source
such as Middle Dutch splitten, from Proto-Germanic *spl(e)it- (cognates: Danish and Frisian splitte,
Old Frisian splita, German splei&szlig;en to split), from PIE *(s)plei- to split, splice (see
flint).    U.S. slang meaning leave, depart first recorded 1954. Of couples, to separate, to divorce
from 1942. To split the difference is suggested from 1715; to split (one's) ticket in the U.S.
political sense is attested from 1842. To split hairs make too-nice distinctions is from 1670s
(split a hair). Splitting image exact likeness is from 1880. To split the atom is from 1909.


split (adj.)

1640s, past participle adjective from split (v.). Split decision is from 1946 of court rulings, 1951
in boxing. Split shift is from 1904. Split personality first attested 1899.


split (n.)

1590s, narrow cleft, crack, fissure, from split (v.). Meaning piece of wood formed by splitting is
from 1610s. Meaning an act of separation, a divorce is from 1729. From 1861 as the name of the
acrobatic feat. Meaning a drink composed of two liquors is from 1882; that of sweet dish of sliced
fruit with ice cream is attested from 1920, American English. Slang meaning share of the take is
from 1889. Meaning a draw in a double-header is from 1920.


split-level (adj.)

1951 as a type of building plan, from split (adj.) + level (n.). As a noun from 1954, short for
split-level house, etc.


split-screen (adj.)

1949, from noun use (1946); see split (adj.) + screen (n.).


split-second (n.)

1884, originally the name of a type of stopwatch with two second hands that could be stopped
independently. Meaning a fraction of a second is from 1912, from split (adj.) + second (n.1);
adjectival meaning occurring in a fraction of a second is from 1946.


splosh (v.)

1889 [in Farmer, who calls it A New England variant of splash], ultimately imitative. Perhaps
influenced by splish-splosh sound made by feet walking through wet (1881). Related: Sploshed;
sploshing.


splotch (n.)

c.1600, a broad, ill-defined spot, perhaps a blend of spot, blot, and/or botch. Old English had
splott spot, blot; patch of land. Related: Splotchy; splotchiness.


splurge (n.)

1828, ostentatious display, American English, of uncertain origin; originally among the class of
words considered characteristic of Western (i.e. Kentucky) dialect. Perhaps a blend of splash and
surge. The meaning extravagant indulgence in spending is first recorded 1928.


splurge (v.)

to make an ostentatious display, to put on a splurge (in the older sense of the noun), by 1843, from
splurge (n.). Thornton's American Glossary has an 1848 citation defining splurge (v.) as to
expatiate at large, to appeal to broad and general principles. Meaning to spend extravagantly is by
1934. Related: Splurged; splurging.


splutter (n.)

1670s, perhaps a variant of sputter, intensified by the consonant cluster of splash, splatter, etc.


splutter (v.)

1728, from splutter (n.). Related: Spluttered; spluttering.


Spock

half-alien character in the Star Trek U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by
series creator Gene Roddenberry, who later said he was searching for an alien-sounding word and not
thinking of U.S. physician and child-care specialist Benjamin M. Spock (1903-1998), whose name is of
Dutch origin. The doctor wrote the enormously popular Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care
(1946) and is the source of the first element in Spock-marked (1967), defined in OED as (Adversely)
affected by an upbringing held to be in accordance with the principles of Dr. Spock ....


spode (n.)

fine sort of porcelain, 1869, named for first maker, Josiah Spode (1754-1827), potter in Stoke-on-
Trent, England.


spodomancy (n.)

divination by ashes, 1836, from Greek spodos wood ashes, embers, of uncertain origin, + -mancy.
Related: Spodomantic.


spoil (v.)

c.1300, to strip (someone) of clothes, strip a slain enemy, from Old French espillier to strip,
plunder, pillage, from Latin spoliare to strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder,
pillage, from spolia, plural of spolium arms taken from an enemy, booty; originally skin stripped
from a killed animal, from PIE *spol-yo-, perhaps from root *spel- to split, to break off (see spill
(v.)).    From late 14c. in English as strip with violence, rob, pillage, plunder, dispossess;
impoverish with excessive taxation. Used c.1400 as the verb to describe Christ's harrowing of Hell.
Sense of destroy, ruin, damage so as to render useless is from 1560s; that of to over-indulge (a
child, etc.) is from 1640s (implied in spoiled). Intransitive sense of become tainted, go bad, lose
freshness is from 1690s. To be spoiling for (a fight, etc.) is from 1865, from notion that one will
spoil if he doesn't get it.


spoil (n.)

booty, goods captured in time of war, mid-14c., spoils (collective singular), from spoil (v.) or
else from Old French espoille booty, spoil, from the verb in French, and in part from Latin spolium.
Also from the Latin noun are Spanish espolio, Italian spoglio.    Transferred sense of that which
has been acquired by special effort is from 1750. Spoils has stood cynically for public offices,
etc. aince at least 1770. Spoils system in U.S. politics attested by 1839, commonly associated with
the administration of President Andrew Jackson, on the notion of to the victor belongs the spoils.


spoil-sport (n.)

1786, from verbal phrase (attested by 1711); see spoil (v.) + sport (n.).


spoiled (adj.)

over-indulged, 1640s, past participle adjective from spoil (v.).


spoiler (n.)

1530s, one who robs or plunders, agent noun from spoil (v.). Meaning one who mars another's chance
at victory is attested from 1950 in U.S. politics, perhaps from boxing. Aeronautics sense is from
1928, because the flap thwarts the lift on the plane; transferred to structures serving a similar
purpose on speedboats (1957) and motor vehicles (1963). Meaning information about the plot of a
movie, etc., which might 'spoil' it for one who has not seen it is attested by 1982.


spoke (n.)

radius of a wheel, Old English spaca spoke of a wheel, radius, related to spicing large nail, from
Proto-Germanic *spaikon (cognates: Old Saxon speca, Old Frisian spake, Dutch spaak, Old High German
speicha, German speiche spoke), of uncertain origin, probably from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike
(n.1)).


spoken (adj.)

in compounds, speaking (in a certain way), late-15c., from past participle of speak (v.). Meaning
uttered, oral (as opposed to written) is from 1837.


spokesman (n.)

1510s, an interpreter, 1530s in the sense of person who speaks for another or others. Irregular
formation from spoke, past tense of speak (actually a back-formation from spoken) + man (n.).
Perhaps on analogy of craftsman. Spokeswoman is from 1650s; spokesperson is from 1972; spokesmodel
is attested from 1990.


spoliation (n.)

robbery, plunder, c.1400, from Latin spoliationem (nominative spoliatio) a robbing, plundering,
pillaging, noun of action from past participle stem of spoliare to plunder, rob (see spoil (v.)).


spondee (n.)

metrical foot consisting of two long syllables, late 14c., from Old French spondee (14c.), from
Latin spondeus, from Greek spondeios (pous), the name of the meter originally used in chants
accompanying libations, from sponde solemn libation, a drink-offering, related to spendein make a
drink offering, from PIE root *spend- to make an offering, perform a rite, hence to engage oneself
by a ritual act (cognates: Latin spondere to engage oneself, promise, Hittite shipantahhi I pour out
a libation, I sacrifice). Related: Spondaic.


spondulicks (n.)

1856, American English slang, money, cash, of unknown origin, said to be from Greek spondylikos,
from spondylos, a seashell used as currency (the Greek word means literally vertebra). [U]sed by
Mark Twain and by O. Henry and since then adopted into British English [Barnhart], where it survived
after having faded in the U.S.


spondyle (n.)

a vertebra, from French spondyle (14c.), from Latin spondylus, from Greek spondylos vertebra (see
spondylo-).


spondylitis (n.)

inflammation of the vertebrae, 1837, Modern Latin, from Latin spondylus, from Greek spondylos (see
spondylo-) + -itis.


spondylo-

before vowels spondyl-, comb form meaning vertebrae, from Greek spondylos a vertebra, in plural the
backbone, variant of sphondylos, of uncertain origin.


spondylolisthesis (n.)

medical Latin, from Greek spondylos (see spondylo-) + oliothesis dislocation, slipping.


spondylosis (n.)

1885, from Greek spondylos vertebra (see spondylo-) + -osis.


sponge (n.)

Old English sponge, spunge, from Latin spongia a sponge, also sea animal from which a sponge comes,
from Greek spongia, related to spongos sponge, of unknown origin. The Latin word is the source of
Old Saxon spunsia, Middle Dutch spongie, Old French esponge, Spanish esponja, Italian spugna.    In
English in reference to the marine animal from 1530s. To throw in the sponge quit, submit (1860) is
from prizefighting, in reference to the sponges used to cleanse the faces of combatants between
rounds (compare later throw in the towel). Sponge-cake is attested from 1808.


sponge (v.)

late 14c., to soak up with a sponge, also (transitive) to cleanse or wipe with a sponge, from sponge
(n.). The slang sense of to live in a parasitic manner, live at the expense of others is attested
from 1670s; sponger (n.) in this sense is from 1670s. Originally it was the victim who was the
sponge (c.1600), because he or she was being squeezed. Intransitive sense dive for sponges is from
1881. Related: Sponged; sponging.


sponger (n.)

1670s, parasite, agent noun from sponge (v.) in figurative sense. As a job on a cannon crew, by
1828.


spongiform (adj.)

resembling a sponge, 1774, from Latin spongia sponge (see sponge (n.)) + forma form, shape (see form
(n.)).


spongy (adj.)

soft, elastic, 1530s, from sponge (n.) + -y (2). Of hard material (especially bone) open, porous,
1590s. Related: Sponginess.


sponsor (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin sponsor sponsor in baptism, in Latin a surety, guarantee, bondsman, from
sponsus, past participle of spondere give assurance, promise solemnly (see spondee). Sense of person
who pays for a radio (or, after 1947, TV) program is first recorded 1931.


sponsor (v.)

1884, to favor or support, from sponsor (n.). Commercial broadcasting sense is from 1931. Related:
Sponsored; sponsoring.


sponsorship (n.)

1753, from sponsor (n.) + -ship.


spontaneity (n.)

1650s, from French spontan&#233;it&#233; or a native formation from spontaneous + -ity.


spontaneous (adj.)

1650s, occurring without external stimulus, from Late Latin spontaneus willing, of one's free will,
from Latin (sua) sponte of one's own accord, willingly; of uncertain origin. Related: Spontaneously;
spontaneousness. Used earlier of persons and characters, with a sense acting of one's own accord
(c.1200). Spontaneous combustion first attested 1795. Spontaneous generation (the phrase, not the
feat) attested from 1650s.


spoof (n.)

hoax, deception, 1889, from spouf (1884), name of a game invented by British comedian Arthur Roberts
(1852-1933). Sense of a parody, satirical skit or play is first recorded 1958, from verb in this
sense (1914).


spoof (v.)

1889, to hoax, deceive, trick; from 1914 as to parody or satirize; see spoof (n.). Related: Spoofed;
spoofing.


spook (n.)

1801, spectre, apparition, ghost, from Dutch spook, from Middle Dutch spooc spook, ghost, from a
common Germanic source (German Spuk ghost, apparition, Middle Low German spok spook, Swedish spok
scarecrow, Norwegian spjok ghost, specter, Danish sp&oslash;g joke), of unknown origin. According to
Klein's sources, possible outside connections include Lettish spigana dragon, witch, spiganis will
o' the wisp, Lithuanian spingu, spingeti to shine, Old Prussian spanksti spark.    Meaning
undercover agent is attested from 1942. The derogatory racial sense of black person is attested from
1940s, perhaps from notion of dark skin being difficult to see at night. Black pilots trained at
Tuskegee Institute during World War II called themselves the Spookwaffe.


spook (v.)

1867, to walk or act like a ghost, from spook (n.). Meaning to unnerve is from 1935. Related:
Spooked; spooking.


spooky (adj.)

1854, frightening; 1926, easily frightened, from spook (n. or v.) + -y (2). Related: Spookily;
spookiness.


spool (n.)

early 14c., wheel for winding thread upon, from Old North French spole, espole a spool (13c.), from
Middle Dutch spoele a spool, from Proto-Germanic *spolon (cognates: Norwegian and Swedish spole, Old
High German spuola, German Spule a spool, bobbin), from PIE root *spel- to cleave, split (see spoil
(v.)).


spool (v.)

c.1600, from spool (n.). Related: Spooled; spooling; spooler (1550s).


spoon (n.)

Old English spon chip, sliver, shaving, splinter of wood, from Proto-Germanic *spe-nu- (cognates:
Old Norse spann, sponn chip, splinter, Swedish sp&#229;n a wooden spoon, Old Frisian spon, Middle
Dutch spaen, Dutch spaan, Old High German span, German Span chip, splinter), from PIE *spe- (2)
long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe spade, also possibly Greek sphen wedge).    As the
word for a type of eating utensil, c.1300 in English (in Old English such a thing might be a
metesticca), in this sense supposed to be from Old Norse sponn, which meant spoon as well as chip,
tile. The eating utensil sense is specific to Middle English and Scandinavian, though Middle Low
German spon also meant wooden spatula. To be born with a silver spoon in one's mouth is from at
least 1719 (Goldsmith, 1765, has: one man is born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another with
a wooden ladle).


spoon (v.)

1715, to dish out with a spoon, from spoon (n.). The meaning court, flirt sentimentally is first
recorded 1831, a back-formation from spoony (adj.) soft, silly, weak-minded, foolishly sentimental.
Related: Spooned; spooning.


spoon-bread (n.)

1932, from spoon (n.) + bread (n.).


spoon-feed (v.)

to feed (someone) with a spoon, 1610s, from spoon (n.) + feed (v.). Figurative sense is attested by
1864. Related: Spoon-fed.


spoonbill (n.)

1670s, from spoon (n.) + bill (n.2); after Dutch lepelaar (from lepel spoon).


spoonerism (n.)

1900, but according to OED in use at Oxford as early as 1885, involuntary transposition of sounds in
two or more words (such as shoving leopard for loving shepherd, half-warmed fish for half-formed
wish, beery work speaking to empty wenches, etc.), in reference to the Rev. William A. Spooner
(1844-1930), warden of New College, Oxford, who was noted for such disfigures of speech. A different
thing from malapropism.


spoonful (n.)

late 13c., from spoon (n.) + -ful.


spoony (adj.)

1812, soft, silly, weak-minded; by 1836 as foolishly sentimental, with -y (2) + spoon (n.) in a
slang sense silly person, simpleton (1799), a figurative use of the eating utensil word, perhaps
based on the notion of shallowness. Related: Spoonily; spooniness.


spoor (n.)

track, trace, 1823, used originally by travelers in South Africa, from Afrikaans spoor, from Dutch
spoor, from Middle Dutch spor, cognate with Old English spor footprint, track, trace, from Proto-
Germanic *spur-am, from PIE *spere- ankle (see spurn).


sporadic (adj.)

1680s, from Medieval Latin sporadicus scattered, from Greek sporadikos scattered, from sporas
(genitive sporados) scattered, dispersed, from spora a sowing (see spore). Originally a medical
term, occurring in scattered instances; the meaning happening at intervals is first recorded 1847.
Related: Sporadical (1650s); sporadically.


sporangium (n.)

a case containing spores, 1821, Modern Latin (plural sporangia), from Greek spora spore (see spore)
+ angeion vessel (see angio-).


spore (n.)

reproductive body in flowerless plants corresponding to the seeds of flowering ones, 1836, from
Modern Latin spora, from Greek spora a seed, a sowing, seed-time, related to sporas scattered,
dispersed, sporos a sowing, and speirein to sow, scatter, from PIE *spor-, variant of root *sper-
(4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).


spork (n.)

1909, from spoon (n.) + fork (n.).


sporo-

before vowels spor-, word-forming element meaning spore, from comb. form of Greek spora a seed, a
sowing, related to sporas scattered, dispersed, sporos sowing, and speirein to sow, from PIE *spor-,
variant of root *sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).


sporophyte (n.)

from sporo- + -phyte.


sporran (n.)

furred leather pouch, 1818, from Gaelic sporan, Irish sparan purse, of uncertain origin.
Familiarized by Walter Scott (first attested English use is in Rob Roy).


sport (v.)

c.1400, to take pleasure, to amuse oneself, from Old French desporter, deporter to divert, amuse,
please, play (see disport). Restricted sense of amuse oneself by active exercise in open air or
taking part in some game is from late 15c. Meaning to wear is from 1778. Related: Sported; sporting.


sport (n.)

early 15c., pleasant pastime, shortening of disport activity that offers amusement or relaxation;
entertainment, fun (c.1300), also a pastime or game; flirtation; pleasure taken in such activity
(late 14c.), from Anglo-French disport, Old French desport, deport pleasure, enjoyment, delight;
solace, consolation; favor, privilege, related to desporter, deporter to divert, amuse, please, play
(see sport (v.)).    Original sense preserved in phrases such as in sport in jest (mid-15c.).
Meaning game involving physical exercise first recorded 1520s. Sense of stylish man is from 1861,
American English, probably because they lived by gambling and betting on races. Meaning good fellow
is attested from 1881 (as in be a sport, 1913). Sport as a familiar form of address to a man is from
1935, Australian English. The sport of kings was originally (1660s) war-making. Other, lost senses
of Middle English disport were consolation, solace; a source of comfort.


sporting (adj.)

c.1600, playful; 1799 as characterized by conduct constant with that of a sportsman (as in sporting
chance, 1897), present participle adjective from sport (v.).


sportive (adj.)

1580s, frolicsome, from sport (n.) + -ive. Related: Sportively; sportiveness. Earlier was sportful
(c.1400).


sports (n.)

atheltic games and contests, 1590s, from sport (n.). Meaning sports section of a newspaper is 1913.
As an adjective from 1897. Sports fan attested from 1921. Sports car attested by 1914; so called for
its speed and power:    I have just returned from the south of France, passing through Lyons, where
I visited the [Berliet] works with my car, and was shown the new model 25 h.p. sports car, and was
so impressed with this that I immediately ordered one on my return to London. [letter in The
Autocar, Jan. 7, 1914]


sportscast (n.)

1938, from sports + ending from broadcast (n.).


sportsman (n.)

1706, from sports + man (n.). Sportswoman attested from 1754.


sportsmanlike (adj.)

1728, from sportsman + like (adj.).


sportsmanship (n.)

conduct worthy of a sportsman, 1745, from sportsman + -ship.


sportswear (n.)

also sports-wear, 1912, from sports (n.) + wear (n.). Hence sports coat, sports shirt, etc.


sporty (adj.)

1889, sportsmanlike; 1962, in the style of a sports car, from sport (n.) + -y (2). Related:
Sportily; sportiness.


spot (n.)

c.1200, moral stain, probably from Old English splott a spot, blot, patch (of land), and partly from
or related to Middle Dutch spotte spot, speck. Other cognates are East Frisian spot speck, North
Frisian spot speck, piece of ground, Old Norse spotti small piece, Norwegian spot spot, small piece
of land. It is likely that some of these are borrowed from others, but the exact evolution now is
impossible to trace.    Meaning speck, stain is from mid-14c. The sense of particular place, small
extent of space is from c.1300. Meaning short interval in a broadcast for an advertisement or
announcement is from 1923. Proceeded by a number (as in five-spot) it originally was a term for
prison sentence of that many years (1901, American English slang). To put (someone) on the spot
place in a difficult situation is from 1928. Colloquial phrase to hit the spot satisfy, be what is
required is from 1868. Spot check first attested 1933. Adverbial phrase spot on completely right
attested from 1920.


spot (v.)

mid-13c., to mark or stain with spots; late 14c. as to stain, sully, tarnish, from spot (n.).
Meaning to see and recognize, is from 1718, originally colloquial and applied to a criminal or
suspected person; the general sense is from 1860. Related: Spotted; spotting. Spotted dick suet
pudding with currants and raisins is attested from 1849.


spotless (adj.)

late 14c., spotlez, from spot (n.) + -less. Figurative sense is from 1570s. Related: Spotlessly;
spotlessness.


spotlight (n.)

1904, from spot (n.) + light (n.). Originally a theatrical equipment; figurative sense is attested
from 1916. The verb is first recorded 1923.


spotter (n.)

1610s, one who makes spots, agent noun from spot (v.). From 1893 in hunting; 1903 in sense look-out.


spotty (adj.)

mid-14c., marked with spots, from spot (n.) + -y (2). Meaning unsteady, uneven is attested from
1932, from a more specific use with reference to painting (1812).


spousage (n.)

marriage, wedlock, mid-14c., from spouse (n.) + -age.


spousal (adj.)

1510s, pertaining to marriage, from spouse (n.) + -al (1).


spousal (n.)

c.1300, a wedding ceremony, action of marrying; wedlock, condition of being espoused, from Anglo-
French spousaille, Old French esposaille (see espousal). Earlier was spousage marriage, wedlock
(mid-14c.).


spouse (n.)

c.1200, a married person, either one of a married pair, but especially a married woman in relation
to her husband, also Christ or God as the spiritual husband of the soul, the church, etc., also
marriage, the wedded state, from Old French spous (fem. spouse) marriage partner, variant of
espous/espouse (Modern French &#233;pous/&#233;pouse), from Latin sponsus bridegroom (fem. sponsa
bride), literally betrothed, from masc. and fem. past participle of spondere to bind oneself,
promise solemnly, from PIE *spend- to make an offering, perform a rite (see spondee). Spouse-breach
(early 13c.) was an old name for adultery.


spout (v.)

to issue forcible, as a liquid, early 14c., related to Middle Dutch spoiten to spout (Dutch spuiten
to flow, spout), North Frisian sp&uuml;tji spout, squirt, Swedish sputa to spout, from Proto-
Germanic *sput-, from PIE *sp(y)eu- to spew, spit (see spew (v.)). Meaning to talk, declaim is
recorded from 1610s. Related: Spouted; spouting.


spout (n.)

late 14c., from spout (v.). Cognate with Middle Dutch spoit, North Frisian sp&#252;tj. It was the
slang term for the lift in a pawnbroker's shop, the device which took up articles for storage, hence
figurative phrase up the spout lost, hopeless, gone beyond recall (1812).


sprag (n.)

prop in a mine, 1841, of unknown origin. Transferred by 1878 to wood blocks, etc., used to brake
motor vehicles. As a verb, from 1841. Related: Spragged; spragging.


sprain (n.)

c.1600, of uncertain origin. The verb is attested from 1620s. A connection has been suggested to
Middle French espraindre to press out, from Latin exprimere [Klein, Century Dictionary], but the
sense evolution is difficult. Related: Sprained; spraining.


sprang

past tense of spring (v.).


sprat (n.)

small European herring, 1590s, variant of sprot (c.1300), from Old English sprott a small herring,
according to Klein related to Dutch sprot and probably connected to sprout (v.).


sprawl (v.)

Old English spreawlian move convulsively, with cognates in the Scandinavian languages (such as
Norwegian sprala, Danish spr&#230;lle) and North Frisian spraweli, probably ultimately from PIE root
*sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)). Meaning to spread out is from c.1300. That of to spread or
stretch in a careless manner is attested from 1540s; of things, from 1745. Related: Sprawled;
sprawling.


sprawl (n.)

1719, from sprawl (v.); meaning straggling expansion of built-up districts into surrounding
countryside is from 1955.


spray (v.)

sprinkle liquid in drops, 1520s, from Middle Dutch sprayen, from Proto-Germanic *sprewjan (cognates:
German spr&uuml;hen to sparkle, drizzle, Spreu chaff, literally that which flies about), from
extended form of PIE root *sper- (4) to sow, scatter (see sprout (v.)). Related: Sprayed; spraying.


spray (n.1)

small branch, mid-13c., of uncertain origin. Perhaps related to Old English spr&aelig;c shoot, twig
(see sprig), and compare Danish sprag in same sense.


spray (n.2)

water blown by waves, 1620s, from spray (v.).


spray-paint (v.)

1928, from spray (v.) + paint (v.). Related: Spray-painting (1902).


spread (v.)

c.1200, to stretch out, to lay out; diffuse, disseminate (transitive), also to advance over a wide
area (intransitive); probably from Old English spr&aelig;dan to spread, stretch forth, extend
(especially in tospr&aelig;dan to spread out, and gespr&aelig;dung spreading), from Proto-Germanic
*spreit- (cognates: Danish sprede, Old Swedish spreda, Middle Dutch spreiden, Old High German and
German spreiten to spread), extended form of PIE root *sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).
Reflexive sense of to be outspread is from c.1300; that of to extend, expand is attested from mid-
14c. Transitive sense of make (something) wide is from late 14c. As an adjective from 1510s.
Related: Spreading.


spread (n.)

1620s, act of spreading; 1690s, extent or expanse of something, from spread (v.). Meaning copious
meal dates from 1822; sense of food for spreading (butter, jam, etc.) is from 1812. Sense of bed
cover is recorded from 1848, originally American English. Meaning degree of variation is attested
from 1929. Meaning ranch for raising cattle is attested from 1927.


spread-eagle (n.)

literally splayed eagle, 1560s, a heraldic term, from past participle adjective of spread (v.).
Common on signs, flags, etc; the colloquial term was from split crow. The figure is on the seal of
the United States (hence spreadeagleism extravagant laudation of the U.S., 1858). Meaning person
secured with arms and legs stretched out (originally to be flogged) is attested from 1785.


spreadable (adj.)

1940, from spread (v.) + -able.


spreader (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from spread (v.).


spreadsheet (n.)

1965, from spread (n.) + sheet (n.).


spree (n.)

a frolic, drinking bout, 1804, slang, earliest use in Scottish dialect works, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps [Barnhart] an alteration of French esprit lively wit (see esprit). According to Klein, Irish
spre seems to be a loan-word from Old Norse sprakr. Watkins proposes a possible origin as an
alteration of Scots spreath cattle raid, from Gaelic spr&#233;dh, spr&#233;, cattle; wealth, from
Middle Irish preit, preid, booty, ultimately from Latin praeda plunder, booty (see prey (n.)).
The splore is a frolic, a merry meeting. In the slang language of the inhabitants of St Giles's, in
London, it is called a spree or a go. [Note in Select Scottish Songs, Ancient and Modern, vol. II,
London, 1810]    In Foote's comedy The Maid of Bath (1794) the word appears as a Scottish dialect
pronunciation of spry:  'When I intermarried with Sir Launcelot Coldstream, I was en siek a spree
lass as yoursel; and the baronet bordering upon his grand climacteric;'  etc.


sprig (n.)

shoot, twig or spray of a plant, shrub, c.1400, probably related to Old English spr&aelig;c shoot,
twig, of obscure origin.


spright (n.)

alternative form of sprite.


sprightly (adj.)

1590s, from spright, an early 16c. variant of sprite, + -ly (1). Related: Sprightliness.


spring (v.)

Old English springan to leap, burst forth, fly up; spread, grow, (class III strong verb; past tense
sprang, past participle sprungen), from Proto-Germanic *sprengan (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian
springa, Middle Dutch springhen, Dutch Related: springen, Old Saxon and Old High German springan,
German springen), from PIE *sprengh-, nasalized form of root *spergh- to move, hasten, spring
(cognates: Sanskrit sprhayati desires eagerly, Greek sperkhesthai to hurry).    In Middle English,
it took on the role of causal sprenge, from Old English sprengan (as still in to spring a trap,
etc.). Meaning to cause to work or open, by or as by a spring mechanism, is from 1828.Meaning to
announce suddenly (usually with on) is from 1876. Meaning to release (from imprisonment) is from
1900. Slang meaning to pay (for a treat, etc.) is recorded from 1906.


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


spring (n.2)

source of a stream or river, flow of water rising to the surface of the earth from below, Old
English spring spring, source, sprinkling, from spring (v.) on the notion of the water bursting
forth from the ground. Rarely used alone in Old English, appearing more often in compounds, such as
wyllspring wellspring, espryng water spring. Figurative sense of source or origin of something is
attested from early 13c. Cognate with Old High German sprung source of water, Middle High German
sprinc leap, jump; source of water.


spring (n.3)

act of springing or leaping, late 14c., from spring (v.). The elastic wire coil that returns to its
shape when stretched is so called from early 15c., originally in clocks and watches. As a device in
carriages, coaches, etc., it is attested from 1660s.


spring-house (n.)

also springhouse, 1762, from spring (n.2) + house (n.).


springboard (n.)

also spring-board, 1799, from spring (v.) + board (n.1).


springbok (n.)

South African gazelle, 1775, from Afrikaans, from springen to leap (from Middle Dutch springhen, see
spring (v.)) + bok antelope, from Middle Dutch boc (see buck (n.1)).


springer (n.)

one who or that which leaps, mid-14c. (late 12c. as a surname), agent noun from spring (v.). As a
type of spaniel, 1808, so called from being used originally to rouse (that is, to spring) game.


Springfield

type of firearm, 1813, named for the U.S. government armory in Springfield, Mass.


springtime (n.)

also spring-time, late 15c., from spring (n.1) + time (n.).


springy (adj.)

elastic, 1650s, from spring (v.) + -y (2). Related: Springiness.


sprinkle (v.)

late 14c. (implied in sprinkled), frequentative of sprenge (see spring (v.)) or via Middle Dutch,
Middle Low German sprenkel spot, speck, from PIE root *(s)preg- to jerk, scatter (cognates: Latin
spargere to scatter, sprinkle). The meaning rain lightly is first recorded 1778.


sprinkler (n.)

1530s, agent noun from sprinkle (v.).


sprinkling (n.)

mid-15c., act of sprinkling, verbal noun from sprinkle (v.). Meaning small amount is from 1590s.


sprint (v.)

1560s, to spring, dart, probably an alteration of sprenten to leap, spring (early 14c.), from a
Scandinavian source such as Old Norse spretta to jump up (cognate with Swedish spritta to start,
startle). Meaning to run a short distance at full speed first recorded 1871. Related: Sprinted;
sprinting.


sprint (n.)

short burst of running, etc., 1865, from sprint (v.).


sprinter (n.)

1871, agent noun from sprint (v.).


sprit (n.)

Old English spreot pole, pike, spear, originally a sprout, shoot, branch, from Proto-Germanic
*sprut- (see sprout (v.)). Cognate with Middle Dutch spriet, Middle Low German spryet, German
Spriet, North Frisian sprit. Restricted nautical sense of diagonal spar from a mast is from 14c.
Related: Spritsail.


sprite (n.)

c.1300, Holy Ghost, from Old French esprit spirit, from Latin spiritus (see spirit (n.)). From mid-
14c. as immaterial being; angel, demon, elf, fairy; apparition, ghost.


spritz (v.)

1917, from Yiddish or directly from German spritzen to squirt, from Middle High German spr&#252;tzen
to squirt, sprout, from Proto-Germanic *sprut- (see sprout (v.)). Spritzer glass of wine mixed with
carbonated water is from 1961.


sprocket (n.)

1530s, originally a carpenters' word for a piece of timber used in framing, of unknown origin. The
meaning projection from the rim of a wheel that engages the links of a chain is first recorded 1750.


sprout (v.)

Old English -sprutan (in asprutan to sprout), from Proto-Germanic *sprut- (cognates: Old Saxon
sprutan, Old Frisian spruta, Middle Dutch spruten, Old High German spriozan, German sprie&#223;en to
sprout), from PIE *spreud-, extended form of root *sper- (4) to strew (cognates: Greek speirein to
scatter, spora a scattering, sowing, sperma sperm, seed, literally that which is scattered; Old
English spreawlian to sprawl, -spr&aelig;dan to spread, spreot pole; Armenian sprem scatter; Old
Lithuanian sprainas staring, opening wide one's eyes; Lettish sprie&#382;u I span, I measure).
Related: Sprouted; sprouting.


sprout (n.)

shoot of a plant, sprout; a twig, Old English sprota, from the verb (see sprout (v.)). Cognate with
Middle Dutch spruyte, Dutch spruite a sprout, Old Norse sproti, German Spro&#223;.


spruce (n.)

1660s, evergreen tree, fir, from spruse (adj.) made of spruce wood (early 15c.), literally from
Prussia, from Spruce, Sprws (late 14c.), unexplained alterations of Pruce Prussia, from an Old
French form of Prussia.   Spruce seems to have been a generic term for commodities brought to
England by Hanseatic merchants (especially beer, boards and wooden chests, and leather), and the
tree thus was believed to be particular to Prussia, which for a time was figurative in England as a
land of luxuries. Compare spruce (adj.). As a distinct species of fir, from 1731.


spruce (v.)

to make trim or neat, 1590s, from spruce (adj.). Related: Spruced; sprucing.


spruce (adj.)

neat, smart in dress and appearance, dapper, brisk, 1580s, from spruce leather (mid-15c.; see spruce
(n.)), a type of leather imported from Prussia in the 1400s and 1500s which was used in England to
make a popular style of jerkin that was considered smart-looking.


sprucify (v.)

1610s, from spruce (adj.) + -ify. Related: Sprucified.


sprue (n.)

piece of metal (later plastic) attached to a cast object, 1875, earlier (1849) channel through which
metal is poured into a mold; of unknown origin.


spruik (v.)

1916, Australia and New Zealand slang, of unknown origin.


sprung

past participle of spring (v.).


spry (adj.)

1746, active, nimble, vigorous, lively, dialectal, perhaps a shortening and alteration of sprightly
[Barnhart], or from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse spr&aelig;kr, dialectal Swedish sprygg
brisk, active), from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, from PIE root *(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (see
sparse).


spud (n.)

mid-15c., small or poor knife, of uncertain origin probably related to Danish spyd, Old Norse spjot
spear, German Spiess spear, lance). Meaning spade is from 1660s; sense of short or stumpy person or
thing is from 1680s; that of potato is first recorded 1845 in New Zealand English.


spue (v.)

variant of spew (v.).


spumante (n.)

sparkling white wine from Asti in Piedmont, 1908, from Italian spumante, literally sparkling, from
spuma foam, froth (see spume).


spume (n.)

late 14c., from Old French spume, from Latin spuma foam (also source of Italian spuma, Spanish
espuma); cognate with Old English fam, Old High German veim foam (see foam (n.)).


spumescent (adj.)

foaming, frothing, 1856, from Latin spumescentem (nominative spumescens), present participle of
spumescere grow frothy, from spuma (see spume) + inchoative suffix -escere.


spumoni (n.)

kind of ice cream dessert, 1929, from Italian spumone (singular), spumoni (plural), from spuma foam
(see spume).


spun

past participle of spin (v.).


spunk (n.)

1530s, a spark, Scottish, from Gaelic spong tinder, pith, sponge, from Latin spongia (see sponge
(n.)). The sense of courage, pluck, mettle is first attested 1773. A similar sense evolution took
place in cognate Irish sponnc sponge, tinder, spark; courage, spunk. Vulgar slang sense of seminal
fluid is recorded from c.1888.


spunky (adj.)

courageous, spirited, 1786, from spunk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Spunkily; spunkiness.


spur (n.)

Old English spura, spora metal implement worn on the heel to goad a horse (related to spurnan to
kick), from Proto-Germanic *spuron (cognates: Old Norse spori, Middle Dutch spore, Dutch spoor, Old
High German sporo, German Sporn spur), from PIE *spere- ankle (see spurn). Related to Dutch spoor,
Old English spor track, footprint, trace.    Generalized sense of anything that urges on, stimulus,
is from late 14c. As a sharp projection on the leg of a cock, from 1540s. Meaning a ridge projecting
off a mountain mass is recorded from 1650s. Of railway lines from 1837. Widely extended senses ...
are characteristic of a horsey race [Weekley]. Expression on the spur of the moment (1801) preserves
archaic phrase on the spur in great haste (1520s). To win one's spurs is to gain knighthood by some
valorous act, gilded spurs being the distinctive mark of a knight.


spur (v.)

c.1200, from spur (n.). Figurative use from c.1500. Related: Spurred; spurring. Old English had
spyrian, but it meant follow the track of, track down, investigate.


spurge (n.)

plant species, late 14c., from Old French espurge, from espurgier to purge (transitive and
intransitive), from Latin expurgare, from ex- out (see ex-) + purgare to purge (see purge (v.)). So
called from the purgative and emetic properties of the plant's root.


spurious (adj.)

1590s, born out of wedlock, from Latin spurius illegitimate, false (source also of Italian spurio,
Spanish espurio), from spurius (n.) illegitimate child, probably from Etruscan spural public. Sense
of having an irregular origin, not properly constituted is from c.1600; that of false, sham is from
1610s; of writing, etc., not proceeding from the source pretended, 1620s. Related: Spuriously;
spuriousness.


spurn (v.)

Old English spurnan to kick (away), strike against; reject, scorn, despise, from Proto-Germanic
*spurnon (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German spurnan, Old Frisian spurna, Old Norse sporna to
kick, drive away with the feet), from PIE root *spere- ankle (cognates: Middle Dutch spoor track of
an animal, Greek sphyron ankle, Latin spernere to reject, spurn, Sanskrit sphurati kicks, Middle
Irish seir heel). Related: Spurned; spurning.


spurt (v.)

to gush out, squirt, 1560s, variant of spirt, perhaps cognate with Middle High German sp&uuml;rzen
to spit, and spr&uuml;tzen to squirt (see sprout (v.)). Related: Spurted; spurting. The noun in this
sense is attested from 1775.


spurt (n.)

brief burst of activity, 1560s, variant of spirt brief period of time (1540s), of uncertain origin,
perhaps somehow connected with spurt (v.).


sputnik (n.)

artificial satellite, extended from the name of the one launched by the Soviet Union Oct. 4, 1957,
from Russian sputnik satellite, literally traveling companion (in this use short for sputnik zemlyi,
traveling companion of the Earth) from Old Church Slavonic supotiniku, from Russian so-, s- with,
together + put' path, way, from Old Church Slavonic poti, from PIE *pent- to tread, go (see find
(v.)) + agent suffix -nik.    The electrifying impact of the launch on the West can be gauged by the
number of new formations in -nik around this time (the suffix had been present in a Yiddish context
for at least a decade before); Laika, the stray dog launched aboard Sputnik 2 (Nov. 2, 1957), which
was dubbed muttnik in the Detroit Free Press, etc. The rival U.S. satellite which failed to reach
orbit in 1957 (because the Vanguard rocket blew up on the launch pad) derided as a kaputnik (in the
Daytona Beach Morning Journal), a dudnik (Christian Science Monitor), a flopnik (Youngstown
Vindicator, New York Times), a pffftnik (National Review), and a stayputnik (Vancouver Sun).


sputter (v.)

1590s, to spit with explosive sounds, cognate with Dutch sputteren, West Frisian sputterje, from
Proto-Germanic *sput- (see spout (v.)). Related: Sputtered; sputtering. The noun is attested from
1670s.


sputum (n.)

1690s, from Latin sputum, noun use of neuter past participle of spuere to spit (see spew (v.)).


spy (v.)

mid-13c., to watch stealthily, from Old French espiier observe, watch closely, spy on, find out,
probably from Frankish *spehon or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *spehon-
(cognates: Old High German *spehon to look out for, scout, spy, German sp&auml;hen to spy, Middle
Dutch spien), the Germanic survivals of the productive PIE root *spek- to look, observe (see scope
(n.1)). Old English had spyrian make a track, go, pursue; ask about, investigate, also a noun
spyrigend investigator, inquirer. Italian spiare, Spanish espiar also are Germanic loan-words.
Meaning to catch sight of is from c.1300. Children's game I spy so called by 1946.


spy (n.)

mid-13c., one who spies on another, from Old French espie spy, look-out, scout (Modern French
&#233;pie), probably from a Germanic source related to spy (v.).


spyglass (n.)

also spy-glass, telescope, field-glass, 1706, from spy (v.) + glass (n.). Spying-glass is from
1680s.


spyware (n.)

by 2000, from spy + ending from software in the computer sense.


squab (n.)

1680s, very young bird, earlier (1630s) unformed, lumpish person and used at various times for any
sort of flabby mass, such as sofa cushions; probably from a Scandinavian word (compare dialectal
Swedish skvabb loose or fat flesh, skvabba fat woman), from Proto-Germanic *(s)kwab-. Klein lists
cognates in Old Prussian gawabo toad, Old Church Slavonic zaba frog.


squabble (n.)

c.1600, probably from a Scandinavian source and of imitative origin (compare dialectal Swedish
skvabbel a quarrel, a dispute, dialectal German schwabbeln to babble, prattle). The verb also is
from c.1600. Related: Squabbled; squabbling.


squad (n.)

1640s, small number of military men detailed for some purpose, from French esquade, from Middle
French escadre, from Spanish escuadra or Italian squadra battalion, literally square, from Vulgar
Latin *exquadra (see square (n.)). Before the widespread use of of automatic weapons, infantry
troops tended to fight in a square formation to repel cavalry or superior forces. Extended to sports
1902, police work 1905.


squadron (n.)

1560s, from Italian squadrone, augmentative of squadra battalion, literally square (see squad). As a
division of a fleet, from 1580s, of an air force, 1912.


squalid (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French squalide and directly from Latin squalidus rough, coated with dirt,
filthy, related to squales filth, squalus filthy, squalare be covered with a rough, stiff layer, be
coated with dirt, be filthy, of uncertain origin. Related: Squalidly; squalidness; squalidity.


squall (n.)

sudden, violent gust of wind, 1719, originally nautical, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Norwegian skval sudden rush of water, Swedish skvala to gush, pour down), probably
ultimately a derivative of squall (v.).


squall (v.)

cry out loudly, 1630s, probably from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse skvala to cry out, and
of imitative origin (compare squeal (v.)). Related: Squalled; squalling. As a noun from 1709.


squally (adj.)

1719, from squall + -y (2).


squalor (n.)

1620s, state or condition of being miserable and dirty, from Latin squalor roughness, dirtiness,
filthiness, from squalere be filthy (see squalid).


squamous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin squamosus covered with scales, scaly, from squama scale, perhaps related to
squalus foul, filthy (see squalid). Middle English had squame a scale (late 14c.), from Old French
esquame, from Latin squama. Alternative form squamose attested from 1660s.


squander (v.)

1580s (implied in squandering), to spend recklessly or prodigiously, of unknown origin; Shakespeare
used it in Merchant of Venice (1593) with a sense of to be scattered over a wide area. Squander-bug,
a British symbol of reckless extravagance and waste during war-time shortages, represented as a
devilish insect, was introduced 1943. In U.S., Louis Ludlow coined squanderlust (1935) for the
tendency of government bureaucracies to spend much money.


square (n.)

mid-13c., tool for measuring right angles, carpenter's square, from Old French esquire a square,
squareness, from Vulgar Latin *exquadra, back-formation from *exquadrare to square, from Latin ex-
out (see ex-) + quadrare make square, set in order, complete, from quadrus a square (see quadrant).
Meaning square shape or area is recorded by late 14c. (Old English used feower-scyte). Geometric
sense four-sided rectilinear figure is from 1550s; mathematical sense of a number multiplied by
itself is first recorded 1550s. Sense of open space in a town or park is from 1680s; that of area
bounded by four streets in a city is from c.1700. As short for square meal, from 1882. Square one
the very beginning (often what one must go back to) is from 1960, probably a figure from board
games.


square (adj.)

early 14c., containing four equal sides and right angles, from square (n.), or from Old French
esquarre, past participle of esquarrer. Meaning honest, fair, is first attested 1560s; that of
straight, direct is from 1804. Of meals, from 1868.    Sense of old-fashioned is 1944, U.S. jazz
slang, said to be from shape of a conductor's hand gestures in a regular four-beat rhythm. Square-
toes meant nearly the same thing late 18c.: precise, formal, old-fashioned person, from the style of
men's shoes worn early 18c. and then fallen from fashion. Squaresville is attested from 1956. Square
dance attested by 1831; originally one in which the couples faced inward from four sides; later of
country dances generally.    [T]he old square dance is an abortive attempt at conversation while
engaged in walking certain mathematical figures over a limited area. [March 1868]


square (v.)

late 14c. of stones, from Old French esquarrer, escarrer to cut square, from Vulgar Latin
*exquadrare (see square (adj.)). Meaning regulate according to standard is from 1530s; sense of to
accord with is from 1590s. With reference to accounts from 1815. In 15c.-17c. the verb also could
mean to deviate, vary, digress, fall out of order. Related: Squared; squaring.


square (adv.)

1570s, fairly, honestly, from square (adj.). From 1630s as directly, in line. Sense of completely is
American-English, colloquial, by 1862.


squared (adj.)

late 14c., made square, past participle adjective from square (v.). Meaning drawn up in squares is
from 1660s. Of numbers, multiplied by itself, from 1550s.


squarely (adv.)

1540s, of multiplication, from square (adj.) + -ly (2). From 1560s as in a straightforward manner;
meaning firmly, solidly is from 1860.


squash (v.)

to crush, squeeze, early 14c., squachen, from Old French esquasser, escasser to crush, shatter,
destroy, break, from Vulgar Latin *exquassare, from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + quassare to shatter
(see quash to crush). Related: Squashed; squashing.


squash (n.1)

gourd fruit, 1640s, shortened borrowing from Narraganset (Algonquian) askutasquash, literally the
things that may be eaten raw, from askut green, raw, uncooked + asquash eaten, in which the -ash is
a plural affix (compare succotash).


squash (n.2)

1610s, act of squashing, from squash (v.). The racket game called by that name 1899; earlier (1886)
it was the name of the soft rubber ball used in it.


squashy (adj.)

1690s, from squash (n.2) + -y (2).


squat (v.)

mid-14c., to crush; early 15c., crouch on the heels, from Old French esquatir, escatir compress,
press down, lay flat, crush, from es- out (see ex-) + Old French quatir press down, flatten, from
Vulgar Latin *coactire press together, force, from Latin coactus, past participle of cogere to
compel, curdle, collect (see cogent). Meaning to settle on land without any title or right is from
1800. Related: Squatted; squatting.


squat (n.)

c.1400, bump, heavy fall, from squat (v.). Meaning posture of one who squats is from 1570s; that of
act of squatting is from 1580s. Slang noun sense of nothing at all first attested 1934, probably
suggestive of squatting to defecate. Weight-lifting sense is from 1954.


squat (adj.)

early 15c., crouch on the heels, in a squatting position, from squat (v.)). Sense of short, thick
dates from 1620s.


squatter (n.)

settler who occupies land without legal title, 1788, agent noun from squat (v.); in reference to
paupers or homeless people in uninhabited buildings, it is recorded from 1880.


squaw (n.)

American Indian woman, 1630s, from Massachuset (Algonquian) squa woman (cognate with Narraganset
squaws woman). Over the years it has come to have a derogatory sense and is now considered offensive
by many Native Americans [Bright]. Widespread in U.S. place names, sometimes as a translation of a
local native word for woman.


squawk (v.)

1821, probably of imitative origin (compare dialectal Italian squacco small crested heron). Related:
Squawked; squawking. Squawk-box loud-speaker is from 1945.


squawk (n.)

1850, from squawk (v.).


squeak (v.)

late 14c., probably of imitative origin, similar to Middle Swedish skv&auml;ka to squeak, croak.
Related: Squeaked; squeaking.


squeak (n.)

1660s, from squeak (v.); sense of narrow escape is by 1811.


squeaky (adj.)

1823, from squeak (n.) + -y (2). Squeaky clean in figurative sense is from 1972, probably from
advertisements for dishwashing liquid. Related: Squeakily; squeakiness.


squeal (v.)

c.1300, probably of imitative origin, similar to Old Norse skvala to cry out (see squall (v.)). The
sense of inform on another is first recorded 1865. Related: Squealed; squealing. The noun is
attested from 1747.


squeamish (adj.)

late 14c., variant (with -ish) of squoymous disdainful, fastidious (early 14c.), from Anglo-French
escoymous, which is of unknown origin. Related: Squeamishly; squeamishness.    He was somdel
squaymous  Of fartyng, and of speche daungerous  [Chaucer, Miller's Tale, c.1386]


squeegee (n.)

wooden scraping instrument with a rubber blade, 1844, a nautical word originally, perhaps from
squeege to press (1782), an alteration of squeeze (v.). Later in photography, then window-washing.


squeezable (adj.)

1813, from squeeze + -able.


squeeze (v.)

c.1600, press forcibly (transitive), probably an alteration of quease (c.1550), from Old English
cwysan to squeeze, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative (compare German quetschen to squeeze).
Perhaps altered by influence of many words of similar sense in squ-. Intransitive sense from 1680s.
Baseball squeeze play first recorded 1905. The 1811 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue has squeeze-crab
A sour-looking, shrivelled, diminutive fellow.


squeeze (n.)

1610s, act of squeezing, from squeeze (v.). Main squeeze most important person is attested from
1896; meaning one's sweetheart, lover is attested by 1980. Slang expression to put the squeeze on
(someone or something) exert influence on is from 1711.


squelch (v.)

1620s, to fall, drop, or stomp (on something soft) with crushing force, possibly imitative of sound
made in the process. The figurative sense of suppress completely is first recorded 1864. Related:
Squelched; squelching.


squib (n.)

1520s, short bit of sarcastic writing, witty scoff, of unknown origin. If the meaning small firework
that burns with a hissing noise (also 1520s) is the original one, the word might be imitative.


squid (n.)

marine mollusk, cuttlefish, 1610s, of unknown origin; perhaps a sailors' variant of squirt, so
called for the ink it squirts out.


squiggle (v.)

1804, probably a blend of squirm and wriggle. Related: Squiggled; squiggling.


squiggle (n.)

1902, from squiggle (v.). In reference to handwriting, drawing, etc., 1928. Related: Squiggly
(1902).


squinch (v.)

1840 (transitive), of faces; intransitive use from 1843. Perhaps related to squinch narrow opening
in a building (c.1600). Also compare squink-eyed (1630s), variant of squint-eyed, so perhaps it is
at least partly an altered form of squint. Related: Squinched; squinching.


squint (adj.)

1570s, looking different ways; looking obliquely, shortened form of asquint (adv.). Meaning looking
indirectly is from 1610s.


squint (v.)

1590s, from squint (adj.). Related: Squinted; squinting.


squint (n.)

non-coincidence of the optic axes, 1650s, from squint (adj.). Meaning sidelong glance is from 1660s.


squire (v.)

to attend (a lady) as a gallant, late 14c., from squire (n.). Related: Squired; squiring.


squire (n.)

early 13c., young man who attends a knight, later member of the landowning class ranking below a
knight (c.1300), from Old French esquier squire, literally shield carrier (see esquire). Meaning
country gentleman, landed proprietor is from 1670s; as a general term of address to a gentleman, it
is attested from 1828.


squirm (v.)

1690s, originally referring to eels, of unknown origin; sometimes associated with worm or swarm, but
perhaps imitative. Figurative sense to be painfully affected, to writhe inside is from 1804.
Related: Squirmed; squirming. As a noun from 1839.


squirrel (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French esquirel, Old French escurueil squirrel; squirrel fur (Modern French
&eacute;cureuil), from Vulgar Latin *scuriolus, diminutive of *scurius squirrel, variant of Latin
sciurus, from Greek skiouros a squirrel, literally shadow-tailed, from skia shadow (see shine (v.))
+ oura tail, from PIE root *ors- buttocks, backside (see arse). Perhaps the original notion is that
which makes a shade with its tail. The Old English word was acweorna, which survived into Middle
English as aquerne.


squirrel (v.)

to hoard up, store away (as a squirrel does nuts), 1939, from squirrel (n.). Related: Squirreled;
squirreling.


squirrely (adj.)

also squirrelly, 1895, abounding in squirrels; 1910 as reminiscent in some way of a squirrel, from
squirrel (n.) + -y (2). Earlier was squirrelish (1834). Related: Squirreliness.


squirt (v.)

late 15c., squyrten to spit (intransitive), of uncertain origin, probably imitative. Transitive
sense cause to issue in a sudden jet or stream is from 1580s. Related: Squirted; squirting. Squirt-
gun attested from 1803.


squirt (n.)

late 14c., diarrhea, from squirt (v.). Meaning jet of liquid is from 1620s. Meaning a whipper-
snapper is from 1839.


squish (v.)

1640s, probably a variant of squash (v.), perhaps by influence of obsolete squiss to squeeze or
crush (1550s). Related: Squished; squishing.


squishy (adj.)

1847, from squish + -y (2). Related: Squishily; squishiness.


squiz (v.)

to look at, 1916, Australian, perhaps a blend of squint and quiz.


Sri Lanka

large island southeast of India (known in English until 1972 as Ceylon), from Lanka, older name for
the island and its chief city, + Sanskrit sri beauty (especially of divinities, kings, heroes,
etc.), also an honorific prefix to proper names, from PIE root *kreie- to be outstanding, brilliant,
masterly, beautiful, found in Greek (kreon lord, master) and Indo-Iranian.


SRO

1941, initialism (acronym) for standing room only.


SSR

1926, from Russian, initialism (acronym) for Sovetskaya Sotsialisticheskaya Respublika Soviet
Socialist Republic.


stab (v.)

late 14c., thrust with a pointed weapon, first in Scottish English, apparently a dialectal variant
of Scottish stob to pierce, stab, from stob (n.), perhaps a variant of stub (n.) stake, nail, but
Barnhart finds this doubtful. Figurative use, of emotions, etc., is from 1590s. Related: Stabbed;
stabbing.


stab (n.)

wound produced by stabbing, mid-15c., from stab (v.). Meaning act of stabbing is from 1520s. Meaning
a try first recorded 1895, American English. Stab in the back in the figurative sense treacherous
deed is first attested 1881; the verbal phrase in the figurative sense is from 1888.


Stabat Mater

Latin Stabat Mater dolorosa Stood the Mother (of Jesus) full of sorrow, opening words of a sequence
composed 13c. by Jacobus de Benedictis.


stability (n.)

mid-14c., firmness of resolve, mental equilibrium (of persons), from Old French stablete, establete
firmness, solidity, stability; durability, constancy (Modern French stabilit&#233;), from Latin
stabilitatem (nominative stabilitas) a standing fast, firmness, figuratively security,
steadfastness, from stabilis steadfast, firm (see stable (adj.)). In physical sense, state of being
difficult to overthrow, power of remaining upright, it is recorded from early 15c. Meaning
continuance in the same state is from 1540s.


stabilization (n.)

1881, noun of action from stabilize.


stabilize (v.)

1861, originally of ships; probably a back-formation from stability, or else from French stabiliser.
Related: Stabilized; stabilizing. Earlier verbs in the same sense were stabilitate (1640s) and
simple stable (v.) make steady or firm, make stable (c.1300), from Old French establir.


stabilizer (n.)

1909 in aeronautical sense, agent noun from stabilize (v.).


stable (n.)

early 13c., building or enclosure where horses or cows are kept, building for domestic animals, from
Old French stable, estable a stable, stall (Modern French &#233;table), also applied to cowsheds and
pigsties, from Latin stabulum a stall, fold, aviary, beehive, lowly cottage, brothel, etc.,
literally a standing place, from PIE *ste-dhlo-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Meaning collection of horses belonging to one stable is attested from 1570s; transferred sense of
group of fighters under same management is from 1897; that of group of prostitutes working for the
same employer is from 1937.  For what the grete Stiede  Is stole, thanne he taketh hiede,  And makth
the stable dore fast.  [John Gower, Confessio Amantis, 1390]


stable (adj.)

mid-12c., trustworthy, reliable; mid-13c., constant, steadfast; virtuous; from Old French stable,
estable constant, steadfast, unchanging, from Latin stabilis firm, steadfast, stable, fixed,
figuratively durable, unwavering, literally able to stand, from PIE *ste-dhli-, from root *sta- to
stand (see stet). From c.1300 as well-founded, well-established, secure (of governments, etc.).
Physical sense of secure against falling is recorded from late 14c.; also of even temperament. Of
nuclear isotopes, from 1904.


stable (v.)

to put in a certain place or position, c.1300; to put (a horse) in a stable, early 14c., from stable
(n.) or from Old French establer. Related: Stabled; stabling.


stable-boy (n.)

1729, from stable (n.) + boy (n.).


staccato (adj.)

1724, from Italian staccato, literally detached, disconnected, past participle of staccare to
detach, shortened form of distaccare separate, detach, from Middle French destacher, from Old French
destachier to detach (see detach). As an adverb from 1844. Related: Staccatissimo.


stack (v.)

early 14c., to pile up (grain) into a stack, from stack (n.). Meaning arrange (a deck of cards)
unfairly (in stack the deck) is first recorded 1825. Stack up compare against is 1903, from notion
of piles of poker chips (1896). Of aircraft waiting to land, from 1941. Related: Stacked; Stacking.


stack (n.)

c.1300, pile, heap, or group of things, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse stakkr haystack
(cognate with Danish stak, Swedish stack heap, stack), from Proto-Germanic *stakon- a stake, from
PIE *stog- (cognates: Old Church Slavonic stogu heap, Russian stog haystack, Lithuanian stokas
pillar), variant of root *steg- (1) pole, stick (see stake (n.)). Meaning set of shelves on which
books are set out is from 1879. Used of the chimneys of factories, locomotives, etc., since 1825. Of
computer data from 1960.


stacked (adj.)

1796, of hay, past participle adjective from stack (v.). Of women, well-built physically; curved in
a way considered sexually desirable, 1942.


stadium (n.)

late 14c., a foot race; an ancient measure of length, from Latin stadium a measure of length; a
course for foot-racers (commonly one-eighth of a Roman mile or a little over 600 English feet;
translated in early English Bibles by furlong), from Greek stadion a measure of length; a race-
course, a running track, especially the track at Olympia, which was one stadion in length. The
meaning running track, recorded in English from c.1600, was extended to mean in modern-day context
large, open oval structure with tiers of seats for viewing sporting events (1834).    Originally the
distance between successive stations of the shouters and runners employed to estimate distances
[Century Dictionary]. According to Barnhart, the Greek word might literally mean fixed standard of
length (from stadios firm, fixed, from PIE root *sta- to stand), or it may be from spadion, from
span to draw up, pull, with form influenced by stadios.


staff (n.)

Old English st&aelig;f (plural stafas), walking stick, strong pole used for carrying, rod used as a
weapon, pastoral staff, probably originally *st&aelig;b, from Proto-Germanic *stabaz (cognates: Old
Saxon staf, Old Norse stafr, Danish stav, Old Frisian stef, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staf,
Old High German stab, German Stab, Gothic *stafs element; Middle Dutch stapel pillar, foundation),
from PIE root *stebh- post, stem, to support, place firmly on, fasten (cognates: Old Lithuanian
stabas idol, Lithuanian stebas staff, pillar; Old Church Slavonic stoboru pillar; Sanskrit stabhnati
supports; Greek stephein to tie around, encircle, wreathe, staphyle grapevine, bunch of grapes; Old
English stapol post, pillar).    As pole from which a flag is flown, 1610s. In musical notation from
1660s. Sense of group of military officers that assists a commander is attested from 1702,
apparently from German, from the notion of the baton that is a badge of office or authority (a sense
attested in English from 1530s); hence staff officer (1702), staff-sergeant (1811). Meaning group of
employees (as at an office or hospital) is first found 1837. Staff of life bread is from the
Biblical phrase break the staff of bread meaning cut off the supply of food (Lev. xxvi:26),
translating Hebrew matteh lekhem.    The Old English word, in plural, was the common one used for
letter of the alphabet, character, hence writing, literature, and many compounds having to do with
writing, such as st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft grammar, st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ftig lettered,  st&aelig;flic
literary, st&aelig;fleahtor grammatical error, with leahtor vice, sin, offense.


staff (v.)

to provide with a staff of assistants, 1859, from staff (n.). Related: Staffed; staffing.


staffer (n.)

staff-writer, 1949, in journalism, from staff-writer (1878); from staff (n.) in the group of
employees sense.


Stafford

city in England, mid-11c., St&aelig;fford, literally ford by a landing-place, from Old English
st&aelig;&eth; river bank, shore + ford (n.). County town of Staffordshire, which, as a name for a
type of earthenware and porcelain made there is attested from 1765. The city was noted in medieval
England as a source of blue cloth.


stag (n.)

late 12c., probably from Old English stagga a stag, from Proto-Germanic *stag-, from PIE *stegh- to
prick, sting (see sting (v.)). The Old Norse equivalent was used of male foxes, tomcats, and
dragons; and the Germanic root word perhaps originally meant male animal in its prime. Meaning
pertaining to or composed of males only (stag party) is American English slang from 1848. Stag film
pornographic movie is attested from 1968. Stag beetle, so called for its horns, is from 1680s.


stage (n.)

mid-13c., story of a building; early 14c., raised platform used for public display (also the
platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage building, dwelling place; stage for
performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey (12c., Modern French &#233;tage story of a house,
stage, floor, loft), from Vulgar Latin *staticum a place for standing, from Latin statum, past
participle of stare to stand (see stet). Meaning platform for presentation of a play is attested
from late 14c.; generalized for profession of an actor from 1580s.    Sense of period of development
or time in life first recorded early 14c., probably from Middle English sense of degree or step on
the 'ladder' of virtue, 'wheel' of fortune, etc., in parable illustrations and morality plays.
Meaning a step in sequence, a stage of a journey is late 14c. Meaning level of water in a river,
etc. is from 1814, American English.   Stage-name is from 1727. Stage-mother (n.) in the overbearing
mother-of-an-actress sense is from 1915. Stage-door is from 1761, hence Stage-Door Johnny young man
who frequents stage doors seeking the company of actresses, chorus girls, etc. (1907). Stage
whisper, such as used by an actor on stage to be heard by the audience, first attested 1865. Stage-
manage (v.) is from 1871.


stage (v.)

early 14c., to erect, construct, from stage (n.). The meaning put into a play is from c.1600; that
of put (a play) on the stage first recorded 1879; general sense of to mount (a comeback, etc.) is
attested from 1924. Related: Staged; staging.


stage-fright (n.)

1826, from stage (n.) + fright (n.).


stage-hand (n.)

1865, from stage (n.) + hand (n.).


stage-struck (adj.)

possessed by a passionate desire to perform on stage, 1813, from stage (n.) + past participle
adjective from strike (v.). Earlier was stage-smitten (1680s).


stagecoach (n.)

also stage-coach, 1650s, from stage (n.) in a sense of division of a journey without stopping for
rest (c.1600) + coach (n.).


stagecraft (n.)

also stage-craft, 1848, from stage (n.) + craft (n.).


staged (adj.)

1560s, appearing on a stage, past participle adjective from stage (v.). Meaning proceeding in stages
is from 1960.


stagflation (n.)

1965, apparently coined by U.K. politician Iain Macleod (1913-1970), from stag(nation) +
(in)flation.    Attacking the Government's economic policy last night in the House of Commons, Mr.
Iain Macleod (West Enfield - Con.) the Opposition spokesman on Treasury and economic affairs,
described the present situation in Britain as stagflation -- stagnation and inflation together.
[Glasgow Herald, Nov. 18, 1965]


staggard (n.)

stag in its fourth year, thus not quite full-grown, c.1400, from stag + -ard.


stagger (v.)

mid-15c., walk unsteadily, reel (intransitive), altered from stakeren (early 14c.), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Danish stagra, Old Norse stakra to push, shove, cause to reel, also
to stumble, stagger, perhaps literally hit with a stick, from Proto-Germanic *stakon- a stake, from
PIE *steg- (1) pole, stick. Cognate with Dutch staggelen to stagger, German staggeln to stammer.
Transitive sense of bewilder, amaze first recorded 1550s; that of arrange in a zig-zag pattern is
from 1856. Related: Staggered; staggering.


staggering (adj.)

amazing, 1560s, figurative present participle adjective from stagger (v.). Related: Staggeringly.


staging (n.)

temporary structure or support, early 14c., verbal noun from stage (v.). As an adjective to
designate stopping place or assembly point, 1945.


stagnant (adj.)

1660s, from French stagnant (early 17c.), from Latin stagnantem (nominative stagnans), present
participle of stagnare to stagnate (see stagnate). Related: Stagnancy (1650s); stagnantly.


stagnate (v.)

1660s, from Latin stagnatum, stagnatus, past participle of stagnare to stagnate, from stagnatum
standing water, pond, swamp, perhaps from a PIE root *stag- to seep drip (cognates: Greek stazein to
ooze, drip; see stalactite). Figurative use by 1709. Related: Stagnated; stagnating.


stagnation (n.)

1660s, noun of action from stagnate (v.).


stagy (adj.)

also stagey, 1845, from stage (n.) in the theatrical sense + -y (2). Related: Staginess.


staid (adj.)

1540s, fixed, permanent, adjectival use of stayed, past participle of stay (v.). Meaning sober,
sedate first recorded 1550s. Related: Staidly.


stain (v.)

late 14c., damage or blemish the appearance of, probably representing a merger of Old Norse steina
to paint, color, stain, and a shortened form of Middle English disteynen to discolor or stain, from
Old French desteign-, stem of desteindre to remove the color (Modern French d&#233;teindre), from
des- (from Latin dis- remove; see dis-) + Old French teindre to dye, from Latin tingere (see
tincture). Meaning to color (fabric, wood, etc.) is from 1650s. Intransitive sense to become
stained, take stain is from 1877. Related: Stained; staining. Stained glass is attested from 1791.


stain (n.)

1560s, act of staining, from stain (v.). Meaning a stain mark, discoloration produced by foreign
matter is from 1580s. Meaning dye used in staining is from 1758.


stainless (adj.)

1580s, from stain (n.) + -less. Related: Stainlessly. Stainless steel is from 1917, a chromium-steel
alloy (usually 14% chromium) used for cutlery, etc., so called because it is highly resistant to
rust or tarnish.


stair (n.)

Old English st&aelig;ger stair, flight of steps, staircase, from Proto-Germanic *staigri (cognates:
Middle Dutch stegher, Dutch steiger a stair, step, quay, pier, scaffold; German Steig path, Old
English stig narrow path), from PIE *steigh- go, rise, stride, step, walk (cognates: Greek steikhein
to go, march in order, stikhos row, line, rank, verse; Sanskrit stighnoti mounts, rises, steps; Old
Church Slavonic stignati to overtake, stigna place; Lithuanian staiga suddenly; Old Irish tiagaim I
walk; Welsh taith going, walk, way). Originally also a collective plural; stairs developed by late
14c.


staircase (n.)

also stair-case, 1620s, originally the enclosure of the stairs, from stair + case (n.2) in its sense
frame; compare former window-case, door-case.


stairway (n.)

1767, from stair + way (n.).


stairwell (n.)

by 1862, from stair + well (n.).


stake (n.1)

pointed stick or post, Old English staca pin, stake, from Proto-Germanic *stakon (cognates: Old
Norse stiaki, Danish stage, Old Frisian stake, Middle Dutch stake, Dutch staak, German stake), from
PIE root *steg- (1) pole, stick. The Germanic word has been borrowed in Spanish (estaca), Old French
(estaque), and Italian stacca) and was borrowed back as attach.    Meaning post upon which persons
were bound for death by burning is recorded from c.1200. Meaning vertical bar affixed to the edge of
a platform of s truck, rail car, etc., to hold boards to keep the load from falling off is from
1875; hence stake-body as a type of truck (1907). In pull up stakes, The allusion is to pulling up
the stakes of a tent [Bartlett].


stake (v.1)

early 14c., to mark (land) with stakes, from stake (n.1). Hence, to stake a claim (1857). Meaning to
maintain surveilance (usually stake out) is first recorded 1942, American English colloquial,
probably form earlier sense of mark off territory. Related: Staked; staking. Old English had stacung
piercing of an effigy by a pin or stake (in witchcraft); staccan pierce with a stake, spit.


stake (v.2)

to risk, wager, 1520s, perhaps from notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed (see stake
(n.2)), though Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor in this usage.
Meaning to maintain surveillance (usually stake out) is first recorded 1942, American English
colloquial, probably form earlier sense of mark off territory. Related: Staked; staking.


stake (n.2)

that which is placed at hazard, 1530s, from stake (v.). Perhaps literally that which is put up, from
notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed, though OED points out there is no evidence of
the existence of such a custom. Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor
in this usage. Hence, an interest, something to gain or lose (1784). Plural stakes, sum of money to
be won in a (horse) race, first recorded 1690s (compare sweepstakes). To have a stake in is recorded
from 1784.


stake-holder (n.)

1708, from stake (n.2) + agent noun from hold (v.). Originally one with whom bets are deposited when
a wager is made.


stake-out (n.)

1942, from stake (v.2) + out (adv.).


Stakhanovite (n.)

1935, from name of hard-working Soviet coal miner Aleksei Grigorevich Stakhanov (1906-1977), in
reference to an efficiency system in which workers increase their piecework production and are
rewarded with bonuses and privileges. Soviet authorities publicized his prodigious output as part of
a campaign to increase productivity.


stalactite (n.)

hanging formation of carbonite of lime from the roof of a cave, 1670s, Englished from Modern Latin
stalactites (used 1654 by Olaus Wormius), from Greek stalaktos dripping, oozing out in drops, from
stalassein to trickle, from PIE root *stag- to seep, drip, drop (cognates: German stallen,
Lithuanian telziu to urinate) + noun suffix -ite (1). Related: Stalactic; stalactitic.


stalag (n.)

German POW camp, 1940, from German Stalag, short for stammlager main camp, from Old High German stam
stem, from Proto-Germanic *stamniz (see stem (n.)).


stalagmite (n.)

cone-shaped formation of carbonate of lime on the floor of a cave, 1680s, from Modern Latin
stalagmites (1650s, Olaus Wormius), from Greek stalagmos a dropping, or stalagma a drop, drip, that
which drops, from stalassein to trickle (see stalactite). Related: Stalagmitic; stalagmitical.


stale (adj.)

early 13c., freed from dregs or lees (of ale, wine, etc.), probably literally having stood long
enough to clear, ultimately from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet); probably via Old French estal
placed, fixed position, from Frankish *stal- position (see stall (n.1)). Cognate with Middle Dutch
stel stale (of beer and old urine). Originally a desirable quality (in beer and wine); the meaning
not fresh is first recorded late 15c. Figurative sense (of immaterial things) old and trite,
hackneyed is recorded from 1560s. As a noun, that which has become tasteless by exposure, hence a
prostitute (in Shakespeare, etc.). Related: Staleness.


stale (v.)

mid-15c., from stale (adj.). Related: Staled; staling.


stalemate (n.)

1765, in chess, from stale stalemate (early 15c.) + mate (n.2) checkmate. Middle English stale is
probably from Anglo-French estale standstill (see stall (n.2)). A misnomer, because a stale is not a
mate. In England from the 17th c. to the beginning of the 19th c. the player who received stalemate
won the game [OED]. Figurative sense is recorded from 1885. As a verb from 1765; figurative from
1861.


Stalin

Russian, literally steel, assumed name of Soviet Communist Party and Soviet Union leader Iosif
Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili (1879-1953). Also see Molotov.


Stalingrad

name of southern Russian city from 1925-1961, from Stalin (q.v.) + -grad (see yard (n.1)). Now
Volgograd, formerly Tsaritsyn (1589), from Turkish sarisin yellowish, in reference to the river
water, but associated in Russian with Tsar.


Stalinism (n.)

1927, from Stalin + -ism. Related: Stalinist.


stalk (n.)

stem of a plant, early 14c., probably a diminutive (with -k suffix) of stale one of the uprights of
a ladder, handle, stalk, from Old English stalu wooden part (of a tool or instrument), from Proto-
Germanic *stalla- (cognates: Old English steala stalk, support, steall place), from PIE *stol-no-,
suffixed form of *stol-, variant of root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Of similar
structures in animals from 1826.


stalk (v.1)

pursue stealthily, Old English -stealcian, as in bestealcian to steal along, walk warily, from
Proto-Germanic *stalkon, frequentative of PIE *stel-, possibly a variant of *ster- (3) to rob, steal
(see steal (v.)). Compare hark/hear, talk/tell). In another view the Old English word might be from
a sense of stalk (v.1), influenced by stalk (n.). Meaning harass obsessively first recorded 1991.
Related: Stalked; stalking.    A stalking-horse in literal use was a horse draped in trappings and
trained to allow a fowler to conceal himself behind it to get within range of the game; figurative
sense of person who participates in a proceeding to disguise its real purpose is recorded from
1610s.


stalk (v.2)

walk haughtily (nearly the opposite meaning of stalk (v.1)), 1520s, perhaps from stalk (n.) with a
notion of long, awkward strides, or from Old English stealcung a stalking, act of going stealthily,
related to stealc steep, lofty.


stalker (n.)

early 15c., a poacher; also one who prowls for purposes of theft (c.1500), agent noun from stalk
(v.1). Meaning obsessive harasser is from early 1990s.


stall (n.1)

place in a stable for animals, Old English steall standing place, position, state; place where
cattle are kept, fishing ground, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (cognates: Old Norse stallr pedestal
for idols, altar; crib, manger, Old Frisian stal, Old High German stall stand, place, stable, stall,
German Stall stable, Stelle place), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring
to a standing object or place (cognates: Greek stele standing block, slab, stellein to set in order,
arrange, array, equip, make ready; Latin stolidus insensible, dull, brutish, properly unmovable).
Meaning partially enclosed seat in a choir is attested from c.1400; that of urinal in a men's room
is from 1967. Several meanings, including that of a stand for selling (mid-13c., implied in
stallage), probably are from (or influenced by) Anglo-French and Old French estal station, position;
stall of a stable; stall in a market; a standing still; a standing firm (12c., Modern French
&eacute;tal butcher's stall). This, along with Italian stallo place, stalla stable is a borrowing
from a Germanic source from the same root as the native English word.


stall (n.2)

pretense or evasive story to avoid doing something, 1812, from earlier sense thief's assistant
(1590s, also staller), from a variant of stale bird used as a decoy to lure other birds (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-French estale decoy, pigeon used to lure a hawk (13c., compare stool pigeon), literally
standstill, from Old French estal place, stand, stall, from Frankish *stal- position, ultimately
from Germanic and cognate with Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Compare Old English
st&aelig;lhran decoy reindeer, German stellvogel decoy bird. Figurative sense of deception, means of
allurement is first recorded 1520s. Also see stall (v.2).    The stallers up are gratified with such
part of the gains acquired as the liberality of the knuckling gentlemen may prompt them to bestow.
[J.H. Vaux, Flash Dictionary, 1812]


stall (v.2)

1590s, distract a victim and thus screen a pickpocket from observation, from stall (n.2) decoy.
Meaning to precaricate, be evasive, play for time is attested from 1903. Related: Stalled; stalling.
Compare old slang stalling ken house for receiving stolen goods (1560s).


stall (v.1)

to come to a stand (intransitive), c.1400; to become stuck or be set fast, mid-15c., from Old French
estale or Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Transitive sense place in office, install is 14c.;
specifically place an animal in a stall (late 14c.). Of engines or engine-powered vehicles, it is
attested from 1904 (transitive), 1914 (intransitive); of aircraft to lose lift, 1910. Related:
Stalled; stalling.


stall (n.3)

action of losing lift, power, or motion, 1918 of aircraft, 1959 of automobile engines, from stall
(v.1).


stallage (n.)

tax levied for the privilege of erecting a stall at a market or fair, late 14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-
Latin), from stall (n.1) + -age.


stalling (n.)

action of being evasive, 1927, verbal noun from stall (v.2).


stallion (n.)

mid-15c., earlier staloun (c.1300), male horse kept for breeding purposes, from Anglo-French
estaloun, Old French estalon stallion, uncastrated male horse (Modern French &#233;talon), from
Frankish *stal, cognate with Old High German stal stable, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (see stall
(n.1)). The notion is probably of a horse kept in a stable to service mares. Transferred sense of
robustly lascivious man is attested from 1550s.


stalwart (adj.)

late 14c., resolute, determined, Scottish variant of stalworth, from Old English
st&aelig;lwier&eth;e good, serviceable, probably a contracted compound of sta&eth;ol base,
foundation, support; stability, security (from Proto-Germanic *stathlaz, from PIE root *sta- to
stand, set down, make or be firm; see stet) + wier&eth;e good, excellent, worthy (see worth).
Another theory traces the first element of st&aelig;lwier&eth;e to Old English st&aelig;l place,
from Proto-Germanic *st&aelig;laz.


stamen (n.)

pollen-bearing organ of a flower, 1660s, from Modern Latin (1625, Spigelus), from Latin stamen
stamen (Pliny), literally foundation in weaving, thread of the warp in the upright loom (related to
stare to stand), from PIE *sta-men- (cognates: Greek stemon warp, also used by Hesychius for some
part of a plant, Gothic stoma, Sanskrit sthaman place, also strength), from root *sta- to stand (see
stet). The usual English plural is stamens because of the special use of the classical plural,
stamina.


stamina (n.)

1670s, rudiments or original elements of something, from Latin stamina threads, plural of stamen
(genitive staminis) thread, warp (see stamen). Sense of power to resist or recover, strength,
endurance first recorded 1726 (originally plural), from earlier meaning congenital vital capacities
of a person or animal; also in part from use of the Latin word in reference to the threads spun by
the Fates (such as queri nimio de stamine too long a thread of life), and partly from a figurative
use of Latin stamen the warp (of cloth) on the notion of the warp as the foundation of a fabric.
Related: Staminal.


Stammbaum (n.)

German, family tree, especially of languages, 1939, from Stamm tree, trunk (see stem (n.)) + Baum
tree (see beam (n.)).


stammer (v.)

Old English stamerian to stammer, from Proto-Germanic *stamro- (cognates: Old Norse stammr
stammering, Old Saxon stamaron, Gothic stamms stammering, Middle Dutch and Dutch stameren, Old High
German stammalon, German stammeln to stammer, a frequentative verb related to adjective forms such
as Old Frisian and German stumm mute). Related: Stammered; stammerer; stammering; stammeringly.


stammer (n.)

1773, from stammer (v.).


stammtisch (n.)

1938, table reserved for regular customers in a German restaurant, from German Stammtisch, from
Stamm cadre, literally tree, trunk (see stem (n.)) + tisch table (see dish (n.)).


stamp (v.)

Old English stempan to pound in a mortar, from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stappa,
Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen to stamp with the
foot, beat, pound, German Stampfe pestle), from nasalized form of PIE root *stebh- to support, place
firmly on (cognates: Greek stembein to trample, misuse; see staff (n.)). The vowel altered in Middle
English, perhaps by influence of Scandinavian forms.    Sense of strike the foot forcibly downwards
is from mid-14c. The meaning impress or mark (something) with a die is first recorded 1550s. Italian
stampa stamp, impression, Spanish estampar to stamp, print, French &#233;tamper (13c., Old French
estamper) to stamp, impress are Germanic loan-words. Related: Stamped; stamping. To stamp out
originally was extinguish a fire by stamping on it; attested from 1851 in the figurative sense.
Stamping ground one's particular territory (1821) is from the notion of animals. A stamped addressed
envelope (1873) was one you enclosed in a letter to speed or elicit a reply.


stamp (n.)

mid-15c., instrument for crushing, stamping tool, from stamp (v.). Especially instrument for making
impressions (1570s). Meaning downward thrust or blow with the foot, act of stamping is from 1580s.
Sense of official mark or imprint (to certify that duty has been paid on what has been printed or
written) dates from 1540s; transferred 1837 to designed, pre-printed adhesive labels issued by
governments to serve the same purpose as impressed stamps. German Stempel rubber stamp, brand,
postmark represents a diminutive form. Stamp-collecting is from 1862 (compare philately).


stampede (n.)

1844 (earlier stampedo, 1839), A general scamper of animals on the Western prairies, generally
caused by a fright [Bartlett] from Mexican Spanish estampida, from Spanish, an uproar, from estamper
to stamp, press, pound, from Proven&ccedil;al estampier to stamp, from the same Germanic root that
yielded English stamp (v.). The political sense is first recorded 1846 (in reference to the U.S.
Democratic Party convention of 1844). As the name of an annual exhibition of cowboy skills in
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, it is attested from 1912.


stampede (v.)

1823 (intransitive); 1838 (transitive), from stampede (n.). Related: Stampeded; stampeding.


stance (n.)

1530s, standing place, station, probably from Middle French stance resting place, harbor (16c.),
from Vulgar Latin *stantia place, abode (also source of Italian stanza stopping place, station,
stanza, Spanish stancia a dwelling), from Latin stans (genitive stantis), present participle of
stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of position of the feet (in golf,
etc.) is first recorded 1897; figurative sense of point of view is recorded from 1956. The sense of
the French word has since narrowed.


stanch (v.)

to stop the flow of (especially of blood), early 14c., from Old French estanchier cause to cease
flowing (of blood), stop, hinder; extinguish (of fire); tire, exhaust, drain (Modern French
&#233;tancher), from Vulgar Latin *stancare, perhaps contracted from *stagnicare, from Latin stagnum
pond, pool (see stagnate). But Barnhart says it probably is from Latin stantio, present participle
of stare to stand.


stanchion (n.)

early 14c., post, pillar, or beam used for support, from Old French estanchon prop, brace, support
(13c., Modern French &eacute;tan&ccedil;on), probably from estant upright, from present participle
of ester be upright, stand, from Latin stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


stand (v.)

Old English standan occupy a place; stand firm; congeal; stay, continue, abide; be valid, be, exist,
take place; oppose, resist attack; stand up, be on one's feet; consist, amount to (class VI strong
verb; past tense stod, past participle standen), from Proto-Germanic *sta-n-d- (cognates: Old Norse
standa, Old Saxon and Gothic standan, Old High German stantan, parallel with simpler forms, such as
Swedish st&#229;, Dutch staan, German stehen [see discussion in OED]), from PIE root *sta- to stand
(see stet).    Sense of to exist, be present is attested from c.1300. Meaning encounter without
flinching is from 1590s; weaker sense of put up with is from 1620s. Meaning to submit (to chances,
etc.) is from c.1700. Meaning to pay for as a treat is from 1821. Meaning become a candidate for
office is from 1550s. Nautical sense of hold a course at sea is from 1620s. Meaning to be so high
when standing is from 1831.   Stand back keep (one's) distance is from c.1400. Phrase stand pat is
from poker (1882), earlier simply stand (1824 in other card games). To stand down is from 1680s,
originally of witnesses in court; in the military sense of come off duty it is first recorded 1916.
To let (something) stand is from c.1200. To stand for is c.1300 as count for; early 14c. as be
considered in lieu of; late 14c. as represent by way of sign; sense of tolerate first recorded
1620s. Phrase stands to reason (1620) is from earlier stands (is constant) with reason.


stand (n.)

Old English stand a pause, delay, state of rest or inaction, from the root of stand (v.). Compare
Dutch and German stand (n.). Sense of action of standing or coming to a position is attested from
late 14c., especially in reference to fighting (1590s). Sense of state of being unable to proceed is
from 1590s.    Meaning place of standing, position is from early 14c.; figurative sense is from
1590s. Meaning raised platform for a hunter or sportsman is attested from c.1400. Meaning raised
platform for spectators at an open-air event is from 1610s; meaning piece of furniture on which
something is to be set is from 1690s. Sense of stall or booth is first recorded c.1500. Military
meaning complete set (of arms, colors, etc.) is from 1721, often a collective singular. Sense of
standing growth (usually of of trees) is 1868, American English. Theatrical sense of each stop made
on a performance tour is from 1896. The word formerly also was slang for an erection (1867).


stand-alone (adj.)

1966, from stand (v.) + alone.


stand-by (n.)

also standby, 1796, that which stands by one, originally nautical, of a vessel kept nearby for
emergencies, from verbal phrase stand by await, support, remain beside (mid-13c.); see stand (v.) +
by. Meaning state of being ready for duty is from 1946. In civil aviation, as an adjective meaning
without a booked ticket, from 1961. As an order to hold one's self in readiness, it is recorded from
1660s.


stand-in (n.)

one who substitutes for another, 1928, from the verbal phrase, attested from 1904 in show business
slang in the sense to substitute, to fill the place of another, from stand (v.) + in (adv.).


stand-off (n.)

also stand-off, 1843, draw, tie, from the verbal phrase (c.1600), from stand (v.) + off (adv.).
Mexican stand-off stalemate is recorded from 1891.


stand-out (n.)

also standout, one who is eminent, 1928; as an adjective in this sense from 1932; from verbal
phrase, from stand (v.) + out (adv.). Earlier it was used in a sense labor strike (1898). To stand
out is from 1530s as to project or seem to project, 1826 in the figurative sense be prominent.


stand-pipe (n.)

upright pipe, in various technical senses, 1810, from stand (v.) + pipe (n.).


stand-up (adj.)

1811, courageous, originally of fist fights, denoting a manful contest without fake falls, from the
verbal phrase (early 12c. in sense rise to one's feet), from stand (v.) + up (adv.). To stand up
hold oneself against an opponent is from c.1600; as stand up to in the same sense from 1620s. To
stand up for defend the cause of is from c.1600. To stand (someone) up fail to keep an appointment
is attested from 1902. Stand-up comic first attested 1966. Catch-phrase will the real _______ please
stand up? is from the popular CBS game show To Tell the Truth, which debuted in 1956.


standard (n.1)

mid-12c., flag or other conspicuous object to serve as a rallying point for a military force, from
shortened form of Old French estandart military standard, banner. According to Barnhart and others,
this is probably from Frankish *standhard, literally stand fast or firm, a compound of unrecorded
Frankish words cognate stand (v.) and hard. So called because the flag was fixed to a pole or spear
and stuck in the ground to stand upright. The more common theory [OED, etc.] calls this folk-
etymology and connects the Old French word to estendre to stretch out, from Latin extendere (see
extend). Some senses (such as upright pole, mid-15c.) seem to be influenced by if not from stand
(v.). Standard-bearer in the figurative sense is from 1560s.


standard (adj.)

1620s, serving as a standard, from standard (adj.). Earlier it meant upright (1530s). Standard-bred
bred up to some agreed-upon standard of excellence is from 1888.


standard (n.2)

weight, measure, or instrument by which the accuracy of others is determined, late 14c., from
standard (n.1) military standard, banner, a particular use in English of this word, but the sense
evolution is somewhat obscure [OED]. The standard weights and measures were set by royal ordinance
and were known as the king's standard, so perhaps metaphoric, the royal standard coming to stand for
royal authority in matters like setting weights and measures. Hence the meaning authoritative or
recognized exemplar of quality or correctness (late 15c.). Meaning rule, principal or means of
judgment is from 1560s. That of definite level of attainment is attested from 1711 (as in standard
of living, 1903).


standardization (n.)

1888, originally in pharmacology publications, noun of action from standardize.


standardize (v.)

1857, a hybrid from standard (adj.) + -ize. Related: Standardized; standardizing. Earlier verb was
simply standard (1690s).


standing (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from stand (v.). In the sense of rank, status, it is first recorded 1570s.
Sense of state of having existed for some time is 1650s. Legal sense is first recorded 1924. Sports
sense is from 1881. To be in good standing is from 1789. Standing room is from 1788.    A young
gentleman attempting to get into Drury-lane play-house, found there was such a croud of people that
there was no room. Just without the door, a damsel of the town accosted him with 'can't you get in,
sir?' to which he replied in the negative. 'If you'll go along with me, resumed she you may get in
very easily, for I can furnish you with very good standing room.' [The Banquet of Wit, or A Feast
for the Polite World, London, 1790]


standing (adj.)

late 14c., at rest, motionless, also permanent, not transient, present participle adjective from
stand (v.). Meaning having an erect position, upright is from 1570s; that of done while standing is
from 1630s. The sense in standing army (c.1600) is permanent. Standing ovation is from 1902.


standoffish (adj.)

1826, from verbal phrase stand off hold aloof (c.1600); see stand (v.) + off (adv.). Related:
Standoffishly; standoffishness.


standpoint (n.)

1829, from stand (v.) + point (n.). A loan-translation of German Standpunkt. Century Dictionary
calls it a word objected to by purists.


standstill (n.)

state of cessation of movement, 1702, from stand (v.) + still (adv.). Earlier the notion would have
been expressed simply by stand.


Stanford-Binet

intelligence test, first published 1916 as a revision and extension of the Binet-Simon intelligence
tests, from Stanford University (California, U.S.) + the name of French psychologist Alfred Binet
(1857-1911), who devised the attempt at a scientific measurement of intelligence.


stanine (n.)

nine-point scale for test scores, introduced by the U.S. Air Force in 1942, from sta(ndard) + nine.


Stanislavsky (adj.)

in reference to a method of acting, 1924, from Russian actor and director Konstantin Stanislavsky
(1863-1938).


stank

Old English stanc, past tense of stink (v.).


stannate (n.)

1797, from Late Latin stannum tin (see stannic) + -ate (3).


stannic (adj.)

containing tin, 1790, from Modern Latin stannum, from Late Latin stannum tin (earlier alloy of
silver and lead), a scribal alteration of Latin stagnum, probably from a Celtic source (compare
Irish stan tin, Cornish and Breton sten, Welsh ystaen). The Latin word is the source of Italian
stagno, French &eacute;tain, Spanish esta&ntilde;o tin.


stannous (adj.)

1829, from Late Latin stannum tin (see stannic) + -ous.


stanza (n.)

group of rhymed verse lines, 1580s, from Italian stanza verse of a poem, originally standing,
stopping place, from Vulgar Latin *stantia a stanza of verse, so called from the stop at the end of
it, from Latin stantem (nominative stans), present participle of stare to stand (see stet). Related:
Stanzaic.


stapes (n.)

stirrup-shaped bone in the middle ear, 1660s, from Modern Latin (1560s), special use of Medieval
Latin stapes stirrup, probably an alteration of Late Latin stapia, related to stare to stand (see
stet) + pedem, accusative of pes foot (see foot (n.)). This was an invented Medieval Latin word for
stirrup, for which there was no classical Latin word, as the ancients did not use stirrups.


staph

colloquial short form of staphylococcus, attested from 1933.


staphylococcus (n.)

(plural staphylococci), 1887, Modern Latin, the genus name, coined (on model of streptococcus) in
1882 by Scottish surgeon and bacteriologist Alexander Ogston (1844-1929). The first element is from
comb. form of Greek staphyle bunch of grapes, which possibly is from PIE *stabh-, variant of *stebh-
post, stem; to support (see staff (n.)). The second element is Modern Latin coccus spherical
bacterium, from Greek kokkos berry, grain (see cocco-). So called because the bacteria usually bunch
together in irregular masses.


staple (n.1)

bent piece of metal with pointed ends, late 13c., from Old English stapol post, pillar, trunk of a
tree, steps to a house, from Proto-Germanic *stapulaz pillar (cognates: Old Saxon stapal candle,
small tub, Old Frisian stapul stem of a tooth, Dutch stapel a prop, foot-rest, seat, Middle Low
German stapel block for executions, German Stapel stake, beam), from *stap-, from PIE stebh- (see
staff (n.)).    A general Germanic word that apparently evolved a specialized meaning in English,
though OED finds the connection unclear and suggests the later sense in English might not be the
same word. Meaning piece of thin wire driven through papers to hold them together is attested from
1895.


staple (n.2)

principal article grown or made in a country or district, early 15c., official market for some class
of merchandise, from Anglo-French estaple (14c.), Old French estaple counter, stall; regulated
market, depot, from a Germanic source akin to Middle Low German stapol, Middle Dutch stapel market,
literally pillar, foundation, from the same source as staple (n.1), the notion perhaps being of
market stalls behind pillars of an arcade, or else of a raised platform where the king's deputies
administered judgment.    The sense of principle article grown or made in a place is 1610s, short
for staple ware wares and goods from a market (early 15c.). Meaning principle element or ingredient
in anything is from 1826. Meaning fiber of any material used for spinning is late 15c., of uncertain
origin, and perhaps an unrelated word.


staple (v.)

late 14c., to fix with a (large) staple, from staple (n.1). In the wire paper fastener sense, by
1898. Related: Stapled; stapling.


stapler (n.)

mechanical device for driving staples, by 1949; agent noun from staple (v.). Long before, it meant
merchant of the staple, monopolist.


star (n.)

Old English steorra star, from Proto-Germanic *sterron, *sternon (cognates: Old Saxon sterro, Old
Frisian stera, Dutch ster, Old High German sterro, German Stern, Old Norse stjarna, Swedish stjerna,
Danish stierne, Gothic stairno).    This is from PIE *ster- (2) star (cognates: Sanskrit star-,
Hittite shittar, Greek aster, astron, Latin stella, Breton sterenn, Welsh seren star), of uncertain
connection to other roots. Some suggest it is from a root meaning to strew, scatter. Buck and others
doubt the old suggestion that it is a borrowing from Akkadian istar venus. The source of the common
Balto-Slavic word for star (Lithuanian &#382;vaig&#382;de, Old Church Slavonic zvezda, Polish
gwiazda, Russian zvezda) is not explained.    Astrological sense of influence of planets and zodiac
on human affairs is recorded from mid-13c., hence person's fate as figured in the stars (c.1600);
star-crossed ill-fated is from Romeo and Juliet (1592). Meaning lead performer is from 1824; star
turn is from 1898. Stars as a ranking of quality for hotels, restaurants, etc. are attested from
1886, originally in Baedecker guides. Sticker stars as rewards for good students are recorded from
1970s. Brass star as a police badge is recorded from 1859 (New York City). Star-cluster is from
1870. To see stars when one is hit hard on the head is from 1839.


star (v.)

1590s, to affix a star or asterisk to, from star (n.). From 1718 as to set with stars. Meaning
perform the lead part (of actors, singers, etc.) is from 1824. Sporting sense is from 1916. Related:
Starred; starring.


Star Chamber (n.)

late 14c., apartment in the royal palace at Westminster in which members of the king's council sat
to exercise jurisdiction 14-15c., it evolved 15c. into a court of criminal jurisdiction, infamous
under James I and Charles I for arbitrary and oppressive proceedings. Abolished 1641. Supposedly so
called because gilt stars had been painted on the ceiling. Later there was a star on the door.


Star Wars (n.)

name of a popular science fiction film released in 1977; also the informal name for a space-based
missile defense system proposed in 1983 by U.S. president Ronald Reagan.


star-fruit (n.)

Damasonium stellatum, 1857, from star (n.) + fruit (n.). So called for its shape.


star-gazer (n.)

1550s, from star (n.) + agent noun from gaze (v.). Related: Star-gazing (n., 1570s); star-gaze (v.,
1620s).


star-lit (adj.)

1813, from star (n.) + lit (adj.).


star-shine (n.)

1580s, from star (n.) + shine (n.).


star-spangled (adj.)

1590s, from star (n.) + spangle (v.); Star-Spangled Banner United States flag is 1814, from Francis
Scott Key's poem (printed in the Baltimore Patriot Sept. 20).


starboard (n.)

Old English steorbord, literally steer-board, side on which a vessel was steered, from steor rudder,
steering paddle, from Proto-Germanic *steuro a steering (compare German Steuer), from PIE *steu-,
secondary form of root *sta- to stand (see stet) + bord ship's side (see board (n.2)). Similar
formation in Old Norse stjornbor&eth;i, Low German st&uuml;rbord, Dutch stuurboord, German
Steuerbord.    Early Germanic peoples' boats were propelled and steered by a paddle on the right
side. The opposite side of the ship sometimes in Germanic was the back-board (Old English
b&aelig;cbord). French tribord (Old French estribord), Italian stribordo starboard are Germanic
loan-words.


starch (v.)

late 14c., from Old English *stercan (Mercian), *stiercan (West Saxon) make rigid, found in
stercedferh&eth; fixed, hard, resolute (related to stearc stiff), from Proto-Germanic *starkijan to
make hard (cognates: German St&auml;rke strength, starch, Swedish st&#228;rka to starch), from PIE
root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stark). Related: Starched; starching.


starch (n.)

pasty substance used to stiffen cloth, mid-15c., back-formation from starch (v.). Figurative sense
of stiffness of manner is recorded from 1705.


starchy (adj.)

1795, from starch (n.) + -y (2). Related: Starchily; starchiness.


stardom (n.)

1860 in reference to celebrity, from star (n.) + -dom. From 1856 in reference to the celestial sort.


stardust (n.)

also star-dust, 1836 in reference to irresolvable nebulas among star-fields in telescopic views;
1868 as meteoric dust, from star (n.) + dust (n.).


stare (v.)

Old English starian to stare, gaze, look fixedly at, from Proto-Germanic *staren be rigid (cognates:
Old Norse stara, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staren, Old High German staren, German starren
to stare at; German starren to stiffen, starr stiff; Old Norse storr proud; Old High German storren
to stand out, project; Gothic andstaurran to be obstinate), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm,
stiff, rigid (see stereo- and compare torpor).    Not originally implying rudeness. To stare
(someone) down is from 1848. Related: Stared; staring.


stare (n.2)

starling, from Old English (see starling).


stare (n.1)

late 14c., power of sight, from stare (v.). From c.1700 as a fixed gaze.


stare decisis (n.)

the legal doctrine of being bound by precedents, Latin, literally to stand by things decided (see
stet + decisive).


starfish (n.)

also star-fish, 1530s, from star (n.) + fish (n.).


stark (adj.)

Old English stearc stiff, strong, rigid, obstinate; stern, severe, hard; harsh, rough, violent, from
Proto-Germanic *starkaz (cognates: Old Norse sterkr, Danish, Old Frisian sterk, Middle Dutch starc,
Old High German starah, German stark, Gothic *starks), from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). From the same root as stare (v.).    Meaning utter, sheer, complete first recorded c.1400,
perhaps from influence of common phrase stark dead (late 14c.), with stark mistaken as an intensive
adjective. Sense of bare, barren is from 1833. As an adverb from c.1200. Related: Starkly;
starkness. Stark-raving (adj.) is from 1640s; earlier stark-staring 1530s.


stark-naked (adj.)

1520s, deformed (by influence of stark (adj.)) from Middle English start naked (early 13c.), from
Old English steort tail, rump, from Proto-Germanic *stertaz (cognates: Old Norse stertr, Danish
stjert, Middle Dutch stert, Dutch staart, Old High German sterz, German Sterz), from PIE *sterd-,
extended form of root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (see stereo-). Hence British slang
starkers naked (1923).


starless (adj.)

late 14c., from star (n.) + -less.


starlet (n.)

1825, small star, from star (n.) + diminutive suffix -let. Meaning promising young female performer
is from 1911 [Italian soprano Emma Trentini (1878-1959), so called in The Theatre magazine, March
1911].


starlight (n.)

also star-light, late 14c., from star (n.) + light (n.).


starling (n.)

Sturnus vulgaris, Old English st&aelig;rlinc starling, with diminutive suffix -linc + st&aelig;r
starling, from Proto-Germanic *staraz (cognates: Old English stearn, Old Norse stari, Norwegian
stare, Old High German stara, German star starling), from PIE *storo- starling (cognates: Latin
sturnus starling, Old Prussian starnite gull).


starry (adj.)

late 14c., from star (n.) + -y (2). Starry-eyed unrealistically optimistic is attested from 1884;
earlier descriptive of bright eyes. Related: Starrily; starriness.


Stars and Stripes (n.)

American flag, attested from 1782. Stars and Bars as a name for the Confederate flag is attested
from 1863.


starscape (n.)

1883, from star (n.) + scape (n.1).


starship (n.)

space ship, 1934 (in Astounding Stories), from star (n.) + ship (n.). Earlier in reference to
celebrity.


start (v.)

Old English *steortian, *stiertan, Kentish variants of styrtan to leap up (related to starian to
stare), from Proto-Germanic *stert- (cognates: Old Frisian stirta to fall, tumble, Middle Dutch
sterten, Dutch storten to rush, fall, Old High German sturzen, German st&uuml;rzen to hurl, throw,
plunge), of uncertain origin. According to Watkins, the notion is move briskly, move swiftly, and it
is from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff.    From move or spring suddenly, sense evolved by late 14c. to
awaken suddenly, flinch or recoil in alarm, and by 1660s to cause to begin acting or operating.
Meaning begin to move, leave, depart (without implication of suddenness) is from 1821. The
connection probably is from sporting senses (to force an animal from its lair, late 14c.).
Transitive sense of set in motion or action is from 1670s; specifically as to set (machinery) in
action from 1841.    Related: Started; starting. To start something cause trouble is 1915, American
English colloquial. To start over begin again is from 1912. Starting-line in running is from 1855;
starting-block in running first recorded 1937.


start (n.)

late 14c., an involuntary movement of the body, a sudden jump, from start (v.). Meaning act of
beginning to move or act is from 1560s. Meaning act of beginning to build a house is from 1946. That
of opportunity at the beginning of a career or course of action is from 1849. Paired with finish
(n.) at least from 1839. False start first attested 1850.


start-up (n.)

also startup, 1550s, upstart, from verbal phrase (attested from c.1200 in sense rise up; 1590s as
come suddenly into being); see start (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning action of starting up is from 1845.
See start (v.) + up (adv.).


starter (n.)

c.1400, stertour instigator; one who starts, agent noun from start (v.). Mechanical sense is from
1875. For starters to begin with is 1873, American English colloquial. Starter home is from 1976;
starter set is from 1946, originally of china.


startle (v.)

c.1300, run to and fro (intransitive), frequentative of sterten (see start (v.)). Sense of move
suddenly in surprise or fear first recorded 1520s. Transitive meaning frighten suddenly is from
1590s. The word retains more of the original meaning of start (v.). Related: Startled; startling;
startlingly. As a noun from 1714.


starvation (n.)

1778, hybrid noun of action from starve. Famously (but not certainly) introduced in English by Henry
Dundas during debate in the House of Commons in 1775 on American affairs. It earned him the nickname
Starvation Dundas, though sources disagree on whether this was given in objection to the harshness
of his suggestion of starving the rebels into submission or in derision at the barbarous formation
of the word. It is one of the earliest instances of -ation used with a native Germanic word
(flirtation is earlier).    As to Lord Chatham, the victories, conquests, extension of our empire
within these last five years, will annihilate his fame of course, and he may be replaced by
Starvation Dundas, whose pious policy suggested that the devil of rebellion could be expelled only
by fasting, though that never drove him out of Scotland. [Horace Walpole, letter to the Rev. William
Mason, April 25, 1781]


starve (v.)

Old English steorfan to die (past tense stearf, past participle storfen), literally become stiff,
from Proto-Germanic *sterban be stiff (cognates: Old Frisian sterva, Old Saxon sterban, Dutch
sterven, Old High German sterban to die, Old Norse stjarfi tetanus), from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff,
rigid (see stereo-).    The conjugation became weak in English by 16c. The sense narrowed to die of
cold (14c.); transitive meaning to kill with hunger is first recorded 1520s (earlier to starve of
hunger, early 12c.). Intransitive sense of to die of hunger dates from 1570s. German cognate sterben
retains the original sense of the word, but the English has come so far from its origins that starve
to death (1910) is now common.


starveling (n.)

starving or starved person, 1540s, from starve (v.) + diminutive suffix -ling. As an adjective, weak
from hunger, from 1590s.


stash (v.)

to conceal, hide, 1797, criminals' slang, of unknown origin, perhaps a blend of stow and cache.
Related: Stashed; stashing.


stash (n.)

hoard, cache, 1914, from stash (v.). Slang sense of personal supply of narcotics is from 1942.


stasis (n.)

stoppage of circulation, 1745, from medical Latin, from Greek stasis a standing still, a standing;
the posture of standing; a position, a point of the compass; position, state, or condition of
anything; also a party, a company, a sect, especially one for seditious purposes; related to statos
placed, verbal adjective of histemi cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


stat (n.)

instrument that keeps something stationary, before 1970, shortened form of Latin statim (adv.)
steadily, regularly; at once, immediately, from status (see state (n.1)). Perhaps originally to a
standstill. As an abbreviation of statistic, from 1961. Related: Stats.


state (n.1)

c.1200, circumstances, position in society, temporary attributes of a person or thing, conditions,
from Old French estat position, condition; status, stature, station, and directly from Latin status
a station, position, place; way of standing, posture; order, arrangement, condition, figuratively
standing, rank; public order, community organization, noun of action from past participle stem of
stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Some Middle English senses are via Old
French estat (French &eacute;tat; see estate).    The Latin word was adopted into other modern
Germanic languages (German, Dutch staat) but chiefly in the political senses only. Meaning physical
condition as regards form or structure is attested from late 13c. Meaning mental or emotional
condition is attested from 1530s (phrase state of mind first attested 1749); colloquial sense of
agitated or perturbed state is from 1837.     He [the President] shall from time to time give to the
Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures
as he shall judge necessary and expedient. [U.S. Constitution, Article II, Section iii]


state (v.)

1590s, to set in a position, from state (n.1); the sense of declare in words is first attested
1640s, from the notion of placing something on the record. Related: Stated; stating.


state (n.2)

political organization of a country, supreme civil power, government, c.1300, from special use of
state (n.1); this sense grew out of the meaning condition of a country with regard to government,
prosperity, etc. (late 13c.), from Latin phrases such as status rei public&aelig; condition (or
existence) of the republic.    The sense of a semi-independent political entity under a federal
authority, one of the bodies politic which together make up a federal republic is from 1774. The
British North American colonies occasionally were called states as far back as 1630s; the States has
been short for the United States of America since 1777; also of the Netherlands. State rights in
U.S. political sense is attested from 1798; form states rights is first recorded 1858. Church and
state have been contrasted from 1580s. State-socialism attested from 1850.


state-house (n.)

1630s, American English, a building used for public business, from state (n.2) + house (n.).


state-of-the-art (adj.)

1961, from noun phrase (1816), from state (n.1) + art (n.).


statecraft (n.)

the art of government, 1640s, from state (n.2) + craft (n.).


statehood (n.)

1819, from state (n.) + -hood.


stateless (adj.)

c.1600, from state (n.2) + -less. Related: Statelessly; statelessness.


stately (adj.)

noble, splendid, late 14c., from -ly (1) + state (n.1) in a sense of costly and imposing display
(such as benefits a person of rank and wealth), attested from early 14c. This sense also is
preserved in the phrase to lie in state to be ceremoniously exposed to view before interment (1705).
Hence also stateroom. Related: Stateliness.


statement (n.)

1775, what is stated, from state (v.) + -ment. From 1789 as action of stating; 1885 in the
commercial sense document displaying debits and credits.


stater (n.)

ancient coin, late 14c., from Greek stater, from histanai to fix, to place in a balance, hence to
weigh; literally to cause to stand (see stet). Once the name of a specific issue of coin, in ancient
Greece it became a general name for the principal or standard coin in any place.


stateroom (n.)

also state-room, 1703, room reserved for ceremonial occasions; earlier (1650s) a captain's cabin;
from room (n.) + state (n.1) in a sense also preserved in stately.


stateside (adj.)

also state-side, 1944, World War II U.S. military slang, from the States United States (see state
(n.2)) + side.


statesman (n.)

1590s, after French homme d'&eacute;tat; see state (n.1) + man (n.). Related: Statesmanly;
statesmanship. Stateswoman attested from c.1600.


static (adj.)

1630s, pertaining to the science of weight and its mechanical effects, from Modern Latin statica,
from Greek statikos causing to stand, skilled in weighing, from stem of histanai to make to stand,
set; to place in the balance, weigh, from PIE root *sta- stand (see stet). Earlier statical (1560s).
The sense of having to do with bodies at rest or with forces that balance each other is first
recorded 1802. Applied to frictional electricity from 1839.


static (n.)

random radio noise, 1912, from static (adj.). Figurative sense of aggravation, criticism is attested
from 1926.


statics (n.)

branch of mechanics which treats of stresses and strains, 1650s, from Modern Latin statica (see
static); also see -ics. Related: Statical; statically.


station (v.)

to assign a post or position to, 1748, from station (n.). Related: Stationed; stationing.


station (n.)

late 13c., place which one normally occupies, from Old French stacion, estacion site, location;
station of the Cross; stop, standstill, from Latin stationem (nominative statio) a standing,
standing firm; a post, job, position; military post; a watch, guard, sentinel; anchorage, port
(related to stare to stand), from PIE *ste-ti-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Meaning each of a number of holy places visited in succession by pilgrims is from late 14c., as in
Station of the Cross (1550s). Meaning fixed uniform distance in surveying is from 1570s. Sense of
status, rank is from c.1600. Meaning military post in English is from c.1600. The meaning place
where people are stationed for some special purpose (as in polling station) is first recorded 1823.
Radio station is from 1912; station break, pause in broadcasting to give the local station a chance
to identify itself, is from 1942.    The meaning regular stopping place is first recorded 1797, in
reference to coach routes; applied to railroads 1830. Station-master is from 1836. Station wagon in
the automobile sense is first recorded 1929, from earlier use for a horse-drawn conveyance that took
passengers to and from railroad stations (1894). Station house police station is attested from 1836.


stationary (adj.)

late 14c., having no apparent motion (in reference to planets), from Middle French stationnaire
motionless and directly from Latin stationarius, from the stem of statio a standing, post, job,
position (see station (n.)). Meaning unmovable is from 1620s. In classical Latin, stationarius is
recorded only in the sense of a military station; the word for stationary, steady being statarius.


stationer (n.)

book-dealer, seller of books and paper, early 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), from Medieval Latin
stationarius tradesman who sells from a station or shop, noun use of Latin stationarius (see
stationary). Roving peddlers were the norm in the Middle Ages; sellers with a fixed location often
were bookshops licensed by universities; hence the word acquired a more specific sense than its
etymological one.


stationery (n.)

1727, from stationery wares (c.1680) articles sold by a stationer, from stationer seller of books
and paper (q.v.) + -y (1).


statism (n.)

c.1600, in reference to church-state matters; 1880 as the art of government; 1919 as the modern
political opposite of individualism; from state (n.) + -ism.


statist (n.)

1580s, statesman; 1803, statistician; 1976 as supporter of statism; 1960 as an adjective in this
sense; from state (n.2) + -ist.


statistic (n.)

1852, one numerical statistic, see statistics. From 1939 in reference to a person (considered as
nothing more than an example of some measured quantity).


statistical (adj.)

1787, from statistics + -al (1). Related: Statistically.


statistician (n.)

1801, from statistics + -ian.


statistics (n.)

1770, science dealing with data about the condition of a state or community [Barnhart], from German
Statistik, popularized and perhaps coined by German political scientist Gottfried Aschenwall
(1719-1772) in his Vorbereitung zur Staatswissenschaft (1748), from Modern Latin statisticum
(collegium) (lecture course on) state affairs, from Italian statista one skilled in statecraft, from
Latin status (see state (n.2)). OED points out that the context shows that [Aschenwall] did not
regard the term as novel, but current use of it seems to trace to him. Sir John Sinclair is credited
with introducing it in English use. Meaning numerical data collected and classified is from 1829;
hence the study of any subject by means of extensive enumeration. Abbreviated form stats first
recorded 1961.


stator (n.)

stationary part of a generator (opposed to rotor), 1895, from Latin stator, agent noun from stare to
stand (see stay (v.)). In classical Latin it meant an orderly, attendant upon a proconsul.


statuary (n.)

1560s, art of making statues; 1580s, statue sculptor, from Latin statuaria (ars), noun use of fem.
of statuarius of statues, as a noun, maker of statues, from statua an image, statue, monumental
figure (see statue). Meaning statues collectively is from 1670s. As an adjective, of or pertaining
to statues, 1620s, from the noun or from Latin statuarius.


statue (n.)

late 14c., from Old French statue, estatue (pagan) statue, graven image (12c.), from Latin statua
image, statue, monumental figure, representation in metal, properly that which is set up, back-
formation from statuere to cause to stand, set up, from status a standing, position (see status).
The children's game of statues is attested from 1906.


statuesque (adj.)

of or like a statue in some sense, especially stately, having a formal dignity and beauty, tall and
solidly built, 1823, from statue, patterned on picturesque. Related: Statuesquely; statuesqueness.


statuette (n.)

1843, from statue + diminutive ending -ette.


stature (n.)

early 14c., natural height of a body, height, from Old French stature, estature build, structure,
from Latin statura height, size of body, size, growth, from PIE *ste-tu-, from root *sta- to stand,
with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Figurative sense first recorded
1834.


status (n.)

1670s, height of a situation or condition, later legal standing of a person (1791), from Latin
status condition, position, state, manner, attitude from past participle stem of stare to stand,
from PIE *ste-tu-, from root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of standing in one's society or
profession is from 1820. Status symbol first recorded 1955; status-seeker from 1956. Status-anxiety
is from 1959.


status quo (n.)

unaltered condition, 1833, from Latin status quo the state in which, hence existing state of
affairs. Also status quo ante the state in which before, state of affairs previous (1877). Related:
Status-quoism.


statute (n.)

late 13c., from Old French statut, estatut (royal) promulgation, (legal) statute, from Late Latin
statutum a law, decree, noun use of neuter past participle of Latin statuere enact, establish, from
status condition, position (see status).


statutory (adj.)

pertaining to statues, depending on statute for authority, required by statute, 1717, from statute +
-ory. Statutory rape attested from 1873; in U.S., sexual intercourse with a female below the legal
age of consent, whether forced or not. Related: Statutorily.


staunch (adj.)

early 15c., impervious to water, from Old French estanche firm, watertight, fem. of estanc tired,
exhausted, wearied, vanquished; water-tight; withered, dried (Modern French &#233;tanche), from
Vulgar Latin *stanticare (source also of Spanish estanco water-tight, Italian stanco exhausted,
weary), probably from Latin stans (genitive stantis), present participle of stare to stand, from PIE
root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of strong, substantial first recorded mid-15c.; of persons,
standing firm and true to one's principles from 1620s.


staunchly (adv.)

1825, from staunch + -ly (2).


stave (n.)

piece of a barrel, 1750, back-formation from staves (late 14c.), plural of staff, with the usual
change of medial -f- to -v- (compare leaves/leaf). The plural form possibly was in Old English but
not recorded there.


stave (v.)

1540s, to fit with staves, from stave (n.). The meaning break into staves is from 1590s (with in
from 1748, chiefly nautical, on notion of bashing in the staves of a cask). Past tense stove. Stave
off (1620s), however, is literally keep off with a staff, as of one beset by wolves or dogs.
Related: Staved; staving.


stavesacre (n.)

herbal plant of the Delphinium family, c.1400, from Latin staphisagria, from Greek staphis agria,
literally wild raisin, from staphis raisin (according to Klein, probably related to staphyle bunch
of grapes) + agria, fem. of agrios wild, literally living in the fields, from agros field (see
acre).


stay (v.1)

mid-15c., cease going forward, come to a halt, also (transitive) detain, hold back, from Old French
estai-, stem of estare to stay or stand, from Latin stare to stand, stand still, remain standing; be
upright, be erect; stand firm, stand in battle; abide; be unmovable; be motionless; remain, tarry,
linger; take a side, (source also of Italian stare, Spanish estar to stand, to be), from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of remain is first recorded 1570s; that of reside as a guest for a
short period is from 1550s. Related: Stayed; staying.    Of things, remain in place, 1590s. Stay put
is first recorded 1843, American English. To stay put is to keep still, remain in order. A vulgar
expression [Bartlett]. Phrase stay the course is originally (1885) in reference to horses holding
out till the end of a race. Stay-stomach was (1800) a snack.


stay (n.1)

support, prop, brace, 1510s, from Middle French estaie piece of wood used as a support, Old French
estaie prop, support, perhaps from Frankish *staka support or some other Germanic word, from Proto-
Germanic *stagaz (cognates: Middle Dutch stake stick, Old English steli steel, st&aelig;g rope used
to support a mast), from PIE *stak- to stand, place (see stay (n.2)). In some uses from stay (v.2).


stay (n.2)

strong rope which supports a ship's mast, from Old English st&aelig;g rope used to support a mast,
from Proto-Germanic *stagaz (cognates: Dutch stag, Low German stach, German Stag, Old Norse stag
stay of a ship), from PIE *stak- to stand, place, perhaps ultimately an extended form of root *sta-
to stand (see stet).


stay (n.3)

1520s, delay, postponement, period of remaining in a place, from stay (v.1). Meaning action of
stoppage, appliance for stopping is 1530s; that of suspension of judicial proceedings is from 1540s.


stay (v.2)

support, sustain, early 15c., from Middle French estayer (Modern French &#233;tayer), originally in
nautical use, secure by stays, from estaie (see stay (n.1)). The nautical sense in English is from
1620s. Related: Stayed; staying.


stay-at-home (n.)

1836, from adjectival stay-at-home (1806); see stay (v.1).


staycation (n.)

also stay-cation, 2008, American English, a word from the Great Recession of that year, from stay
(v.1) + ending from vacation.


staymaker (n.)

also stay-maker, from stays + maker.


stays (n.)

laced underbodice, c.1600, from plural of stay (n.1). Also compare bodice.


stead (n.)

Old English stede place, position; standing, firmness, stability, fixity, from Proto-Germanic
*stadiz (cognates: Old Saxon stedi, Old Norse sta&eth;r place, spot; stop, pause; town, Swedish
stad, Dutch stede place, Old High German stat, German Stadt town, Gothic sta&thorn;s place), from
PIE *steti-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related to stand.    Now chiefly in
compounds or phrases. Meaning assistance, use, benefit, advantage is from c.1300. Meaning frame on
which a bed is laid is from c.1400. The German use of Stadt for town, city is a late development
from c.1200 when the term began to replace Burg [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]. The
Steads was 16c. English for the Hanseatic cities.


steadfast (adj.)

Old English stedef&aelig;st secure in position, steady, firm in its place, from stede  (see stead) +
f&aelig;st (see fast (adj.)); similar formation in Middle Low German stedevast, Old Norse
sta&eth;fastr steadfast, firm; faithful, staunch, firm in one's mind. Of persons, in English,
unshakable, stubborn, resolute from c.1200. Related: Steadfastly, steadfastness.


steady (adj.)

1520s, firmly fixed in place or station (replacing earlier steadfast), from stead + adjectival
suffix -y (2), perhaps on model of Middle Dutch, Middle Low German stadig. Old English had
st&aelig;&eth;&eth;ig grave, serious, and stedig barren, but neither seems to be the direct source
of the modern word. Old Norse cognate sto&eth;ugr steady, stable was closer in sense. As an adverb
from c.1600.    Originally of things; of persons or minds from c.1600. Meaning working at an even
rate is first recorded in 1540s. Steady progress is etymologically a contradiction in terms. Steady
state first attested 1885; as a cosmological theory (propounded by Bondi, Gold, and Hoyle), it is
attested from 1948. Related: Steadily.


steady (v.)

1520s, transitive and intransitive, from steady (adj.). Related: Steadied; steadying.


steady (n.)

1792, a steady thing or place, from steady (adj.). From 1885 as something that holds another object
steady. Meaning one's boyfriend or girlfriend is from 1897; to go steady is 1905 in teenager slang.


steak (n.)

mid-15c., thick slice of meat cut for roasting, probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse steik roast meat, related to steikja to roast on a spit, and ultimately meaning something
stuck (on a spit), from Proto-Germanic *staiko-, from PIE *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick
(v.)).


steal (v.)

Old English stelan to commit a theft, to take and carry off clandestinely and without right or leave
(class IV strong verb; past tense st&aelig;l, past participle stolen), from Proto-Germanic *stelan
(cognates: Old Saxon stelan, Old Norse, Old Frisian stela to steal, to rob one of, Dutch stelen, Old
High German stelan, German stehlen, Gothic stilan to steal), from PIE *stel-, possibly a variant of
*ster- (3) to rob, steal.    The notion of secrecy ... seems to be part of the original meaning of
the vb. [OED]. Intransitive meaning to depart or withdraw stealthily and secretly is from late Old
English. Most IE words for steal have roots in notions of hide, carry off, or collect, heap up.
Attested as a verb of stealthy motion from c.1300 (as in to steal away, late 14c.); of kisses from
late 14c.; of glances, sighs, etc., from 1580s. The various sports senses begin 1836. To steal
(someone) blind first recorded 1974.


steal (n.)

1825, act or case of theft, from steal (v.). Meaning a bargain is attested by 1942, American English
colloquial. Baseball sense of a stolen base is from 1867.


stealing (n.)

14c., verbal noun from steal (v.). Old English had st&#230;l&#240;ing theft.


stealth (n.)

mid-13c., theft, action or practice of stealing, from a probable Old English *st&aelig;l&thorn;,
which is related to stelen (see steal (v.)), from Proto-Germanic *st&aelig;litho (cognates: Old
Norse stul&thorn;r), with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Compare
heal/health, weal/wealth. Sense of secret action developed c.1300, but the word also retained its
etymological sense into 18c. Got a boost as an adjective from stealth fighter, stealth bomber,
radar-evading U.S. military aircraft, activated 1983.


stealthy (adj.)

c.1600, from stealth + -y (2). Related: Stealthily; stealthiness.


steam (n.)

Old English steam vapor, fume, water in a gaseous state, from Proto-Germanic *staumaz (cognates:
Dutch stoom steam), of unknown origin. Meaning vapor of boiling water used to drive an engine is
from 1690s, hence steam age (1828) and many figurative uses, such as let off steam (1831, literal),
blow off steam (1857, figurative), full-steam (1878), get up steam (1887, figurative). Steam heat is
from 1820s in thermodynamics; as a method of temperature control from 1904.    We have given her six
months to consider the matter, and in this steam age of the world, no woman ought to require a
longer time to make up her mind. [Sarah Josepha Hale, Sketches of American Character, 1828]


steam (v.)

Old English stiemen, stymen emit vapor, emit a scent or odor, from the root of steam (n.). Meaning
go by steam power is from 1831. Transitive sense from 1660s, to emit as steam; meaning to treat with
steam is from 1798. Slang steam up (transitive) make (someone) angry is from 1922. Related: Steamed;
steaming.


steam-engine (n.)

1751; earlier in the same sense was fire engine, atmospheric engine.


steam-roller (n.)

also steamroller, 1866, from steam (n.) + roller. As a verb, first recorded 1912 (steam-roll (v.) is
from 1879). Related: Steam-rollered.


steam-whistle (n.)

1840, from steam (n.) + whistle (n.).


steamboat (n.)

1787, from steam + boat (n.).


steamer (n.)

1814 in the cookery sense, agent noun from steam (v.). From 1825 as a vessel propelled by steam,
hence steamer trunk (1885), one that carries the essentials for a voyage.


steampunk (n.)

also steam-punk, by 1992, perhaps 1989, from steam (as in Age of Steam) + punk (n.), probably on
model of cyberpunk (1986).


steamship (n.)

also steam-ship, 1819, from steam (n.) + ship (n.).


steamy (adj.)

1640s, vaporous, misty, abounding in steam, from steam + -y (2); in the sense of erotic, sexy, it is
first recorded 1952. Related: Steamily; steaminess.


stearin (n.)

glycerine of stearic acid, white crystalline compound found in animal and vegetable fats (it was
derived from mutton fat, among other things), 1817, from French st&eacute;arine, coined by French
chemist Marie-Eug&egrave;ne Chevreul (1786-1889) from Greek stear (genitive steatos) tallow, stiff
fat, suet (contrasted with pimele soft fat, lard; compare Latin sebum/adeps), possibly from PIE
*stai- stone, also to thicken, stiffen (see stone (n.)). Stearic (1831) is from French
st&eacute;arique.


steatopygia (n.)

abnormal accumulation of fat on the buttocks of certain races, 1822, Modern Latin, from steato- fat,
tallow, comb. form of Greek stear (genitive steatos) solid fat, suet (see stearin) + Greek pyge
rump, buttocks. Related: Steatopygous having enormously fat buttocks [Century Dictionary];
steatopygy.


steed (n.)

Old English steda stallion, stud horse, from Proto-Germanic *stodjon (source also of Old Norse
sto&eth;), from the same Germanic root as Old English stod (see stud (n.2)). In Middle English, a
great horse (as distinguished from a palfrey), a spirited war horse. Obsolete from 16c. except in
poetic, rhetorical, or jocular language.


steel (n.)

modified form of iron with a small portion of carbon, not found in nature but known in ancient
times, Old English style steel, from noun use of Proto-Germanic adjective *stakhlijan made of steel
(cognates: Old Saxon stehli, Old Norse, Middle Low German stal, Danish staal, Swedish st&#229;l,
Middle Dutch stael, Dutch staal, Old High German stahal, German Stahl), related to *stakhla standing
fast, from PIE *stek-lo-, from root *stak- to stand, place, be firm (see stay (n.1)). The notion is
perhaps that which stands firm. No corresponding word exists outside Germanic except those likely
borrowed from Germanic languages.    As an adjective from c.1200 (Old English used stylen *steel-en.
Steel wool is attested from 1896. Steel drum is from 1952.


steel (v.)

make hard or strong like steel, 1580s, earliest use is figurative, from steel (n.). Old English
lacked the verb but had styled made of steel. Related: Steeled; steeling.


steely (adj.)

1580s, made of steel, from steel (n.) + -y (2). Figurative meaning hard and cold as steel is from
c.1500. Related: Steeliness.


steenbok (n.)

1775, from Afrikaans steenbok, from Middle Dutch steenboc wild goat, literally stone buck, cognate
with Old English stanbucca mountain goat, German Steinbock. See stone (n.) + buck (n.1).


steep (adj.)

having a sharp slope, Old English steap high, lofty; deep; prominent, projecting, from Proto-
Germanic *staupaz (cognates: Old Frisian stap high, lofty, Middle High German *stouf), from PIE
*steup-, extended form of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat, with derivations referring
to projecting objects (cognates: Greek typtein to strike, typos a blow, mold, die; Sanskrit tup-
harm, tundate pushes, stabs; Gothic stautan push; Old Norse stuttr short). The sense of precipitous
is from c.1200. The slang sense at a high price is a U.S. coinage first attested 1856. Related:
Steeply; steepness. The noun meaning steep place is from 1550s.


steep (v.)

to soak in a liquid, early 14c., of uncertain origin, originally in reference to barley or malt,
probably cognate with Old Norse steypa to pour out, throw (perhaps from an unrecorded Old English
cognate), from Proto-Germanic *staupijanan. Related: Steeped; steeping.


steepen (v.)

1847, from steep (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Steepened; steepening.


steeple (n.)

Old English stepel (Mercian), stiepel (West Saxon) high tower, related to steap high, lofty, from
Proto-Germanic *staupilaz (see steep (adj.)). Also the name of a lofty style of women's head-dress
from the 14th century. Steeple-house (1640s) was the old Quaker way of referring to a church
edifice, to avoid in that sense using church, which had with them a more restricted meaning.


steeplechase (n.)

1793 (earlier steeplehunt, 1772), from steeple + chase (n.). Originally an open-country horse race
with a visible church steeple as a goal.


steeplejack (n.)

one who climbs steeples, chimneys, etc. to make repairs, 1881, from steeple + jack (n.) fellow, man.


steepness (n.)

mid-15c., from steep (adj.) + -ness.


steer (v.)

guide the course of a vehicle, originally by a rudder or something like it, Old English steran
(Mercian), stieran (West Saxon) steer, guide, direct; govern, rule; restrain, correct, punish, from
Proto-Germanic *steurjan (cognates: Old Norse styra, Old Frisian stiora, Dutch sturen, Old High
German stiuren, German steuern to steer, Gothic stiurjan to establish, assert), related to *steuro a
rudder, a steering, from PIE *steu-ro- (cognates: Greek stauros stake, pole), extended form of root
*sta- to stand (see stet).    The notion is of a stiff, upright pillar or post used in steering, or
else perhaps establish, hence direct, steer. Intransitive sense also was in Old English. To steer
clear of in the figurative sense of to avoid completely is recorded from 1723. Related: Steered;
steering.


steer (n.)

young ox, Old English steor bullock, from Proto-Germanic *steuraz (cognates: Old Saxon stior, Old
Norse stjorr, Swedish tjur, Danish tyr, Middle Dutch, Dutch, German stier, Gothic stiur bull),
perhaps from PIE *steu-ro-, denoting larger domestic animal (see taurus). In U.S. of male beef
cattle of any age.


steerable (adj.)

1836, originally of balloons, from steer (v.) + -able.


steerage (n.)

c.1400, steering apparatus of a ship; mid-15c., action of steering, from steer (v.) + -age. Meaning
part of a ship in front of the chief cabin is from 1610s; originally in the rear of the ship where
the steering apparatus was, it retained the name after the introduction of the deck wheel in early
18c.; hence meaning section of a ship with the cheapest accommodations, first recorded 1804, later
found in the front part of a ship.


steering (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun from steer (v.). Steering-wheel attested from 1750. Steering committee in
the U.S. political sense is recorded from 1887.


stegosaurus (n.)

type of plant-eating dinosaur, 1892, from Modern Latin order name Stegosauria (O.C. Marsh, 1877),
from comb. form of Greek stegos a roof (related to stege covering, stegein to cover, from PIE root
*(s)teg- (2) to cover, especially cover with a roof (cognates: Sanskrit sthag- cover, conceal, hide;
Latin tegere to cover; Lithuanian stegti roof; Old Norse &thorn;ekja, Old English &thorn;eccan
thatch; Dutch dekken, German decken to cover, put under roof; Irish tuigiur cover, tech house; Welsh
toi thatch, roof, ty house) + -saurus. The back-armor plates in the fossilized remains look like
roof tiles.


stein (n.)

earthenware mug, 1855, from German Stein, shortened form of Steinkrug stone jug, from Stein stone
(see stone (n.)) + Krug jug, jar. Compare Old English st&#230;ne pitcher, jug.


steinbock (n.)

German; see steenbok.


Steinway (n.)

make of pianos, from Henry Englehard Steinway (1797-1871), celebrated German piano-builder who
founded the firm in New York in 1853.


stele (n.)

upright slab, usually inscribed, 1820, from Greek stele standing block, slab, especially one bearing
an inscription, such as a gravestone, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Related:
Stelar.


stell (v.)

to fix in position (obsolete or dialectal), Old English stellan to place, put, set, from West
Germanic *stalljan (source also of German stellen; see stall (n.1)).


Stella

fem. proper name, from Latin stella star (see star (n.)).


stellar (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to stars, star-like, from Late Latin stellaris pertaining to a star, starry, from
stella star (see star (n.)). Meaning outstanding, leading (1883) is from the theatrical sense of
star.


stellate (adj.)

c.1500, starry, star-spangled, from Latin stellatus covered with stars, past participle of stellare
to set with stars, from stella (see star (n.)). Meaning star-shaped is recorded from 1660s.


stem (n.)

Old English stemn, stefn stem of a plant, trunk of a tree, also either end-post of a ship, from
Proto-Germanic *stamniz (cognates: Old Saxon stamm, Old Norse stafn stem of a ship; Danish stamme,
Swedish stam trunk of a tree; Old High German stam, German Stamm), from suffixed form of PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet).    Meaning support of a wineglass is from 1835. Meaning unchanging part
of a word is from 1830. Stems slang for legs is from 1860. The nautical sense is preserved in the
phrase stem to stern along the full length (of a ship), attested from 1620s. Stem cell attested by
1885.


stem (v.1)

to hold back, early 14c., from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse stemma to stop, dam up; be
stopped, abate, from Proto-Germanic *stamjan (cognates: Swedish st&auml;mma, Old Saxon stemmian,
Middle Dutch stemon, German stemmen stop, resist, oppose), from PIE root *stem- to strike against
something (cognates: Lithuanian stumiu thrust, push). Not connected to stem (n.). Related: Stemmed;
stemming. Phrase to stem the tide is literally to hold back the tide, but often is confused with
stem (v.2) make headway against.    Verbal phrase stems from (1932, American English), perhaps is
from stem (v.) in the sense to rise, mount up, have origin in (1570s), or is influenced by or
translates German stammen aus, probably from a figurative sense represented by English stem (n.) in
the sense of stock of a family, line of descent (c.1540; cognates: family tree, and German
stammvater tribal ancestor, literally stem-father).


stem (v.2)

make headway by sailing, head in a certain course, late 14c., literally to push the stem through,
from stem (n.) in the ship post sense (here the post at the prow of the ship). Related: Stemmed;
stemming.


stem-winder (n.)

excellent thing (especially a rousing speech), 1892, from stem-winding watches (1875), which were
advanced and desirable when introduced. See stem (n.) + wind (v.1).


Sten (n.)

type of light, rapid-fire submachine gun, 1942, from initials of surnames of designers R.V. Shepherd
and H.J. Turpin + En(field); compare Bren.


stench (n.)

Old English stenc a smell, odor, scent, fragrance (either pleasant or unpleasant), from Proto-
Germanic *stankwiz (cognates: Old Saxon stanc, Old High German stanch, German stank). Related to
stincan emit a smell (see stink (v.)) as drench is to drink. It tended toward bad smell in Old
English (as a verb, only with this sense), and the notion of evil smell has predominated since
c.1200.


stencil (n.)

1707, not recorded again until 1848, probably from Middle English stencellen decorate with bright
colors, from Middle French estenceler cover with sparkles or stars, powder with color, from
estencele spark, spangle (Modern French &#233;tincelle), from Vulgar Latin *stincilla, metathesis of
Latin scintilla spark (see scintilla).


stencil (v.)

to produce a design with a stencil, 1861, from stencil (n.). Related: Stenciled; stenciling (1781 as
a verbal noun).


steno-

before vowels sten-, word-forming element meaning narrow, from comb. form of Greek stenos narrow,
strait, as a noun straits of the sea, narrow strip of land, also metaphorically, close, confined;
scanty, petty, from PIE *sten- narrow.


stenographer (n.)

1796, agent noun formation from stenography.


stenography (n.)

shorthand, c.1600, from steno- narrow + -graphy. Related: Stenographic; stenographical.


stenosis (n.)

1846, medical Latin, from Greek stenosis narrowing, from stenoun to narrow, from stenos narrow (see
steno-) + -osis.


stent (n.)

tube implanted temporarily, 1964, named for Charles T. Stent (1807-1885), English dentist.


stentorian (adj.)

of powerful voice, c.1600, from Stentor, legendary Greek herald in the Trojan War, whose voice
(described in the Iliad) was as loud as 50 men. His name is from Greek stenein groan, moan, from PIE
imitative root *(s)ten-, source of Old English &thorn;unor thunder.


step (v.)

Old English steppan (Anglian), st&aelig;ppan (West Saxon) take a step, from West Germanic *stap-
tread (cognates: Old Frisian stapa, Middle Dutch, Dutch stappen, Old High German stapfon, German
stapfen step), from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; to support, place firmly on (see staff (n.);
cognates: Old Church Slavonic stopa step, pace, stepeni step, degree). The notion is perhaps a
treading firmly on; a foothold.    Transitive sense (as in step foot in) attested from 1530s.
Related: Stepped; stepping. Originally strong (past tense stop, past participle bestapen); weak
forms emerged 13c., universal from 16c. To step out leave for a short time is from 1530s; meaning to
go out in public in style is from 1907. Step on it hurry up is 1923, from notion of gas pedal.


step (n.)

Old English steppa (Mercian), st&aelig;pe, stepe (West Saxon) stair, act of stepping, from the
source of step (v.). Compare Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Dutch stap, Old High German stapfo, German
Stapfe footstep). From late Old English as degree on a scale. Figurative meaning action which leads
toward a result is recorded from 1540s. In dancing, from 1670s. Meaning type of military pace is
from 1798. Warning phrase watch your step is attested from 1911. Step by step indicating steady
progression is from 1580s. To follow in (someone's) steps is from mid-13c.


step-

Old English steop-, with connotations of loss, in combinations like steopcild orphan, related to
astiepan, bestiepan to bereave, to deprive of parents or children, from Proto-Germanic *steupa-
bereft (cognates: Old Frisian stiap-, Old Norse stjup-, Swedish styv-, Middle Low German stef-,
Dutch stief-, Old High German stiof-, German stief-), literally pushed out, from PIE *steup-, from
root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, with derivatives referring to fragments (see steep (adj.)).
Barnhart suggests the forms in -f- are by assimilation of the first sound in following words for
father.    Etymologically, a stepfather or stepmother is one who becomes father or mother to an
orphan, but the notion of orphanage faded in 20c. and came to denote simply relation through
marriage. For sense evolution, compare Latin privignus stepson, related to privus deprived. Compare
orphan (n.).


step-dance (n.)

one in which the steps are more important than the figure, especially one with difficult steps,
1857, from step (n.) + dance (n.). Related: Step-dancing (1872).


step-daughter (n.)

Old English stepdohtor; see step- + daughter (n.). Similar formation in German Stieftochter.


step-ladder (n.)

also stepladder, one with flat steps instead of rungs, 1728, from step (n.) + ladder.


step-sister (n.)

also stepsister, mid-15c., from step- + sister (n.).


step-son (n.)

also stepson, Old English steopsunu; see step- + son.


stepbrother (n.)

also step-brother, mid-15c., from step- + brother (n.).


stepchild (n.)

also step-child, Old English steopcild; see step- + child (n.). Old English also had steopbearn.
Similar formation in German Stiefkind.


stepfather (n.)

also step-father, Old English steopf&aelig;der; see step- + father.


Stephanie

fem. proper name, female form of Stephen. A top-20 name for girls born in U.S. 1969-1996.


Stephen

masc. proper name, from Latin Stephanus, from Greek Stephanos, from stephanos crown, wreath,
garland, chaplet; crown of victory, hence victory, prize, honor, glory, properly that which
surrounds; also used of the ring of spectators around a fight or the wall of a town, from stephein
to encircle, crown, wreathe, tie around, from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; place firmly on, fasten
(see step (v.)). Exclusively a monk's name in Old English, it became common after the Conquest.
Saint Stephen, stoned to death, was said to be Christianity's first martyr.


Stepin Fetchit

type of stereotypical black roles in Hollywood, or in popular culture generally, from stage name (a
play on step and fetch it) of popular black vaudeville actor Lincoln Theodore Perry (1902-1985), who
first appeared in films under that name in In Old Kentucky (1927). Perry said he took the name from
a racehorse on which he'd won some money.


stepmother (n.)

also step-mother, Old English steopmodor; see step- + mother (n.1). Associated with parsimony and
cruelty at least since Middle English.    Is Moder was ded, his fader nam an o&#254;ur wijf. ...
seint Edward heo louede luyte, for stepmoder is selde guod. [South English Legendary, c.1300]


steppe (n.)

vast treeless plain of southeastern Europe and of Asia, 1670s, from German steppe and directly from
Russian step', of unknown origin. Introduced in Western Europe by Humboldt.


stepper (n.)

horse with a showy gait, 1835, agent noun from step (v.).


stepping (n.)

early 14c., verbal noun from step (v.). Stepping stone first recorded early 14c.; in the figurative
sense 1650s.


stercoraceous (adj.)

consisting of or pertaining to feces, 1731, from Latin stercus (genitive stercoris) dung (from
metathesized form of PIE *skert-, extended form of root *sker- (4) excrement, dung) + -aceous.


stere (n.)

unit of the metric system for solid measure, 1798, from French st&egrave;re unit of volume equal to
one cubic meter, from Greek stereos solid, stiff, firm, from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). Little used, cubic meter generally serving instead.


stereo

1823 as a shortening of stereotype (n.); 1876 as a shortening of stereoscope; 1954 as a shortening
of stereophonic (adj.); the noun meaning stereophonic record or tape player is recorded from 1964.


stereo-

before vowels stere-, word-forming element meaning solid, firm; three-dimensional; stereophonic,
from comb. form of Greek stereos solid, from PIE *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (cognates:
Greek steresthai be deprived of, steira sterile, sterphnios stiff, rigid, sterphos hide, skin; Latin
sterilis barren, unproductive; Sanskrit sthirah hard, firm, starih a barren cow; Persian suturg
strong; Lithuanian storas thick, stregti to become frozen; Old Church Slavonic strublu strong, hard,
sterica a barren cow, staru old (hence Russian stary old); Gothic stairo barren; Old Norse stirtla a
barren cow, Old English starian to stare, stearc stiff, strong, rigid, steorfan to die, literally
become stiff, styrne severe, strict).


stereophonic (adj.)

1927, from stereo- + phonic. Related: Stereophony (1950); stereophonics (1958).


stereoptican (n.)

double magic lantern producing dissolving views or impressions of three-dimensionality to pictured
objects, 1858, from stereo- + Greek optikon, neuter of optikos pertaining to sight (see optic).


stereoscope (n.)

1838, coined by inventor Sir Charles Whetstone (1802-1875) from stereo- + -scope. Instrument
allowing binocular vision of two identical pictures that appear as a single image with relief and
solidity. Related: Stereoscopy; stereoscopically.


stereoscopic (adj.)

1852, from stereoscope + -ic.


stereotype (n.)

1798, method of printing from a plate, from French st&eacute;r&eacute;otype (adj.) printed by means
of a solid plate of type, from Greek stereos solid (see stereo-) + French type type (see type (n.)).
Meaning a stereotype plate is from 1817. Meaning image perpetuated without change is first recorded
1850, from the verb in this sense. Meaning preconceived and oversimplified notion of characteristics
typical of a person or group is recorded from 1922.


stereotype (v.)

1804, to cast a stereotype plate, from stereotype (n.). From 1819 in the figurative sense fix firmly
or unchangeably. By 1953 as assign preconceived and oversimplified notion of characteristics typical
of a person or group. Related: Stereotyped; stereotyping.


stereotypical (adj.)

1949, in the figurative sense, from stereotype (n.) + -ical. Stereotypic is from 1801 in the literal
sense.


stereotyping (n.)

1807, verbal noun from stereotype (v.). Figurative sense from 1888.


sterile (adj.)

mid-15c., barren, from Middle French st&eacute;rile not producing fruit, from Latin sterilis barren,
unproductive, unfruitful; unrequited; unprofitable, from PIE *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong
(see stereo-). Also see torpor. Originally in English with reference to soil; of persons (chiefly
females), from 1530s. The sense of sterilized, free from living germs is first recorded 1877.


sterility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French sterilite, from Latin sterilitatem (nominative sterilitas)
unfruitfulness, barrenness, from sterilis (see sterile).


sterilization (n.)

1826, noun of action from sterilize.


sterilize (v.)

destroy the fertility of, 1690s (in reference to soil), from French st&#233;riliser or else from
sterile + -ize; of living things from 1828. Meaning render free of micro-organisms is from 1878.
Related: Sterilized; sterilizing.


sterling (n.)

c.1300, silver penny, probably from Middle English sterre (see star (n.)), according to OED
presumably from the stars that appeared in the design of certain Norman coins, + diminutive suffix
-ling. But starred coins were not especially common among Anglo-Saxon currency, and the stars on
them tended to be small. The other theory [Kluge] is that it derives from Old French estedre stater
(see stater). Sense broadened by 1560s to money having the quality of the sterling, and c.1600 to
English money in general. As an adjective from early 15c. From 1640s in general sense of capable of
standing a test (as a sound coin would). A pound sterling was originally a pound weight of
sterlings, equal to about 240 of them.


stern (adj.)

Old English styrne severe, strict, grave, hard, cruel, from Proto-Germanic *sternijaz (cognates:
Middle High German sterre, German starr stiff, st&ouml;rrig obstinate; Gothic andstaurran to be
stiff; Old Norse stara; Old English starian to look or gaze upon), from PIE root *ster- (1) rigid,
stiff (see stereo-). Related: Sternly; sternness.


stern (n.)

early 13c., hind part of a ship; steering gear of a ship, probably from a Scandinavian source, such
as Old Norse stjorn a steering, related to or derived from styra to guide (see steer (v.)). Or the
word may come from Old Frisian stiarne rudder, which also is related to steer (v.). Stern-wheeler as
a type of steam-boat is from 1855, American English.


Stern gang (n.)

militant Zionist terrorist organization (officially Lohame Herut Yisra'el Fighters for the Freedom
of Israel) founded 1940 by Avram Stern (1907-1942).


Sterno (n.)

U.S. proprietary name for solidified alcohol used as fuel for cooking stoves, 1915, by S. Sternau
&amp; Co., New York, N.Y. Noted by 1935 as a source of dangerous but cheap alcohol for drinking.


sternocleidomastoid (adj.)

medical Latin, from sterno- sternum, comb. form of Greek sternon or Latin sternum (see sternum) +
Latinized comb. form of Greek kleis (see clavicle) + mastoid.


sternum (n.)

breastbone, 1660s, from Greek sternon chest, breast, breastbone (in Homer, only of males), also the
breast as the seat of affections, related to stornynai to spread out, from PIE *ster-no- to stretch,
extend, from root *stere-, *ster- to spread, related to stornynai to spread out (see structure
(n.)), on the notion of the chest as broad and flat, as opposed to the neck. Related: Sternal.


sternward (adj.)

1832, from stern (n.) + -ward.


steroid (n.)

naturally occuring substance based on a carbon skeleton similar to that of sterol molecules, 1936,
from sterol + -oid resembling. Related: Steroids.


sterol (n.)

white, crystalline substance discovered in gallstones, 1913, abstracted from cholesterol.


stertorous (adj.)

characterized by snoring, 1802, from Modern Latin stertor (from Latin stertere to snore, from PIE
imitative root *pster-) + -ous. Related: Stertorously; stertorousness.


stet

direction to printer to disregard correction made to text, 1755, from Latin stet let it stand, third
person singular present subjunctive of stare to stand, stand upright, be stiff, from PIE root *sta-
to stand, set down, make or be firm, with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing
(cognates: Sanskrit tisthati stands; Avestan histaiti to stand; Persian -stan country, literally
where one stands; Greek histemi put, place, cause to stand; weigh, stasis a standing still, statos
placed, stater a weight, coin, stylos pillar; Latin sistere stand still, stop, make stand, place,
produce in court, status manner, position, condition, attitude, stare to stand, statio station,
post; Lithuanian stojus place myself, statau place; Old Church Slavonic staja place myself, stanu
position; Gothic standan, Old English standan to stand, stede place, steall place where cattle are
kept; Old Norse ste&eth;i anvil, stallr pedestal for idols, altar; German Stall a stable; Old Irish
sessam the act of standing).


stethoscope (n.)

instrument for examining the chest, 1820, from French st&eacute;thoscope, coined 1819 by its
inventor, French physician Ren&eacute;-Th&eacute;ophile-Hyacinthe La&#235;nnec (1781-1826) from
comb. form of Greek stethos chest, breast + -scope. Greek stethos is perhaps related to sternon (see
sternum); it meant front of the chest, and was only rarely used of a woman's breasts, but in Modern
Greek it became the preferred polite term. Related: Stethoscopic; stethoscopy.


Stetson

1902, trademark name, from John B. Stetson (1830-1906), U.S. hat manufacturer, who started his
company in Philadelphia in 1865.


stevedore (n.)

1828, earlier stowadore (1788), from Spanish estibador one who loads cargo, wool-packer, agent noun
from estibar to stow cargo, from Latin stipare pack down, press (see stiff (adj.)).


Steven

masc. proper name, anglicized form of Stephen (q.v.). A top 20 name for boys born in the U.S.
between 1949 and 1976; the -ph- form was the more popular in U.S. until 1960s.


stew (v.)

late 14c., transitive to bathe (a person or a body part) in a steam bath, from Old French estuver
have a hot bath, plunge into a bath; stew (Modern French &eacute;tuver), of uncertain origin. Common
Romanic (cognates: Spanish estufar, Italian stufare), possibly from Vulgar Latin *extufare
evaporate, from ex- out + *tufus vapor, steam, from Greek typhos smoke. Compare Old English
stuf-b&aelig;&thorn; hot-air bath; see stove.    Intransitive use from 1590s. Meaning to boil
slowly, to cook meat by simmering it in liquid is attested from early 15c. The meaning to be left to
the consequences of one's actions is from 1650s, especially in figurative expression to stew in
one's own juices. Related: Stewed; stewing. Slang stewed drunk first attested 1737.


stew (n.)

c.1300, vessel for cooking, from stew (v.). Later heated room, especially for bathing (late 14c.).
The meaning stewed meat with vegetables is first recorded 1756. The obsolete slang meaning brothel
(mid-14c., usually plural, stews) is from a parallel sense of public bath house (mid-14c.), carried
over from Old French estuve bath, bath house; bawdy house, reflecting the reputation of medieval
bath houses.


steward (n.)

Old English stiward, stigweard house guardian, housekeeper, from stig hall, pen for cattle, part of
a house (see sty (n.1)) + weard guard (see ward (n.)). Used after the Conquest as the equivalent of
Old French seneschal (q.v.). Meaning overseer of workmen is attested from c.1300. The sense of
officer on a ship in charge of provisions and meals is first recorded mid-15c.; extended to trains
1906. This was the title of a class of high officers of the state in early England and Scotland,
hence meaning one who manages affairs of an estate on behalf of his employer (late 14c.). Meaning
person who supervises arrangements at a meeting, dinner, etc., is from 1703.    The Scottish form
(with terminal -t attested from late 14c.) is reflected in Stewart, name of the royal house
descended from Walter (the) Steward, who married (1315) Marjorie de Bruce, daughter of King Robert.
Stuart is a French spelling, attested from 1429 and adopted by Mary, Queen of Scots.


stewardess (n.)

1630s, female steward, from steward (n.) + -ess. Meaning female attendant on passenger aircraft is
from 1931; used of ships (where she waited on the female passengers) from 1837.


stewardship (n.)

position or responsibilities of a steward, mid-15c., from steward (n.) + -ship. Specific
ecclesiastical sense of responsible use of resources in the service of God is from 1899.


stichic (adj.)

made up of lines, 1844 (stichical is from 1787), from Greek stikhikos of lines, of verses, from
stikhos row, line, rank, verse, related to steikhein to go, to march in order, from PIE root
*steigh-  go, rise, stride, step, walk (see stair).


stichomythia (n.)

dialogue in alternate lines, Latinized from Greek stikhomythia, from stikhos (see stichic) + mythos
speech, talk (see myth). Related: Stichomythic.


stick (n.)

Old English sticca rod, twig, peg; spoon, from Proto-Germanic *stikkon- pierce, prick (cognates: Old
Norse stik, Middle Dutch stecke, stec, Old High German stehho, German Stecken stick, staff), from
PIE *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick (v.)). Meaning staff used in a game is from 1670s
(originally billiards); meaning manual gearshift lever first recorded 1914. Alliterative connection
of sticks and stones is recorded from mid-15c.; originally every part of a building. Stick-bug is
from 1870, American English; stick-figure is from 1949.


stick (v.)

Old English stician to pierce, stab, transfix, goad, also to remain embedded, stay fixed, be
fastened, from Proto-Germanic *stik- pierce, prick, be sharp (cognates: Old Saxon stekan, Old
Frisian steka, Dutch stecken, Old High German stehhan, German stechen to stab, prick), from PIE
*steig- to stick; pointed (cognates: Latin instigare to goad, instinguere to incite, impel; Greek
stizein to prick, puncture, stigma mark made by a pointed instrument; Old Persian tigra- sharp,
pointed; Avestan tighri- arrow; Lithuanian stingu to remain in place; Russian stegati to quilt).
Figurative sense of to remain permanently in mind is attested from c.1300. Transitive sense of to
fasten (something) in place is attested from late 13c. Stick out project is recorded from 1560s.
Slang stick around remain is from 1912; stick it as a rude item of advice is first recorded 1922.
Related: Stuck; sticking. Sticking point, beyond which one refuses to go, is from 1956; sticking-
place, where any thing put will stay is from 1570s. Modern use generally is an echo of Shakespeare.


stick-in-the-mud (n.)

1852, from verbal phrase, stick (v.) on notion of one who sticks in the mud, hence one who is
content to remain in an abject condition. The phrase appears in 1730, in city of London court
records, as the alias of an accused named John Baker, who with two other men received a death
sentence at the Old Bailey in December 1733 for breaking open the House of Mr. Thomas Rayner, a
Silversmith, and stealing thence Plate to a great Value.


stick-up (n.)

also stickup, 1857, a stand-up collar, from verbal phrase (attested from early 15c.), from stick
(v.) + up (adv.). The verbal phrase in the sense of rob someone at gunpoint is from 1846, hence the
noun in this sense (1887). Stick up for defend is attested from 1823.


stickball (n.)

also stick-ball, 1824, from stick (n.) + ball (n.1).


sticker (n.)

1580s, one who sticks, agent noun from stick (v.). Meaning gummed adhesive label is from 1871.


stickleback (n.)

c.1400, from Old English sticel prick, sting, goad, thorn (from Proto-Germanic *stik- pierce, prick,
be sharp; see stick (v.)) + back (n.).


stickler (n.)

1530s, moderator, umpire, agent noun from stickle mediate (1520s), probably a frequentative of
Middle English stighten to arrange, place, from Old English stihtan to rule, direct, arrange, order,
which is cognate with Middle Dutch stichten, German stiften to found, establish, probably from
Proto-Germanic *stihtan to place on a step or base, from PIE root *steigh- to stride, step, rise
(see stair). Meaning person who contends or insists stubbornly is first recorded 1640s.


sticks (n.)

rural place, 1905, from sticks in slang sense of trees (compare backwoods). See stick (n.).


sticktoitiveness (n.)

by 1971, from phrase stick to it persevere.


stickum (n.)

glue, paste, 1909, from stick (v.).


sticky (adj.)

1727, adhesive, inclined to stick, from stick (v.) + -y (2). An Old English word for this was
clibbor. First recorded 1864 in the sense of sentimental; of situations, 1915 with the meaning
difficult. Of weather, hot and humid, from 1895. Sticky wicket is 1952, from British slang, in
reference to cricket. Related: Stickily; stickiness.


stiff (adj.)

Old English stif rigid, inflexible, from Proto-Germanic *stifaz inflexible (cognates: Dutch stijf,
Old High German stif, German steif stiff; Old Norse stifla choke), from PIE *stipos-, from root
*steip- press together, pack, cram (cognates: Sanskrit styayate coagulates, stima slow; Greek stia,
stion small stone, steibo press together; Latin stipare pack down, press, stipes post, tree trunk;
Lithuanian stipti stiffen, stiprus strong; Old Church Slavonic stena wall). Of battles and
competitions, from mid-13c.; of liquor, from 1813. To keep a stiff upper lip is attested from 1815.
Related: Stiffly.


stiff (v.)

late 14c., to make stiff, from stiff (adj.). Meaning fail to tip is from 1939, originally among
restaurant and hotel workers, probably from stiff (n.), perhaps in slang sense of corpse (because
dead men pay no tips), or from the contemptible person sense. Extended by 1950 to cheat.


stiff (n.)

corpse, dead body, 1859, slang, from stiff (adj.) which had been associated with notion of rigor
mortis since c.1200. Meaning working man first recorded 1930, from earlier genitive sense of
contemptible person, but sometimes merely man, fellow (1882). Slang meaning something or someone
bound to lose is 1890 (originally of racehorses), from notion of corpse.


stiff-necked (adj.)

stubborn, obstinate, 1520s (in Tindale's rendition of Acts vii:51), from stiff (adj.) + neck (n.);
translating Latin dura cervice in Vulgate, from Greek sklero trachelos, a literal translation from
Hebrew qesheh 'oref.


stiffen (v.)

early 15c., make steadfast, from stiff (adj.) + -en (1). Intransitive sense from 1690s. Earlier verb
was simply stiff gain strength, become strong (late 14c.). Related: Stiffened; stiffener;
stiffening. Compare German steifen to stiffen.


stiffness (n.)

late 14c., from stiff (adj.) + -ness. Meaning uneasy formality is from 1630s.


stifle (v.)

late 14c., to choke, suffocate, drown, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Old French
estouffer to stifle, smother (Modern French &#233;touffer), itself of uncertain origin, perhaps from
a Germanic source (compare Old High German stopfon to plug up, stuff). Metaphoric sense is from
1570s. Related: Stifled; stifling.


stigma (n.)

1590s (earlier stigme, c.1400), mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron, from Latin stigma
(plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) mark of a pointed instrument, puncture,
tattoo-mark, brand, from root of stizein to mark, tattoo, from PIE root *steig- to stick; pointed
(see stick (v.)).    Figurative meaning a mark of disgrace in English is from 1610s. Stigmas marks
resembling the wounds on the body of Christ, appearing supernaturally on the bodies of the devout is
from 1630s; earlier stigmate (late 14c.), from Latin stigmata.


stigmatic (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin stigmaticus, from stigmat-, stem of Greek stigma (see stigma), + -ic.
Related: Stigmatical (1580s).


stigmatism (n.)

1660s, a branding, from Greek stigmatizein, from stigmat-, stem of stigma (see stigma). Meaning
condition of being affected with stigmata is from 1897.


stigmatization (n.)

1822, noun of action from stigmatize.


stigmatize (v.)

1580s, to brand or tattoo, from Medieval Latin stigmatizare, from Greek stigmatizein, from stigmat-,
stem of stigma (see stigma). Meaning to blemish is from 1610s (figurative), 1630s (literal).
Related: Stigmatized; stigmatizing.


stile (n.)

Old English stigel, stile device for climbing, ladder, related to stigen to climb, from Proto-
Germanic *stig- to climb (see stair). An arrangement to allow persons to pass but not sheep and
cattle.


stiletto (n.)

1610s, short dagger with a thick blade, from Italian stiletto, diminutive of stilo dagger, from
Latin stilus pointed writing instrument (see style (n.)). Stiletto heel first attested 1953.


still (adj.)

Old English stille motionless, stable, fixed, stationary, from Proto-Germanic *stilli- (cognates:
Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch stille, Dutch stil, Old High German stilli, German
still), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring to a standing object or place
(see stall (n.1)). Meaning quiet, calm, gentle, silent emerged in later Old English. Euphemistic for
dead in stillborn, etc. Still small voice is from KJV:    And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the
mount before the LORD. And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind: and
after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a
fire; but the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. [1 Kings 19:11-13]
Used as a conjunction from 1722.


still (n.1)

distilling apparatus, 1530s, from Middle English stillen to distill (c.1300), a variant of distillen
(see distill).


still (v.)

Old English stillan to be still, have rest; to quiet, calm, appease; to stop, restrain, from stille
at rest (see still (adj.)). Cognate with Old Saxon stillian, Old Norse stilla, Dutch, Old High
German, German stillen. Related: Stilled; stilling.


still (n.2)

c.1200, a calm, from still (adj.). Sense of quietness, the silent part is from c.1600 (in still of
the night). Meaning a photograph (as distinguished from a motion picture) is attested from 1916.


still (adv.)

even now, even then, yet (as in still standing there), 1530s, from still (adj.) in the sense without
change or cessation, continual (c.1300); the sense of even, yet (as in still more) is from 1730.


still life (n.)

1690s, translating Dutch stilleven (17c); see still (adj.) + life (n.).


stillbirth (n.)

also still-birth, 1764, from still (adj.) + birth (n.).


stillborn (adj.)

1590s, from still (adj.) + born. As a noun from 1913; still (n.) in this sense is attested from 1863
in undertaker's slang.


stillness (n.)

Old English stilnes quiet, silence, peace, release, relaxation; see still (adj.) + -ness.


stilly (adv.)

Old English stillice; see still (adj.) + -ly (2).


stilt (n.)

early 14c., a crutch, a common Germanic word (cognates: Danish stylte, Swedish stylta, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch stelte stilt, Old High German stelza plow handle, crutch), though the exact
relationship of them all is unclear, from Proto-Germanic *steltijon, from PIE root *stel- to put,
stand (see stall (n.1)). Application to wooden poles for walking across marshy ground, etc. is from
mid-15c. Meaning one of the posts on which a building is raised from the ground is first attested
1690s. As a type of bird with long legs, from 1831. Stilted in the figurative sense of pompous,
stuffy is first recorded 1820.


stilted (adj.)

1610s, having stilts, from stilt (n.). That of elevated or supported by stilts is from 1820.
Figurative sense of pompous, stuffy, formal and stiff is first recorded 1820.


Stilton (n.)

1736, cheese made famous by a coaching inn at Stilton on the Great North Road from London, the owner
being from Leicestershire, where the cheese was made. Since 1969 restricted to cheese made in
Leicester, Derby, and Nottingham counties by members of the Stilton Cheese Makers Association. The
place name is in Domesday Book as Stichiltone and probably means literally farmstead or village at a
stile or steep ascent.


stimulant (adj.)

1772, from French stimulant or directly from Latin stimulantem (nominative stimulans), present
participle of stimulare to prick, urge, stimulate (see stimulation). As a noun from 1794.


stimulate (v.)

1610s, rouse to action, from Latin stimulatus, past participle of stimulare (see stimulation).
Related: Stimulated; stimulating.


stimulation (n.)

1520s, act of pricking or stirring to action, from Latin stimulationem (nominative stimulatio) an
incitement, noun of action from past participle stem of stimulare prick, goad, urge, from stimulus
spur, goad (see stimulus).


stimuli (n.)

Latinate plural of stimulus.


stimulus (n.)

plural stimuli, 1680s, originally as a medical term, something that goads a lazy organ (often the
male member), from a modern use of Latin stimulus a goad, a pointed stick, figuratively a sting, a
pang; incitement, spur, from PIE *sti- point, prick, pierce (see stick (v.)). General sense of
something that excites or arouses the mind or spirit is from 1791. Psychological sense is first
recorded 1894.


sting (v.)

Old English stingan to stab, pierce, or prick with a point (of weapons, insects, plants, etc.), from
Proto-Germanic *stingan (cognates: Old Norse stinga, Old High German stungen to prick, Gothic us-
stagg to prick out, Old High German stanga, German stange pole, perch, German stengel stalk, stem),
perhaps from PIE *stengh-, nasalized form of root *stegh- to prick, sting (cognates: Old English
stagga stag, Greek stokhos pointed stake).    Specialized to insects late 15c. Intransitive sense be
sharply painful is from 1848. Slang meaning to cheat, swindle is from 1812. Old English past tense
stang, past participle stungen; the past tense later leveled to stung.


sting (n.)

Old English stincg, steng act of stinging, puncture, thrust, from the root of sting (v.). Meaning
sharp-pointed organ capable of inflicting a painful puncture wound is from late 14c. Meaning
carefully planned theft or robbery is attested from 1930; sense of police undercover entrapment
first attested 1975.


sting-ray (n.)

also sting ray, 1620s, from sting + ray (n.2). First in Capt. John Smith's writings: Stingraies,
whose tailes are very dangerous ....


stinger (n.)

1550s, agent noun from sting (v.). As an animal part, from 1889; earlier in this sense was sting
(n.).


stinging (adj.)

c.1200, present participle adjective from sting (v.). Figurative use from late 14c.


stingy (adj.)

niggardly, penurious, extremely tight-fisted, 1650s, of uncertain origin, perhaps a dialectal
alteration of earlier stingy biting, sharp, stinging (1610s), from sting (v.). Back-formation stinge
a stingy person is recorded from 1905. Related: Stingily; stinginess.


stink (v.)

Old English stincan emit a smell of any kind; exhale; rise (of dust, vapor, etc.) (class III strong
verb; past tense stanc, past participle stuncen), common West Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon stincan,
West Frisian stjonke, Old High German stinkan, Dutch stinken), from the root of stench. Old English
had swote stincan to smell sweet, but offensive sense also was in Old English and predominated by
mid-13c.; smell now tends the same way. Figurative meaning be offensive is from early 13c.; meaning
be inept is recorded from 1924. To stink to high heaven first recorded 1963.


stink (n.)

mid-13c., strong offensive odor, from stink (v.). Sense of extensive fuss first recorded 1812.


stink eye (n.)

dirty look, by 1972, perhaps from Hawaiian slang.


stink-bug (n.)

1869, American English, from stink + bug (n.).


stinker (n.)

as a term of abuse (often banteringly), c.1600, agent noun from stink (v.); also in the same sense
was stinkard (c.1600). Extended form stinkeroo attested by 1934.


stinkhorn (n.)

type of foul-smelling fungus, 1724, from stink + horn (n.), for its shape.


stinking (adj.)

late 14c., earlier stinkend, from Old English stincende; present participle adjective from stink
(v.). Modifying drunk, first attested 1887; stinking rich dates from 1956.


stinkpot (n.)

also stink-pot, 1660s, from stink + pot (n.1).


stinkweed (n.)

1793, from stink + weed (n.).


stinky (adj.)

1888, from stink (n.) + -y (2). Related: Stinkiness. Stinko of very poor quality is from 1924.


stint (v.)

to be sparing or frugal, 1722, earlier to limit, restrain (1510s), cause to cease, put an end to
(mid-14c.), cease, desist (intransitive), c.1200, from Old English styntan to blunt, make dull,
probably originally make short, from Proto-Germanic *stuntijanan (cognates: Old Norse stuttr short,
scant, Middle High German stunz blunt, short, German stutzen to cut short, curtail, stop, hesitate),
from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). The English word perhaps
was influenced by its Scandinavian cognates. Sense of be careful in expenditure is from 1848.
Related: Stinted; stinting. The noun is attested from c.1300.


stipe (n.)

stalk of a plant, 1785, from French stipe, from Latin stipes log, post, tree trunk (see stiff
(adj.)).


stipend (n.)

early 15c., periodical payment; soldier's pay, from Latin stipendium tax, impost, tribute, in
military use pay, salary, from stips alms, small payment, contribution of money, gift + pendere
weigh (see pendant). According to Klein's sources, the first element is related to Latin stipes log,
stock, trunk of a tree (see stipe). As a verb from late 15c.


stipendiary (adj.)

1540s, from Latin stipendiarius, from stipendium (see stipend).


stipple (v.)

paint with dots, 1670s, from Dutch stippelen to make points, frequentative of stippen to prick,
speckle, from stip a point, perhaps ultimately from PIE root *st(e)ig- pointed (see stick (v.)), or
from *steip- to stick, compress. Related: Stippled; stippling.


stipulate (v.)

1620s, bargain, make a contract (intransitive), back-formation from stipulation, or else from Latin
stipulatus, past participle of stipulari exact (a promise), bargain for. Transitive sense of demand
as a condition is from 1640s. Related: Stipulated; stipulating.


stipulation (n.)

1550s, a commitment or activity to do something (now obsolete), from Latin stipulationem (nominative
stipulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of stipulari exact a promise, engage, bargain,
of uncertain origin. Traditionally said to be from Latin stipula stalk, straw (see stipule) in
reference to some obscure symbolic act; this is rejected by most authorities, who, however, have not
come up with a better guess. Meaning act of specifying one of the terms of a contract or agreement
is recorded from 1750. Meaning that which is stipulated or agreed upon is from 1802.


stipule (n.)

small appendage at the base of the petiole of a leaf, 1793, from French stipule, from Latin stipula
stalk (of hay), straw, from PIE *stip-ola-, from root *steip- to stick, compress (see stiff (adj.)).


stir (v.)

Old English styrian to stir, move; rouse, agitate, incite, urge (transitive and intransitive), from
Proto-Germanic *sturjan (cognates: Middle Dutch stoeren, Dutch storen to disturb, Old High German
storan to scatter, destroy, German st&ouml;ren to disturb), from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn, whirl
(see storm (n.)). Related: Stirred; stirring. Stir-fry (v.) is attested from 1959.


stir (n.)

commotion, disturbance, tumult, late 14c. (in phrase on steir), probably from a Scandinavian source,
such as Old Norse styrr disturbance, tumult, from the same root as stir (v.)). The sense of
movement, bustle (1560s) probably is from the English verb.


stir-crazy (adj.)

1908, from crazy (adj.) + stir (n.) prison (1851), probably from Start Newgate (1757), prison in
London, later any prison (1823), probably from Romany stardo imprisoned, related to staripen a
prison. According to Barnhart, mid-19c. sturaban, sturbin state prison seem to be transitional
forms.


stirpes (n.)

plural of stirps, Latin, literally stem, stalk, trunk of a plant, figuratively scion, offspring,
descendant; source, origin, foundation, beginning. Hence stirpiculture breeding of special stocks or
strains.


stirring (n.)

a beginning to move, mid-14c., verbal noun from stir (v). Figurative sense by late 14c. Related:
Stirrings.


stirring (adj.)

late 15c., replacing sterand, from Old English styrend in active motion; animated, rousing,present
participle adjective from stir (v.). Related: Stirringly.


stirrup (n.)

Old English stigrap a support for the foot of a person mounted on a horse, literally climbing rope,
from stige a climbing, ascent (from Proto-Germanic *stigaz climbing; see stair) + rap (see rope
(n.)). Originally a looped rope as a help for mounting. Germanic cognates include Old Norse
stigreip, Middle Dutch stegerep, Old High German stegareif, German stegreif. Surgical device used in
childbirth, etc., so called from 1884. Stirrup-cup (1680s) was a cup of wine or other drink handed
to a rider already on horseback and setting out on a journey, hence a parting glass (compare French
le vin de l'etrier).


stitch (n.)

Old English stice a prick, puncture, sting, stab, from Proto-Germanic *stikiz (cognates: Old Frisian
steke, Old High German stih, German Stich a pricking, prick, sting, stab), from PIE *stig-i-, from
root *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick (v.)). The sense of sudden, stabbing pain in the side was
in late Old English.    Senses in sewing and shoemaking first recorded late 13c.; meaning bit of
clothing one is (or isn't) wearing is from c.1500. Meaning a stroke of work (of any kind) is
attested from 1580s. Surgical sense first recorded 1520s. Sense of amusing person or thing is 1968,
from notion of laughing so much one gets stitches of pain (cognates: verbal expression to have
(someone) in stitches, 1935).


stitch (v.)

c.1200, to stab, pierce, also to fasten or adorn with stitches; see stitch (n.). Surgical sense is
from 1570s. Related: Stitched; stitcher; stitching.


stitchery (n.)

c.1600, from stitch (v.) + -ery.


stitching (n.)

1520s, verbal noun from stitch (v.).


stoa (n.)

portico, c.1600, from Greek stoa colonnade, corridor, from PIE *sta- to stand (see stet). A name
given in Athens to several public buildings. The ancient stoa was usually a detached portico, often
of considerable extent, generally near a public place to afford opportunity for walking or
conversation under shelter [Century Dictionary].


stoat (n.)

mid-15c., stote, the ermine, especially in its brown summer coat, of uncertain origin. The word
bears resemblance to Old Norse stutr bull, Swedish stut bull, Danish stud ox, but the sense is
difficult unless a common notion is male animal.


stochastic (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to conjecture, from Greek stokhastikos able to guess, conjecturing, from
stokhazesthai to guess, aim at, conjecture, from stokhos a guess, aim, target, mark, literally
pointed stick set up for archers to shoot at, from PIE *stogh-, variant of root *stegh- to stick,
prick; pointed (see sting (v.)). The sense of randomly determined is from 1934, from German
stochastik (1917).


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


stock (n.2)

supply for future use (early 15c.), sum of money (mid-15c.), Middle English developments of stock
(n.1), but the ultimate sense connection is uncertain. Perhaps the notion is of the trunk from which
gains are an outgrowth, or from stock (n.1) in obsolete sense of money-box (c.1400). Meaning
subscribed capital of a corporation is from 1610s.   In stock in the possession of a trader is from
1610s. Meaning broth made by boiling meat or vegetables is from 1764. Theatrical use, in reference
to a company regularly acting together at a given theater, is attested from 1761. Figurative phrase
take stock in regard as important is from 1870. As the collective term for the movable property of a
farm, it is recorded from 1510s; hence livestock.


stock (v.)

to supply (a store) with stock, 1620s, from stock (n.2). Meaning to lay up in store is from c.1700.
Earliest sense is to imprison in stocks (early 14c.). Related: Stocked; stocking.


stock (adj.)

in reference to conversation, literature, recurring, commonplace (as in stock phrase), 1738,
figurative use from sense kept in store for constant use (1620s), from stock (n.2).


stock market (n.)

place where securities are bought and sold, 1809, from stock (n.2) + market. The original Stock
Market (mid-14c.) was a fish and meat market in the City of London on or near the later site of
Mansion House, so called perhaps because it occupied the site of a former stocks. Stock exchange is
attested from 1773.


stock-broker (n.)

1706, from stock (n.2) + broker.


stock-car (n.)

racing car with a basic chassis of an ordinary commercially produced vehicle, 1914, American
English, from stock (n.2) + car. Earlier a railroad car used to transport livestock (1858).


stock-holder (n.)

1753, from stock (n.2) + agent noun from hold (v.).


stockade (n.)

1610s, a barrier of stakes, a nativization of Spanish estacada, from estaca stake, from a Germanic
source cognate with Old English staca, see stake (n.1)). Meaning military prison first recorded
1865. As a verb from 1755.


Stockholm

capital city of Sweden; it arose mid-13c. from a fishing village; the second element in the name is
holm island (see holm); the first is either st&auml;k bay or stock stake, pole. Related:
Stockholmer.   Stockholm Syndrome is from 1978, a psychologists' term; the name derives from the
Aug. 23, 1973, violent armed robbery of Sveriges Kreditbank in Stockholm, after which four bank
employees were held hostage in a vault for more than five days. The hostages developed a dramatic
attachment to their abuser, and a fear of would-be rescuers, that they could not explain.


stockinet (n.)

elastic, machine-made fabric used for undergarments, 1824, from stocking + diminutive ending.


stocking (n.)

close-fitting garment covering the foot and lower leg, 1580s, from stock leg covering, stocking
(late 15c.), from Old English stocu sleeve, related to Old English stocc trunk, log (see stock
(n.1)). Probably so called because of a fancied resemblance of legs to tree trunks, or a reference
to the punishing stocks. Cognates include Old Norse stuka, Old High German stuhha, from the same
Proto-Germanic source. Restriction to women's hose is 20c. As a receptacle for Christmas presents,
attested from 1853; hence stocking stuffer first recorded 1945. Stocking-feet without shoes is from
1802.


stockpile (n.)

1872, originally a term in mining, from stock (n.2) + pile (n.). Extended to general use during
World War II. The verb is attested from 1921. Related: Stockpiled; stockpiling.


stocks (n.)

instrument of punishment and confinement formerly widely used in Europe and America (usually for
vagrants and petty offenders), early 14c., from stock (n.1), because they consisted of large wooden
blocks.


stocky (adj.)

c.1400, made of wood, from stock (n.1). Of plants, of stout and sturdy growth (not weedy) it is
recorded from 1620s. Of persons, thick-set, 1670s, suggestive of tree trunks, but compare also stock
in sense of trunk of the human body (late 14c.).


stockyard (n.)

also stock-yard, enclosure for sorting and keeping cattle, swine, sheep, etc., typically connected
with a railroad or slaughter-house, 1802, from stock (n.1) + yard (n.1).


stodgy (adj.)

1823, thick, semi-solid, from stodge to stuff, satiate (1670s), of unknown origin, perhaps somehow
imitative. Meaning dull, heavy developed by 1874 from use in reference to food (1841).


stogie (n.)

also stogy, 1847 as an adjective, rough, heavy, coarse (of work shoes, etc.); as a noun, long, cheap
cigar (1873), both shortened from Conestoga, rural region near Lancaster, Pennsylvania; both items
so-called because favored by drivers of the Conestoga style of covered wagons first made there.


stoic (n.)

late 14c., philosopher of the school founded by Zeno, from Latin stoicus, from Greek stoikos
pertaining to a member of or the teachings of the school founded by Zeno (c.334-c.262 B.C.E.),
characterized by austere ethical doctrines, literally pertaining to a portico, from stoa porch,
specifically Stoa Poikile the Painted Porch, the great hall in Athens (decorated with frescoes
depicting the Battle of Marathon) where Zeno taught (see stoa). Meaning person who represses
feelings or endures patiently first recorded 1570s. The adjective is recorded from 1590s in the
repressing feelings sense, c.1600 in the philosophical sense. Compare stoical.


stoical (adj.)

early 15c. in reference to philosophers, from stoic + -al (2). Related: Stoically. From 1570s as
indifferent to pleasure or pain.


stoichiometry (n.)

science of calculating the quantities of chemical elements involved in chemical reactions, 1807,
from German St&#246;chiometrie (1792), coined by German chemist Jeremias Benjamin Richter
(1762-1807) from Greek stoikheion one of a row; shadow-line of a sundial, in plural the elements
(from PIE *steigh- to stride, step, rise) + -metry. Related: Stoichiometric.


stoicism

1620s, from Modern Latin stoicismus, from Latin stoicus (see stoic).


stoke (v.)

1680s, to feed and stir up a fire in a fireplace or furnace, back-formation from stoker (1650s);
ultimately from Dutch stoken to stoke, from Middle Dutch stoken to poke, thrust, related to stoc
stick, stump, from Proto-Germanic *stok- pierce, prick, from PIE *steug-, extended form of root
*(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see stick (v.)).    Meaning to stir up, rouse (feelings,
etc.) is from 1837. Stoked enthusiastic recorded in surfer slang by 1963, but the extension of the
word to persons is older, originally to eat, to feed oneself up (1882).    Having stoked up, as the
men called it, the brigades paraded at 10.30 a.m., ready for the next stage of the march. [Cassell's
History of the Boer War, 1901]


stoker (n.)

1650s, one who maintains the fire in a furnace, agent noun from Dutch stoken to stoke (see stoke
(v.)).


stola (n.)

Latin, from Greek stole (see stole). Plural stolae.


stole (n.)

Old English stole long robe, scarf-like garment worn by clergymen, from Latin stola robe, vestment
(also source of Old French estole, Modern French &#233;tole, Spanish estola, Italian stola), from
Greek stole a long robe; originally garment, equipment, from root of stellein to place, array, with
a secondary sense of to put on robes, etc., from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)).
Meaning women's long garment of fur or feathers is attested from 1889.


stoled (adj.)

wearing a stole, 1540s; see stole.


stolen (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from steal (v.).    Stolen waters are sweet; and bread eaten in
secret is pleasant. [Prov. ix:17, KJV]


stolid (adj.)

c.1600, back-formation from stolidity, or else from Middle French stolide (16c.), from Latin
stolidus insensible, dull, slow, brutish, rude, stupid, properly unmovable, related to stultus
foolish, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)).


stolidity (n.)

1560s, from Middle French stolidite and directly from Late Latin stoliditatem (nominative
stoliditas) dullness, obtuseness, stupidity, from Latin stolidus (see stolid).


stolon (n.)

a shoot, sucker, c.1600, from Latin stolonem (nominative stolo) a shoot, branch, sucker, cognate
with Greek stele standing block, stelekhos trunk, stem, log; from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see
stall (n.1)).


stoma (n.)

orifice, small opening in an animal body, 1680s, Modern Latin, from Greek stoma (genitive stomatos)
mouth; mouthpiece; talk, voice; mouth of a river; any outlet or inlet, from PIE root *stom-en-,
denoting various body parts and orifices (cognates: Avestan staman- mouth (of a dog), Hittite
shtamar mouth, Middle Breton staffn mouth, jawbone, Cornish stefenic palate). Surgical sense is
attested from 1937.


stomach (n.)

late 14c., earlier stomak (early 14c.), internal pouch into which food is digested, from Old French
stomaque, estomac stomach, from Latin stomachus throat, gullet; stomach, also taste, inclination,
liking; distaste, dislike; also pride, indignation, which were thought to have their origin in that
organ (source also of Spanish est&#243;mago, Italian stomaco), from Greek stomachos throat, gullet,
esophagus, literally mouth, opening, from stoma mouth (see stoma).    Applied anciently to the
openings of various internal organs, especially that of the stomach, then by the later Greek
physicians to the stomach itself. The native word is maw. Some 16c. anatomists tried to correct the
sense back to esophagus and introduce ventricle for what we call the stomach. Meaning belly,
midriff, part of the body that contains the stomach is from late 14c.    The spelling of the ending
of the word was conformed to Latin, but the pronunciation remains as in Middle English. Related:
stomachial (1580s); stomachical (c.1600); stomachic (1650s). Pugilistic stomacher punch in the
stomach is from 1814; from mid-15c. as vest or other garment which covers the belly. The Latin
figurative senses also were in Middle English (such as relish, inclination, desire, mid-15c.) or
early Modern English. Also sometimes regarded in Middle Ages as the seat of sexual desire.


stomach (v.)

tolerate, put up with, 1570s, from stomach (n.), probably in reference to digestion; earlier sense
was opposite: to be offended at, resent (1520s), echoing Latin stomachari to be resentful, be
irritated, be angry, from stomachus (n.) in its secondary sense of pride, indignation. Related:
Stomached; stomaching.


stomach-ache (n.)

1763, from stomach (n.) + ache (v.).


stomatitis (n.)

inflammation of the interior of the mouth, 1859, from Greek stomato- (befdore vowels stomat-), comb.
form from stem of stoma mouth (see stoma) + -itis.


stomp (v.)

1803, variant of stamp. Related: Stomped; stomping. Noun meaning lively social dance is recorded
from 1912 in jazz slang.


stone (n.)

Old English stan, used of common rocks, precious gems, concretions in the body, memorial stones,
from Proto-Germanic *stainaz (cognates: Old Norse steinn, Danish steen, Old Saxon sten, Old Frisian
sten, Dutch steen, Old High German stein, German Stein, Gothic stains), from PIE *stoi-no-, suffixed
form of root *stai- stone, also to thicken, stiffen (cognates: Sanskrit styayate curdles, becomes
hard; Avestan stay- heap; Greek stear fat, tallow, stia, stion pebble; Old Church Slavonic stena,
Russian stiena wall).    Sense of testicle is from late Old English. The British measure of weight
(usually equal to 14 pounds) is from late 14c., originally a specific stone. Stone-fruit, one with a
pit, is from 1520s. Stone's throw for a short distance is attested from 1580s. Stone Age is from
1864. To kill two birds with one stone is first attested 1650s. To leave no stone unturned is from
1540s.


stone (adj.)

made of stone, Old English (which also had st&#230;nan stonen); see stone (n.). As an intensifying
adjective recorded from 1935, first recorded in black slang, probably from earlier use in phrases
like stone blind (late 14c., literally blind as a stone), stone deaf, stone-cold (1590s), etc. Stone
cold sober dates from 1937.


stone (v.)

c.1200, to pelt with stones, from stone (n.). From c.1600 as to fit with stones; 1630s as to free
from stones (of fruit, etc.). Related: Stoned; stoning.


stoned (adj.)

1510s, having or containing stones, past participle adjective from stone (v.). From 1728 as deprived
of stones. Slang meaning drunk; intoxicated with narcotics is from 1930s. Stoner is from mid-14c. as
one who stones; mid-1960s as stuporous person.


stonefly (n.)

mid-15c., from stone (n.) + fly (n.). So called because the larval forms abound under stones of
steams.


Stonehenge (n.)

early 12c., Stanenges, literally stone gallows, perhaps so called from fancied resemblance to old-
style gallows with two posts, with the second element related to the verb hang. Some antiquarians
suggest the notion may be of supported in the air, that which hangs in the air (compare henge-clif
for Latin pr&aelig;ruptum), in reference to the lintel stones, but the order of the elements and the
inflection is against this. An ancient name for it was the Giant's Dance.


stonemason (n.)

1733, from stone (n.) + mason. Another name for the profession was hard-hewer (15c.). Stone-cutter
is from 1530s; Old English had stanwyrhta stone-wright.


stonewall (n.)

also stone wall, Old English stanwalle; see stone (n.) + wall (n.). As nickname of Confederate
General Thomas J. Jackson (1824-1863), bestowed 1861 on the occasion of the First Battle of Bull
Run, supposedly by Gen. Bernard Bee, urging his brigade to rally around Jackson, who was standing
like a stone wall. Bee was killed in the battle; the account of the nickname appeared in Southern
newspapers within four days of the battle.    On the face of it this account has no character of
authenticity, and the words ascribed to Bee smack less of the battlefield than of the editorial
sanctum. ... It seems inherently probable that something was said by somebody, during or immediately
after the battle, that likened Jackson or his men or both to a stone wall. [R.M. Johnston, Bull Run:
Its Strategy and Tactics, Boston, 1913]


stonewall (v.)

to obstruct, 1889 in sports; 1914 in politics, from metaphoric use of stone wall (n.) for act of
obstruction (1876). Related: Stonewalled; stonewalling (defined in Century Dictionary as
parliamentary obstruction by talking against time, raising technical objections, etc., and
identified as originally Australian).


stoneware (n.)

1680s, from stone (n.) + ware (n.).


stonework (n.)

Old English stanweorc; see stone (n.) + work (n.).


stony (adj.)

also stoney, Old English st&#230;nig; see stone (n.) + -y (2). Similar formation in Old High German
steinag, German Steinig, Swedish stenig. Related: Stonily; stoniness.


stood

past tense and past participle of stand (v.).


stooge (n.)

1913, stage assistant, actor who assists a comedian, of uncertain origin, perhaps an alteration of
student (with the mispronunciation STOO-jent), in sense of apprentice. Meaning lackey, person used
for another's purpose first recorded 1937. The Three Stooges film slapstick act debuted in movies
1930, originally as Ted Healy and His Stooges.


stool (n.)

Old English stol seat for one person, from Proto-Germanic *stolaz (cognates: Old Frisian stol, Old
Norse stoll, Old High German stuol, German Stuhl seat, Gothic stols high seat, throne), from PIE
*sta-lo-, locative of root *sta- to stand (cognates: Lithuanian pa-stolas stand, Old Church Slavonic
stolu stool; see stet).    Originally used of thrones (as in cynestol royal seat, throne); decline
in sense began with adoption of chair (n.) from French, which relegated stool to small seats without
arms or backs, then to privy (early 15c.) and thence to bowel movement (1530s).


stool pigeon (n.)

police informer, 1859, American English; earlier one who betrays the unwary (or is used to betray
them), 1821, originally a decoy bird (1812); said to be from decoys being fastened to stools to lure
other pigeons. But perhaps related to stall decoy bird (c.1500), especially a pigeon used to entice
a hawk into the net (see stall (n.2)). Also see pigeon.


stool-ball (n.)

outdoor game similar to cricket, in 16c. and 17c. generally played by women alone, late 15c., from
stool (n.) + ball (n.1). The 'stool' was the wicket ... perhaps it was originally an ordinary stool
[OED].


stoop (v.)

bend forward, Old English stupian to bow, bend, from Proto-Germanic *stup- (cognates: Middle Dutch
stupen to bow, bend, Norwegian stupa fall, drop), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat
(see steep (adj.)). Figurative sense of condescend, especially expressing a lowering of the moral
self, is from 1570s. Sense of swoop is first recorded 1570s in falconry. Related: Stooped; stooping.
The noun meaning an act of stooping is from c.1300. Stoop-shouldered attested from 1773.


stoop (n.)

raised open platform at the entrance of a house, 1755, American and Canadian, from Dutch stoep
flight of steps, doorstep, threshold, from Middle Dutch, from Proto-Germanic *stap- step (see step
(v.)).    This, unlike most of the words received [in American English] from the Dutch, has
extended, in consequence of the uniform style of building that prevails throughout the country,
beyond the bounds of New York State, as far as the backwoods of Canada. [Bartlett]     Also in South
African English as stoep.


stop (v.)

Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian to stop up, stifle), a general West Germanic word, cognate
with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low German stoppen, Old High German stopfon,
German stopfen to plug, stop up, Old Low Frankish (be)stuppon to stop (the ears).    These words are
said by many sources to be a Germanic borrowing of Vulgar Latin *stuppare to stop or stuff with tow
or oakum (source of Italian stoppare, French &eacute;touper to stop with tow), from Latin stuppa
coarse part of flax, tow. In support of this theory, it is said that plugs made of tow were used
from ancient times in Rhine valley. Century Dictionary says this suits phonetically, but is on
grounds of meaning somewhat doubtful. Barnhart, for one, proposes the whole Germanic group might be
native, from a base *stoppon.     Sense of bring or come to a halt, discontinue (mid-15c.) is from
notion of preventing a flow by blocking a hole, and the word's development in this sense is unique
to English, though it since has been widely adopted in other languages; perhaps influenced by Latin
stupere be stunned, be stupefied. Intransitive meaning check oneself is from 1680s. Meaning make a
halt or stay, tarry is from 1711. Stop-light is from 1922; stop-sign is from 1918. Stop-motion is
from 1851, originally of looms. Related: Stopped; stopping.


stop (n.)

late 14c., a plug; mid-15c., a cessation, from stop (v.). Of mechanisms of musical instruments from
c.1500, especially of organs, where opening them makes it produce more sound, hence figurative
phrase pull out the stops (1909). From 1660s in phonetics, 1831 in photography. Meaning a stopping
place is from 1889. To put a stop to some activity is from 1670s (earlier give a stop to, 1580s).


stop-and-go (adj.)

1926, originally a reference to traffic signals; see stop (v.), go (v.). Stop-go in same sense is
from 1918.


stop-over (n.)

also stopover, 1881, from the verbal phrase, from stop (v.) + over (adv.).


stope (n.)

1747, a mining word, from Low German stope a step, apparently cognate with step (n.). As a verb from
1778, remove the contents of a vein, literally to cut in stopes. Related: Stoped; stoping.


stopgap (n.)

also stop-gap, 1680s, from stop (v.) + gap (n.). Also as an adjective from 1680s.


stoppable (adj.)

1934, probably a back-formation from unstoppable.


stoppage (n.)

mid-15c., deduction from payment, from stop (v.) + -age. From late 15c. as impediment, hindrance,
obstruction; 1650s as act of stopping.


stopper (n.)

late 15c., one who obstructs, agent noun from stop (v.). From 1590s as something that obstructs;
specific sense glass plug for a bottle neck is from 1660s. As a verb from 1670s. Related: Stoppered.


stopwatch (n.)

also stop-watch, 1737, from stop (v.) + watch (n.).


storage (n.)

1610s, space for storing, from store (v.) + -age. Storage unit as a household piece attested from
1951.


store (v.)

mid-13c., to supply or stock, from Old French estorer erect, construct, build; restore, repair;
furnish, equip, provision, from Latin instaurare restore, renew, repair, make, in Medieval Latin
also to provide, store, from in- in + -staurare, from PIE *stau-ro-, suffixed extended form of root
*sta- to stand (see stet, and compare restore). The meaning to keep in store for future use (1550s)
probably is a back-formation from store (n.). Related: Stored; storing.


store (n.)

c.1300, supplies or provisions for a household, camp, etc., from store (v.) or else from Old French
estore provisions; a fleet, navy, army, from estorer or from Medieval Latin staurum, instaurum
store. General sense of sufficient supply is attested from late 15c. The meaning place where goods
are kept for sale is first recorded 1721 in American English (British English prefers shop (n.)),
from the sense place where supplies and provisions are kept (1660s).    The word store is of larger
signification than the word shop. It not only comprehends all that is embraced in the word shop,
when that word is used to designate a place in which goods or merchandise are sold, but more, a
place of deposit, a store house. In common parlance the two words have a distinct meaning. We speak
of shops as places in which mechanics pursue their trades, as a carpenter's shop a blacksmith's shop
a shoemaker's shop. While, if we refer to a place where oods and merchandise are bought and sold,
whether by wholesale or retail, we speak of it as a store. [C.J. Brickell, opinion in Sparrenberger
v. The State of Alabama, December term, 1875]   Stores articles and equipment for an army is from
1630s. In store laid up for future use (also of events, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Store-
bought is attested from 1912, American English; earlier store-boughten (1872).


store-room (n.)

1746, from store + room (n.).


storefront (n.)

1853, from store (n.) + front (n.). As an adjective from 1919.


storehouse (n.)

mid-14c., from store (n.) + house (n.). Figurative use from 1570s.


storekeeper (n.)

1610s, from store (n.) + keeper.


storied (adj.1)

late 15c., ornamented with scenes from history (of books, walls, etc.), from past participle of verb
form of story (n.1). Meaning celebrated in history or legend is from 1725.


storied (adj.2)

having stories or floors of a certain type or number, 1620s, from story (n.2).


stork (n.)

Old English storc stork, from Proto-Germanic *sturkaz (cognates: Old Norse storkr, Swedish and
Danish stork, Middle Dutch storc, Old High German storah, German Storch stork), from PIE *ster-
stiff (cognates: Old English stear stiff, strong; see stark). Perhaps so called with reference to
the bird's stiff or rigid posture. But some connect the word to Greek torgos vulture.    Old Church
Slavonic struku, Russian sterkhu, Lithuanian starkus, Hungarian eszterag, Albanian sterkjok stork
are said to be Germanic loan-words. The children's fable that babies are brought by storks (told by
adults who aren't ready to go into the details) is in English by 1854, from German and Dutch nursery
stories, no doubt from the notion that storks nesting on one's roof meant good luck, often in the
form of family happiness.


storm (n.)

Old English storm violent disturbance of the atmosphere, tempest; onrush, attack, tumult;
disturbance, from Proto-Germanic *sturmaz storm (cognates: Old Norse stormr, Old Saxon, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch, Dutch storm, Old High German sturm, German Sturm), from PIE *stur-mo-, from
root *(s)twer- (1) to turn, whirl. Old French estour onset, tumult, Italian stormo a fight are
Germanic loan-words. Figurative (non-meteorological) sense was in late Old English.   Storm-wind is
from 1798. Storm-door first recorded 1872; storm-water is from 1847; storm-window is attested from
1824. Storm surge attested from 1872. Adverbial phrase _______ up a storm is from 1946.


storm (v.)

of the wind, to rage, be violent, c.1400, considered to be from storm (n.). Old English had styrman,
cognate with Dutch stormen, Old High German sturman, German st&#252;rmen, Danish storme, Military
sense attack (a place) by scaling walls and forcing gates (1640s) first attested in writings of
Oliver Cromwell. Related: Stormed; storming. Italian stormire make a noise is from Germanic.


storm-trooper (n.)

member of the Nazi Sturmabteilung, 1933, from storm (v.) + trooper (also see Sturmabteilung). Storm-
troops (1917) translates German sturmtruppen, introduced by the German military in World War I.


stormy (adj.)

early 14c., from late Old English storemig (12c.), from storm (n.) + -y (2). Figurative use by mid-
14c. Related: Storminess.


story (n.1)

connected account or narration of some happening, c.1200, originally narrative of important events
or celebrated persons of the past, from Old French estorie, estoire story, chronicle, history, from
Late Latin storia, shortened from Latin historia history, account, tale, story (see history).
Meaning recital of true events first recorded late 14c.; sense of narrative of fictitious events
meant to entertain is from c.1500. Not differentiated from history till 1500s. As a euphemism for a
lie it dates from 1690s. Meaning newspaper article is from 1892. Story-line first attested 1941.
That's another story that requires different treatment is attested from 1818. Story of my life sad
truth first recorded 1938, from typical title of an autobiography.


story (n.2)

floor of a building, c.1400, from Anglo-Latin historia floor of a building (c.1200), also picture,
from Latin historia (see history). Perhaps so called because the front of buildings in the Middle
Ages often were decorated with rows of painted windows [Barnhart].


story-board (n.)

also storyboard, 1941, from story (n.1) + board (n.1).


story-book (n.)

1711, from story (n.1) + book (n.). As an adjective from 1844.


story-telling (n.)

also storytelling, 1709, from story (n.1) + present participle of tell (v.). Related: Story-teller
(1709).


stound (n.)

time, moment (archaic), from Old English stund point of time, time, hour, cognate with Old Saxon
stonda, Old Frisian stunde, Dutch stondi, German Stunde hour.


stoup (n.)

late 14c., jug, especially one made of leather, also a measure for liquid, from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse staup cup, from Proto-Germanic *staupo- (cognates: Middle Low German stop,
Middle Dutch stoop a cup, vessel, Dutch stoop, Old High German stouf, German Stauf, Old English
steap).


stour (n.)

c.1300, tumult, armed conflict, struggle with adversity or pain, from Anglo-French estur, Old French
estour a tumult, conflict, assault, shock, battle, from Proto-Germanic *sturmoz storm (cognates: Old
High German sturm storm; battle; see storm (n.)). Became obsolete, revived by Spenser and his
followers in various senses; also surviving as a Scottish and Northern English word meaning a
(driving) storm or uproar, commotion. Italian stormo also is from Germanic.


stout (adj.)

c.1300, proud, valiant, strong, from Old French estout brave, fierce, proud, earlier estolt strong,
from a Germanic source from West Germanic *stult- proud, stately, strutting (cognates: Middle Low
German stolt stately, proud, German stolz proud, haughty, arrogant, stately), from PIE root *stel-
to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Meaning strong in body, powerfully built is attested from late
14c., but has been displaced by the (often euphemistic) meaning thick-bodied, fat and large, bulky
in figure, which is first recorded 1804. Original sense preserved in figurative phrase stout-hearted
(1550s). Related: Stoutly; stoutness.


stout (n.)

1670s, strong beer or ale, from stout (adj.). Later especially, and now usually, porter of extra
strength (by 1762).


stove (n.)

mid-15c., heated room, bath-room, from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch stove, both meaning heated
room, which was the original sense in English; a general West Germanic word (Old English stofa bath-
room, Old High German stuba, German Stube sitting room).    Of uncertain relationship to similar
words in Romance languages (Italian stufa, French &eacute;tuve sweating-room; see stew (v.)). One
theory traces them all to Vulgar Latin *extufare take a steam bath. The meaning device for heating
or cooking is first recorded 1610s.


stove-pipe (n.)

1690s, from stove (n.) + pipe (n.). As a type of hat for men, from 1851, so called for being tall
and cylindrical like a stove-pipe.


stow (v.)

c.1300, to put, place (somewhere), verbal use of Old English noun stow a place, spot, site, locality
(common in place names), from Proto-Germanic *stowo- (cognates: Old Frisian sto place, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch stouwen, Dutch stuwen to stow, Old High German stouwen to stop, check, German
stauen to stow, pack; bring to a halt, hem in), from PIE *stau- stout, standing, strong, extended
form of root *sta- to stand (cognates: Old Church Slavonic stavljo to place, Lithuanian stoviu to
stand; see stet). The nautical sense of put away to be stored, pack (1550s) was enforced by Dutch
stouwen to cram, pack up close. Related: Stowed; stowing.


stowaway (n.)

1848, from verbal phrase stow away conceal, in use by 1795; see stow + away.


STP (n.)

commercial motor oil additive, probably an initialism (acronym) of scientifically treated petroleum.
As the street name of a type of psychedelic drug, attested from 1967.


strabismus (n.)

a squinting, 1680s, medical Latin, from Greek strabismos, from strabizein to squint, from strabos
squinting, squint-eyed, related to strobos a whirling round, from PIE *streb(h)- to wind, turn (see
strophe). Earlier in anglicized form strabism (1650s). Related: Strabismal; strabismic;
strabismical.


straddle (v.)

1560s, spread the legs wide, probably an alteration of striddle (mid-15c.), frequentative of striden
(see stride (v.)). Transitive sense place one leg on one side of and the other on the other side of
is from 1670s. U.S. colloquial figurative sense of take up an equivocal position, appear to favor
both sides is attested from 1838. Related: Straddled; straddling. The noun is first recorded 1610s.


Stradivarius (n.)

valued type of violin, 1818, from Latinized form of name of Antonio Stradivari (1644-1737), violin-
maker of Cremona, or his sons or pupils. Short form Strad is attested from 1884.


strafe (v.)

1915, punish, attack, bomb heavily, picked up by British soldiers from German strafen to punish
(from Proto-Germanic *str&aelig;f-), in slogan Gott strafe England May God punish England, current
in Germany c.1914-16 at the start of World War I. The word used for many kinds of attack at first;
meaning shoot up ground positions from low-flying aircraft emerged as the main sense 1942. Related:
Strafed; strafing.


straggle (v.)

early 15c., to wander from the proper path, stray, to rove from one's companions, perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Norwegian stragla to walk laboriously), or a frequentative of
Middle English straken to move, go. Specifically of soldiers, be dispersed, be apart from the main
body, from 1520s. Related: Straggled; straggling.


straggler (n.)

1520s, agent noun from straggle (v.).


straight (adj.1)

late 14c., direct, undeviating; not crooked, not bent or curved, of a person, direct, honest;
properly stretched, adjectival use of Old English streht (earlier streaht), past participle of
streccan to stretch (see stretch (v.)). Related: Straightly; straightness.    Meaning true, direct,
honest is from 1520s. Of communication, clear, unambiguous, from 1862. Sense of undiluted,
uncompromising (as in straight whiskey, 1874) is American English, first recorded 1856. As an adverb
from c.1300, in a straight line, without swerving or deviating. Theatrical sense of serious (as
opposed to popular or comic) is attested from 1895; vaudeville slang straight man first attested
1923.   Go straight in the underworld slang sense is from 1919; straighten up become respectable is
from 1907. To play it straight is from 1906 in theater, 1907 in sports (play fair), with figurative
extension; later perhaps also from jazz. Straight arrow decent, conventional person is 1969, from
archetypal Native American brave name. Straight shooter is from 1928. Straight As top grades is from
1920.


straight (adj.2)

conventional, especially heterosexual, 1941, a secondary sense evolved from straight (adj.1),
probably suggested by straight and narrow path course of conventional morality and law-abiding
behavior, which is based on a misreading of Matt. vii:14 (where the gate is actually strait), and
the other influence seems to be from strait-laced.


straight (n.)

1640s, a level position, from straight (adj.1). From 1864 as straight part of a race track. Poker
sense attested from 1841. Meaning conventional person is first recorded 1967, from straight (adj.2).


straight-edge (n.)

1812, bar for drawing or measuring straight lines, from straight (adj.1) + edge (n.). As the name of
a punk subculture, attested by 1987, probably suggested by straight (adj.2).


straight-faced (adj.)

1938, of persons, with visage showing no emotion or reaction, from expression keep a straight face
(1897), from straight (adj.).


straighten (v.)

1540s (transitive), from straight (adj.1) + -en (1). Intransitive sense from 1891. Related:
Straightened; straightening; straightener. The Middle English verb was simply straight (late 14c.).


straightforward (adj.)

1550s, directly forward, right ahead, from straight (adj.1) + forward (adv.). In reference to
language, from 1806. Related: Straightforwardly; straightforwardness.


strain (v.)

c.1300, tie, bind, fasten, gird, from present participle stem of Old French estreindre bind tightly,
clasp, squeeze, from Latin stringere (2) draw tight, bind tight, compress, press together, from PIE
root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Lithuanian stregti congeal, freeze, become stiff;
Greek strangein twist; Old High German strician mends nets; Old English streccian to stretch; German
stramm, Dutch stram stiff).    From late 14c. as tighten; make taut, also exert oneself; overexert
(a body part), Sense of press through a filter, put (a liquid) through a strainer is from early 14c.
(implied in strainer); that of to stress beyond measure, carry too far, make a forced interpretation
of is from mid-15c. Related: Strained; straining.


strain (n.2)

line of descent, lineage, breed, ancestry, c.1200, from Old English strion, streon a gain,
acquisition, treasure; a begetting, procreation, from Proto-Germanic *streu-nam- to pile up, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Hence race, stock, line (early
14c.). Applied to animal species from c.1600; usually involving fairly minor variations, but not
distinct from breed (n.). Normal sound development would have yielded *streen, but the word was
altered in late Middle English, apparently by influence of strain (n.1).


strain (n.1)

injury caused by straining, c.1400, from strain (v.). The meaning passage of music (1570s) probably
developed from a verbal sense of to tighten the voice, which originally was used in reference to the
strings of a musical instrument (late 14c.).


strainer (n.)

utensil which strains, early 14c., agent noun from strain (v.).


strait (n.)

mid-14c., narrow, confined space or place, specifically of bodies of water from late 14c., from Old
French estreit, estrait narrow part, pass, defile, narrow passage of water, noun use of adjective
(see strait (adj.)). Sense of difficulty, plight (usually straits) first recorded 1540s. Strait and
narrow conventional or wisely limited way of life is recorded from mid-14c. (compare straight
(adj.2)).


strait (adj.)

narrow, strict (late 13c.), from Old French estreit, estrait tight, close-fitting, constricted,
narrow (Modern French &eacute;troit), from Latin strictus, past participle of stringere (2) bind or
draw tight (see strain (v.)). More or less confused with unrelated straight (adj.). Related:
Straightly.


strait-jacket (n.)

also straitjacket, 1795 as a type of restraint for lunatics, from strait (adj.) + jacket (n.);
earlier in same sense was strait-waistcoat (1753). As a verb from 1863. Related: Strait-jacketed.


strait-laced (adj.)

early 15c., of stays or bodices, made close and tight; see strait (adj.) + lace (v.). Figurative
sense of over-precise, prudish, strict in manners or morals is from 1550s.


straiten (v.)

1520s (transitive) to restrict, make narrow, from strait (adj.) + -en (1). Related: straitened;
straitening. Earlier verb was simply strait to make narrow (early 15c.).


straitened (adj.)

c.1600, too narrow; 1716, reduced to hardship; past participle adjective from strait (v.). Phrase
straitened circumstances recorded from 1766.


strand (n.1)

shore, Old English strand strand, sea-shore, from Proto-Germanic *strandas (cognates: Danish and
Swedish strand beach, shore, strand, Old Norse str&ouml;nd border, edge, shore, Old Frisian strond,
Middle Dutch strant, Dutch strand, Middle Low German strant, German Strand beach), of uncertain
origin. Perhaps from PIE root *ster- to stretch out. Strictly, the part of a shore that lies between
the tide-marks. Formerly also used of river banks, hence the London street name (1246).


strand (v.)

1620s, to drive aground on a shore, from strand (n.1); figurative sense of leave helpless, as of a
ship left aground by the tide, is first recorded 1837. Related: Stranded; stranding.


strand (n.2)

individual fiber of a rope, string, etc., late 15c., probably from a continental Germanic source
akin to Old High German streno lock, tress, strand of hair, Middle Dutch strene a skein, hank of
thread, German Str&auml;hne a skein, strand, of unknown connection. Perhaps to English via an Old
French form.


strange (adj.)

late 13c., from elsewhere, foreign, unknown, unfamiliar, from Old French estrange foreign, alien,
unusual, unfamiliar, curious; distant; inhospitable; estranged, separated (Modern French
&eacute;trange), from Latin extraneus foreign, external, from without (source also of Italian strano
strange, foreign, Spanish estra&#241;o), from extra outside of (see extra). In early use also
strounge, straunge. Sense of queer, surprising is attested from late 14c. In nuclear physics, from
1956.


stranger (n.)

late 14c., unknown person, foreigner, from strange + -er (1) or else from Old French estrangier
foreigner (Modern French &#233;tranger), from estrange. Latin used the adjective extraneus as a noun
to mean stranger. The English noun never picked up the secondary sense of the adjective. As a form
of address to an unknown person, it is recorded from 1817, American English rural colloquial.
Meaning one who has stopped visiting is recorded from 1520s.


strangle (v.)

late 13c., from Old French estrangler choke, suffocate, throttle (Modern French &#233;trangler),
from Latin strangulare to choke, stifle, check, constrain, from Greek strangalan to choke, twist,
from strangale a halter, cord, lace, related to strangos twisted, from PIE root *strenk- tight,
narrow; pull tight, twist (see string (n.)). Related: Strangled; strangling.


strangle-hold (n.)

also stranglehold, 1893, in wrestling, from strangle (v.) + hold (n.). Figurative use by 1901.


strangler (n.)

1550s, agent noun from strangle (v.).


strangulation (n.)

1540s, from Latin strangulationem (nominative strangulatio) a choking, a suffocating, noun of action
from past participle stem of strangulare (see strangle). The verb strangulate (1660s) probably is a
back-formation from this. Related: Strangulated.


strap (n.)

1610s, band of leather, from Scottish and/or nautical variant of strope loop or strap on a harness
(mid-14c.), probably from Old French estrop strap, from Latin stroppus strap, band, perhaps via
Etruscan, ultimately from Greek strophos twisted band; a cord, rope, from strephein to turn (see
strophe). Old English stropp, Dutch strop halter also are borrowed from Latin, and the Old English
word might be the source of the modern one. Slang meaning credit is from 1828.


strap (v.)

to fasten or secure with a strap, 1711, from strap (n.). Slang adjective strapped short of money is
from 1857, from strap (n.) in the old sense of financial credit (1828). Meaning to beat with a strap
is from 1735. Related: Strapped; strapping.


strap-hanger (n.)

also straphanger rider on a street-car, elevated-train, bus, or subway, 1901, from strap (n.) +
hanger. In reference to the hanging straps built in to cars and meant to be grasped for balance by
those without seats.


strapless (adj.)

1824 of shoes, 1839 of trousers, 1920 of gowns, 1931 of brassieres, from strap (n.) + -less.


strapline (n.)

1960, in typography, subhead above the main head, from strap (n.) + line (n.). In reference to a
woman's undergarments, by 1973.


strapping (adj.)

tall and sturdy, robust, originally applied to women, 1650s, from present participle of strap (v.).
Compare similar senses of whopping, spanking, bouncing and other present participle adjectives of
violent action expressing something large in size.


strappy (adj.)

of shoes, etc., by 1970, from strap (n.) + -y (2).


strata (n.)

c.1700, plural of stratum.


stratagem (n.)

artifice, trick, late 15c., from Middle French strattegeme, stratag&egrave;me trick, especially to
outwit an enemy (15c.), from Italian stratagemma, from Latin strategema artifice, stratagem, from
Greek strategema the act of a general; military stratagem, from strategein to be a general, command,
from strategos general (see strategy). Related: Stratagematic; stratagemical. The second -a- is a
Romanic misspelling (compare Spanish estratagema).


strategic (adj.)

pertaining to strategy, characterized by strategy, 1807, from French strat&#233;gique and directly
from Greek strategikos in classical use of or for a general; fitted for command, from strategos (see
strategy). Related: Strategical; strategically (1810).


strategist (n.)

1838, from French strat&eacute;giste, from strat&eacute;gie (see strategy).


strategize (v.)

1874, from strategy + -ize. Related: Strategized; strategizing.


strategy (n.)

1810, art of a general, from French strat&eacute;gie (18c.) and directly from Greek strategia office
or command of a general, from strategos general, commander of an army, also the title of various
civil officials and magistrates, from stratos multitude, army, expedition, encamped army, literally
that which is spread out (see structure (n.)) + agos leader, from agein to lead (see act (n.)). In
non-military use from 1887.


strath (n.)

wide river valley between hills, 1530s, from Scottish, from Old Irish srath wide river valley, from
Old Celtic *s(t)rato-, from PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)).


stratification (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin stratificationem (nominative stratificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of stratificare to form strata, from stratum thing spread out  (see stratum) + root
of facere to make (see factitious). In sociology from 1879.


stratify (v.)

1660s, from French stratifier, from Modern Latin  stratificare, from stratum (see stratum). Related:
Stratified; stratifying.


stratigraphy (n.)

description of strata, 1865, from Latin strati-, comb. form of stratum (see stratum) + -graphy.
Related: Stratigraphic; stratigraphical.


strato-

before vowels strat-, word-forming element referring to layers or layering, also stratus clouds,
from comb. form of Latin stratus a spreading (see stratum).


strato-cumulus (adj.)

1898, from strato- + cumulus.


stratocracy (n.)

government by the army, military government, 1650s, from comb. form of Greek stratos army, encamped
army (see strategy) + -cracy.


stratography (n.)

description of armies, 1810, from comb. form of Greek stratos army, encamped army (see strategy) +
-graphy.


stratosphere (n.)

1908, from French stratosph&egrave;re, literally sphere of layers, coined by French meteorologist
L&eacute;on-Philippe Teisserenc de Bort (1855-1913) from Latin stratus a spreading out (from past
participle stem of sternere to spread out; see structure (n.)) + French -sph&egrave;re, as in
atmosph&egrave;re (see sphere).    The region where the temperature increases or remains steady as
you go higher. An earlier stratosphere, attested in English 1908 and coined in German 1901, was a
geological term for part of the Earth's crust. It is now obsolete. Related: Stratospheric.


stratovolcano (n.)

coined in German (von Seebach, 1866), from strato- + volcano. So called for its layered structure.


stratum (n.)

horizontal layer, 1590s, from Modern Latin special use of Latin stratum thing spread out, coverlet,
beadspread, horse-blanket; pavement, noun uses of neuter of stratus prostrate, prone, past
participle of sternere to spread out, lay down, stretch out, from PIE *stre-to- to stretch, extend,
from root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)).


stratus (n.)

a low layer of cloud, 1803, from Latin stratus a spreading, from noun use of past participle of
sternere (see stratum).


straw (n.)

Old English streaw (rare) stems or stalks of certain species of grains, apparently literally that
which is scattered or strewn, related to streowian (see strew), from Proto-Germanic *strawam that
which is scattered (cognates: Old Norse stra, Danish straa, Swedish str&#229;, Old Saxon stro, Old
Frisian stre, Old Dutch, Old High German stro, Dutch stroo, German Stroh straw), from PIE *stere- to
spread (see structure (n.)). The notion perhaps is of dried grain stalks strewn on a floor as
carpeting or bedding.    As a type of what is trifling or unimportant, attested from late 13c.
Meaning hollow tube through which a drink is sucked is recorded from 1851. To draw straws as a means
of deciding something is recorded from 1779 (the custom probably is older). As an adjective, made of
straw, mid-15c.; hence false, sham. Straw poll is from 1932; earlier straw vote (1866). Straw hat
first attested mid-15c. To clutch (or grasp or catch) at straws (1748) is what a drowning man
proverbially would do. The last straw (1836 apart from the full phrase) is from the proverbial
image: it is the last straw that breaks the camel's back (or, less often, the mare's, the horse's,
or the elephant's), an image in use in English by 1755.    Let it not, however, be inferred that
taxation cannot be pushed too far : it is, as the Oriental proverb says, the last straw that
overloads the camel ; a small addition, if ill-timed, may overturn the whole. [The Scots Magazine,
April 1799]


straw man (n.)

1590s, doll or scarecrow made of bound straw, from straw (n.) + man (n.). Figuratively, in debates,
by 1896. Man of straw imaginary opponent is recorded from 1620s.


strawberry (n.)

Old English streawberige, streaberie; see straw + berry. There is no corresponding compound in other
Germanic languages; the reason for the name is uncertain, but perhaps it is in reference to the tiny
chaff-like external seeds which cover the fruit. A cognate Old English name was eor&eth;berge earth-
berry (compare Modern German erdbeere). As a color adjective from 1670s. Strawberry blonde is
attested from 1884. Strawberry mark (1847) so called for its resemblance.


stray (v.)

c.1300, a shortening of Old French estraier wander about, roam, drift, run loose, said of animals,
especially a horse without a master, also of persons, perhaps literally go about the streets, from
estree route, highway, from Late Latin via strata paved road (see street). On another theory, the
Old French word is from Vulgar Latin *estragare, a contraction of *estravagare, representing Latin
extra vagari to wander outside (see extravagant). Figurative sense of to wander from the path of
rectitude is attested from early 14c. Related: Strayed; straying.


stray (n.)

domestic animal found wandering, early 13c., from Anglo-French noun use of Old French estrai&eacute;
strayed, riderless, past participle adjective from estraier to roam, drift, run loose (see stray
(v.)).


stray (adj.)

c.1600, of animals; 19c. of persons and things, from stray (n.) and in part a shortening of astray.


streak (n.)

Old English strica line of motion, stroke of a pen (related to strican pass over lightly), from
Proto-Germanic *strikon- (cognates: Middle Dutch streke, Dutch streek, Middle Low German streke a
stroke, line, Old High German, German strich, Gothic striks a stroke, line), from PIE root *streig-
to stroke, rub, press (see strigil; also strike (v.), stroke (v.)). Sense of long, thin mark is
first found 1560s. Meaning a temporary run (of luck) is from 1843.


streak (v.2)

1768, to go quickly, to rush, run at full speed, respelling (probably by association with streak
(v.1)) of streek to go quickly (late 14c.), originally to stretch oneself (mid-13c.), a northern
Middle English variant of stretch (v.). Related: Streaked; streaking.


streak (v.1)

make streaks on (transitive), 1590s, from streak (n.). Intransitive sense of become streaked is from
1870. Related: Streaked; streaking.


streaking (n.)

running naked in public, 1973, verbal noun from streak (v.).


streaky (adj.)

1660s, from streak (n.) + -y (2). Related: Streakiness.


stream (v.)

early 13c., to flow copiously, from stream (n.). Transitive sense discharge in a stream is from late
14c. Related: Streamed; streaming. Compare German str&#246;men, Dutch stroomen, Danish str&#246;mme,
all verbs from nouns.


stream (n.)

Old English stream a course of water, from Proto-Germanic *straumaz (cognates: Old Saxon strom, Old
Norse straumr, Danish str&oslash;m, Swedish str&ouml;m, Norwegian straum, Old Frisian stram, Dutch
stroom, Old High German stroum, German Strom current, river), from PIE root *sreu- to flow (see
rheum).    From early 12c. as anything issuing from a source and flowing continuously. Meaning
current in the sea (as in Gulf Stream) is recorded from late 14c., as is the sense of steady current
in a river. Stream of consciousness in lit crit first recorded 1930, originally in psychology
(1855). Stream of thought is from 1890.


streamer (n.)

flag that streams in the air, late 13c., agent noun from stream (v.).


streamline (v.)

1913, give a streamline form to, from streamline (n.). From 1936 in the extended sense of simplify
and organize. Related: Streamlined; streamlining.


streamline (n.)

1868, line drawn from point to point, so that its direction is everywhere that of the motion of the
fluid [Lamb, Hydrodynamics, 1906], from stream (n.) + line (n.). The adjective is attested from
1898, free from turbulence, 1907 in sense of shaped so that the flow around it is smooth.


street (n.)

Old English stret (Mercian, Kentish), str&aelig;t (West Saxon) street, high road, from Late Latin
strata, used elliptically for via strata paved road, from fem. past participle of Latin sternere lay
down, spread out, pave, from PIE *stre-to- to stretch, extend, from root *stere- to spread, extend,
stretch out (see structure (n.)).    One of the few words in use in England continuously from Roman
times. An early and widespread Germanic borrowing (Old Frisian strete, Old Saxon strata, Middle
Dutch strate, Dutch straat, Old High German straza, German Strasse, Swedish str&#229;t, Danish
str&#228;de street). The Latin is also the source of Spanish estrada, Old French estr&eacute;e,
Italian strada.    The normal term in OE for a paved way or Roman road, later extended to other
roads, urban streets, and in SE dialects to a street of dwellings, a straggling village or hamlet
[Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]. Originally of Roman roads (Watling Street, Icknield
Street). In the Middle Ages, a road or way was merely a direction in which people rode or went, the
name street being reserved for the made road [Weekley].    Used since c.1400 to mean the people in
the street; modern sense of the realm of the people as the source of political support dates from
1931. The street for an especially important street is from 1560s (originally of London's Lombard-
street). Man in the street ordinary person, non-expert is attested from 1831. Street people the
homeless is from 1967; expression on the street homeless is from 1852. Street smarts is from 1971;
street-credibility is from 1979. Street-sweeper as an occupation is from 1848.


street-car (n.)

passenger car for city travel, horse-drawn at first, later cable-powered, 1859, American English,
from street (n.) + car (n.).


street-walker (n.)

common prostitute, 1590s, from street (n.) + agent noun from walk (v.).


street-wise (adj.)

1951, from street + wise (adj.) smart, savvy.


strength (n.)

Old English streng&thorn;u, streng&#240; bodily power, force, vigor, firmness, fortitude, manhood,
violence, moral resistance, from Proto-Germanic *strangitho (cognates: Old High German strengida
strength), from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow (see string (n.)), with Proto-Germanic abstract noun
suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Compare length/long. From the same root as strong,


strengthen (v.)

late 14c., from strength + -en (1). Related: Strengthened; strengthening; strengthener. Earlier verb
was simply strength (12c.).


strenuous (adj.)

characterized by great effort, mid-15c. (implied in strenuously), from Latin strenuus active, brisk,
quick, nimble, prompt, vigorous, keen. Probably cognate with Greek strenes, strenos keen, strong,
strenos arrogance, eager desire, Old English stierne hard, severe, keen (see stern (adj.)). Mocked
by Ben Jonson as a pedantic neologism in Poetaster (1601). Sense of requiring much energy is first
recorded 1670s. Related: Strenuousness; strenuosity.


strep

1927, in strep throat, short for streptococcus.


Strephon

lover, from name of shepherd lover in Sidney's Arcadia (begun 1580).


strepto-

word-forming element used in science to mean twisted, from Latinized comb. form of Greek streptos
twisted, easy to bend, pliant, verbal adjective of strephein to turn, twist, from PIE *streb(h)- to
wind, turn (see strophe).


streptococcus (n.)

bacteria genus, 1877, Modern Latin, coined by Viennese surgeon Albert Theodor Billroth (1829-1894)
from strepto- twisted + Modern Latin coccus spherical bacterium, from Greek kokkos berry (see
cocco-). So called because the bacteria usually form chains.


streptomycin (n.)

antibiotic drug, 1944, from Modern Latin Streptomyces, genus name of the bacterium from which the
antibiotic was obtained, from strepto- twisted + -mycin, element used in forming names of substances
obtained from fungi, from Latinized form of Greek mykes fungus (see mucus). First isolated by U.S.
microbiologist Selman Abraham Waksman (1888-1973) and others.


stress (n.)

c.1300, hardship, adversity, force, pressure, in part a shortening of Middle English distress (n.);
in part from Old French estrece narrowness, oppression, from Vulgar Latin *strictia, from Latin
strictus tight, compressed, drawn together, past participle of stringere draw tight (see strain
(v.)). Meaning physical strain on a material object is from mid-15c. As an abstract force in
mechanics from 1855. The purely psychological sense is attested from 1955.


stress (v.)

c.1300, to subject (someone) to force or compulsion, from Middle French estrecier, from Vulgar Latin
*strictiare, from Latin stringere draw tight, which also is the source of stress (n.). The
figurative meaning put emphasis on is first recorded 1896, from notion of laying pressure on
something by relying on it. Related: Stressed; stressing.


stressful (adj.)

1846, from stress (n.) + -ful. Related: Stressfully; stressfulness.


stressor (n.)

1950, agent noun in Latin form from stress (v.).


stretch (v.)

Old English streccan (transitive and intransitive) to stretch, spread out, prostrate; reach, extend
(past tense strehte, past participle streht), from Proto-Germanic *strakjanan (cognates: Danish
str&aelig;kke, Swedish str&auml;cka, Old Frisian strekka, Old High German strecchan, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch, Old High German, German strecken to stretch, draw out), perhaps a variant of
the root of stark, or else from PIE root *strenk- tight, narrow; pull tight, twist (see string
(n.)).    Meaning to extend (the limbs or wings) is from c.1200; that of to lay out for burial is
from early 13c. To stretch one's legs take a walk is from c.1600. Meaning to lengthen by force first
recorded late 14c.; figurative sense of to enlarge beyond proper limits, exaggerate, is from 1550s.
Stretch limo first attested 1973. Stretch marks is attested from 1960. Related: Stretched;
stretching.


stretch (n.)

late 12c., expanse of land; 1540s, act of stretching, from stretch (v.); meaning unbroken
continuance of some activity is first recorded 1660s; meaning straightaway of a race course (as in
home stretch) is recorded from 1839.


stretcher (n.)

early 15c., person who stretches, agent noun from stretch (v.). As canvas frame for carrying the
sick or wounded, from 1845.


strew (v.)

Old English strewian, streowian to scatter, from Proto-Germanic *strawjan- (cognates: Old Frisian
strewa, Old Saxon strowian, Old Norse stra, Danish str&oslash;, Swedish str&ouml;, Middle Dutch
strowen, Dutch strooien, Old High German strouwen, German streuen, Gothic straujan to sprinkle,
strew), from PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Related: Strewed;
strewn; strewing.


strewn

past participle of strew (v.).


stria (n.)

plural striae, narrow stripe, groove, 1560s, from Latin stria a furrow, flute of a column (see
striate).


striate (v.)

1670s, from special modern use of Latin striatus, past participle of striare to groove, to flute,
from Latin stria furrow, channel, flute of a column (in Modern Latin strip, streak), from PIE root
*streig-  to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Related: Striated (1640s); striating.


striation (n.)

1849, a parallel streak, noun of action from striate (v.).


strick (n.)

handful of broken hemp, jute, flax, etc., c.1400, apparently from root of strike (v.). Also as a
verb (c.1400).


stricken (adj.)

1510s, wounded, affected (by disease, trouble, etc.), adjective use of archaic past participle of
strike (v.). Figurative meaning overwhelmed with terror, grief, etc. is from 1530s. An earlier
development is reflected in 13c. phrase striken in elde advanced in years, from strike in the sense
of to move, go, hence far advanced.


strict (adj.)

early 15c., narrow, drawn in, small, from Latin strictus drawn together, close, tight, past
participle of stringere (2) to draw or bind tight (see strain (v.)). The sense of stringent and
rigorous (of law) is first found in 1570s; of qualities or conditions generally, 1590s.


strictly (adv.)

late 15c., exactly, from strict + -ly (2). From 1640s as narrowly, closely; from 1938 as
exclusively.


stricture (n.)

c.1400, abnormal narrowing in a body part, from Late Latin strictura contraction, constriction, from
past participle stem of stringere (2) to bind or draw tight (see strain (v.)). Sense of criticism,
critical remark is first recorded 1650s, perhaps from the other Latin word stringere to touch
lightly (see strigil).


stride (v.)

Old English stridan (past tense strad, past participle striden), to straddle, mount (a horse), from
Proto-Germanic *stridanan (cognates: Middle Low German strede stride, strive; Old Saxon stridian,
Danish stride, Swedish strida to fight, Dutch stridjen, Old High German stritan, German etreiten to
fight, contend, struggle, Old Norse stri&eth;r strong, hard, stubborn, severe).    The sense
connection in the various Germanic forms is perhaps strive, make a strong effort; the senses having
to do with walking and standing are found only in English and Low German. Meaning to walk with long
or extended steps is from c.1200. Cognate words in most Germanic languages mean to fight, struggle;
the notion behind the English usage might be the effort involved in making long strides, striving
forward.


stride (n.)

a step in walking, especially a long one, from Old English stride a stride, a step, from the root of
stride (v.). Compare Dutch strijd, Old High German strit, German Streit fight, contention, combat,
Swedish and Danish strid combat, contention. From c.1300 as a measure of distance roughly the length
of a stride. Figurative meaning advance rapidly, make progress is from c.1600. Of animals
(especially horses) from early 17c. To take (something) in stride (1832), i.e. without change of
gait, originally is of horses leaping hedges in the hunting-field; figurative sense attested from
1902. To hit (one's) stride is from horse-racing. Jazz music stride tempo is attested from 1938.
Meaning a standing with the legs apart, a straddle is from 1590s.


strident (adj.)

1650s, from French strident (16c.) and directly from Latin stridentem (nominative stridens), present
participle of stridere utter an inarticulate sound, grate, screech, from PIE *(s)trei-, possibly of
imitative origin (cognates: Greek trismos a grinding, scream). Related: Stridently; stridence;
stridency.


strider (n.)

1805, agent noun from stride (v.).


stridor (n.)

harsh, creaking noise, shrill sound, 1630s, from Latin stridor, from stridere (see strident).


stridulous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin stridulus giving a shrill sound, creaking, from stridere to utter an inarticulate
sound, grate, creak (see strident). Stridulation is from 1831. Stridulate (v.) first recorded 1838.
Related: Stridulated; stridulating; stridulously; stridulousness.


strife (n.)

c.1200, quarrel, fight, discord, from Old French estrif fight, battle, combat, conflict; torment,
distress; dispute, quarrel, variant of estrit quarrel, dispute, impetuosity, probably from Frankish
*strid strife, combat or another Germanic source (compare Old High German strit quarrel, dispute),
related to Old High German stritan to fight; see stride (v.).


strigil (n.)

ancient tool for scraping the skin after a bath, 1580s, from Latin strigilis scraper, horse-comb,
from stringere (1) draw along a surface, graze, touch lightly; strip off, pluck off, cut away; clip,
prune; lay bare, unsheathe, figuratively waste, consume, reduce; touch, move, affect, cause pain,
from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Latin striga stroke, strike, furrow, stria
furrow, channel; Old Church Slavonic striga shear; Old English stracian to stroke; German streichen
to stroke, rub). Etymologists dispute over whether this is connected to Latin stringere (2), root of
strain (v.).


strike (v.)

Old English strican (past tense strac, past participle stricen) pass lightly over, stroke, smooth,
rub, also go, move, proceed, from Proto-Germanic *strikan- (cognates: Old Norse strykva to stroke,
Old Frisian strika, Middle Dutch streken, Dutch strijken to smooth, stroke, rub, Old High German
strihhan, German streichen), from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Related to
streak and stroke, and perhaps influenced in sense development by cognate Old Norse striuka.
Sense of to deal a blow developed by early 14c.; meaning to collide is from mid-14c.; that of to hit
with a missile is from late 14c. Meaning to cancel or expunge (as with the stroke of a pen) is
attested from late 14c. A Middle English sense is preserved in strike for go toward. Sense of come
upon, find is from 1835 (especially in mining, well-digging, etc., hence strike it rich, 1854).
Baseball sense is from 1853.  To strike a balance is from the sense balance accounts (1530s).
Meaning refuse to work to force an employer to meet demands is from 1768, perhaps from notion of
striking or downing one's tools, or from sailors' practice of striking (lowering) a ship's sails as
a symbol of refusal to go to sea (1768), which preserves the verb's original sense of make level,
smooth.


strike (n.)

1580s, act of striking, from strike (v.). Meaning concentrated cessation of work by a body of
employees is from 1810. Baseball sense is first recorded 1841, originally meaning any contact with
the ball; modern sense developed by 1890s, apparently from foul strike, which counted against the
batter, and as hit came to be used for contact with the ball this word was left for a swing and a
miss that counts against the batter; figurative sense of have two strikes against (of a possible
three) is from 1938. Bowling sense attested from 1859. Meaning sudden military attack is attested
from 1942.


striker (n.)

late 14c., vagabond, agent noun from strike (v.). From mid-15c. as coiner; 1580s as fighter; 1850 as
worker on strike; 1963 as a soccer position.


striking (adj.)

1610s, that strikes, present participle adjective from strike (v.). Meaning producing a vivid
impression id from 1752, from the verb in the sense of to catch the fancy of (1590s). Related:
Strikingly.


string (n.)

Old English streng line, cord, thread, string of a bow or harp, in plural tackle, rigging; lineage,
race, from Proto-Germanic *strangiz (cognates: Old Norse strengr, Danish streng, Middle Dutch
strenge, Dutch streng, Old High German strang, German Strang rope, cord), from *strang- taut, stiff,
from PIE root *strenk- tight, narrow. Gradually restricted by early Middle English to lines that are
smaller than a rope. Sense of a number of objects arranged in a line first recorded late 15c.    Old
English meaning ligaments, tendons is preserved in hamstring, heartstrings. Meaning limitations,
stipulations (1888) is American English, probably from the common April Fool's joke of leaving a
purse that appears to be full of money on the sidewalk, then tugging it away with an attached string
when someone stoops to pick it up.    To pull strings control the course of affairs (1860) is from
the notion of puppet theater. First string, second string, etc. in athletics (1863) is from archers'
custom of carrying spare bowstrings in the event that one breaks. Strings stringed instruments is
attested from mid-14c. String bean is from 1759; string bikini is from 1974.


string (v.)

c.1400, to fit a bow with a string, from string (n.). Meaning to thread (beads, etc.) on a string is
from 1610s. Of musical instruments from 1520s (stringed instrument is from c.1600). To string
(someone) along is slang from 1902; string (v.) in the sense deceive is attested in British dialect
from c.1812; perhaps ultimately from the musical instrument sense and with a notion of to 'tune'
someone (for some purpose). Related: Stringed (later strung); stringing.


stringency (n.)

1829, from stringent + -cy.


stringent (adj.)

c.1600, astringent, especially with reference to taste, from Latin stringentem (nominative
stringens), present participle of stringere (2) to compress, contract, bind or draw tight (see
strain (v.)). Of regulations, procedures, etc., 1846.


stringer (n.)

early 15c., one who makes bow-strings, agent noun from string (v.). Meaning newspaper correspondent
paid by length of copy is from 1950, probably from earlier figurative sense of one who strings words
together (1774).


stringy (adj.)

1660s, from string (n.) + -y (2). Related: Stringiness.


strip (v.)

make bare, early 13c., from Old English -striepan, -strypan to plunder, despoil (as in West Saxon
bestrypan to plunder), from Proto-Germanic *straupijan (cognates: Middle Dutch stropen to strip off,
to ramble about plundering, Old High German stroufen to strip off, plunder, German streifen strip
off, touch upon, to ramble, roam, rove). Meaning to unclothe is recorded from early 13c.
Intransitive sense from late 14c. Of screw threads, from 1839; of gear wheels, from 1873. Meaning
perform a strip-tease is from 1929. Related: Stripped; stripping. Strip poker is attested from 1916,
in a joke in The Technology Monthly and Harvard Engineering Journal:    Say, Bill how, did the game
come out?  It ended in a tie.  Oh, were you playing strip poker?    strip search is from 1947, in
reference to World War II prison camps.


strip (n.)

long, narrow, flat piece, mid-15c., narrow piece of cloth, probably related to or from Middle Low
German strippe strap, thong, and from the same source as stripe (n.1). Sense extension to wood,
land, etc. first recorded 1630s.    Sense in comic strip is from 1920. Airport sense is from 1936;
race track sense from 1941. Meaning street noted for clubs, bars, etc. is attested from 1939,
originally in reference to Los Angeles' Sunset Strip. Strip mine (n.) attested by 1892, as a verb by
1916; so called because the surface material is removed in successive parallel strips.


strip-tease (n.)

also striptease, 1936, perhaps a back-formation from stripteaser (1930); see strip (v.) + tease
(n.). Strip (v.) and tease (v.) both were used in this sense in late 1920s. Life magazine used
strippeuse (1938-40).


stripe (n.1)

a line or band in cloth, early 15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German stripe stripe, streak,
from Proto-Germanic *stripan (cognates: Danish stribe a striped fabric, German Streifen stripe),
cognate with Old Irish sriab stripe, from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Of
soldiers' chevrons, badges, etc., attested from 1827. Stripes for prison uniform is by 1887,
American English.


stripe (n.2)

a stroke or lash, early 15c., probably a special use of stripe (n.1), from the marks left by a lash.
Compare also Dutch strippen to whip, West Frisian strips, apparently cognate but not attested as
early as the English word.


stripe (v.)

ornament with stripes, early 15c., from stripe (n.1). Compare Middle Flemish stripen, Middle Low
German and Middle Dutch stripen. Related: Striped; striping.


striper (n.)

striped bass, 1945, from stripe (n.1).


stripling (n.)

a youth, late 14c., of uncertain origin, possibly from strip (n.1) long, narrow piece, on the notion
of one who is slender as a strip, whose figure is not yet filled out + -ling.


stripper (n.)

1580s, transitive, person who strips (the bark off trees, etc.), agent noun from strip (v.). Meaning
machine or appliance for stripping is from 1835. Sense of strip-tease dancer is from 1930 (see
strip-tease). Meaning chemical for removing paint is from 1937.


strive (v.)

c.1200, quarrel, contend, from Old French estriver to quarrel, dispute, resist, struggle, put up a
fight, compete, from estrif, estrit quarrel (see strife). It became a strong verb (past tense
strove) by rhyming association with drive, dive, etc. Meaning try hard is from early 14c. Related:
Striving.


strobe (n.)

1942, shortening of stroboscope. As a shortened form of strobe light, from 1949. As an adjective
from 1942.


strobic (adj.)

resembling a top, 1876, from Greek strobos (see stroboscope) + -ic.


stroboscope (n.)

instrument for studying motion by periodic light, 1896, from -scope + comb. form of Greek strobos a
twisting, act of whirling, from PIE *streb(h)- to wind, turn (see strophe). Earlier as the name of a
similar device used as a scientific toy [OED]. Related: Stroboscopic (1846).


strode

past tense of stride (v.).


stroganoff (n.)

a beef dish cooked in sauce containing sour cream, 1932, from French, from name of the prominent
Russian family, usually said to be for specifically in honor of diplomat Count Paul Stroganov
(1774-1817).


stroke (n.)

act of striking, c.1300, probably from Old English *strac stroke, from Proto-Germanic *straik-
(cognates: Middle Low German strek, German streich, Gothic striks stroke); see stroke (v.).    The
meaning mark of a pen is from 1560s; that of a striking of a clock is from mid-15c. Sense of feat,
achievement (as in stroke of luck, 1853) first found 1670s; the meaning single pull of an oar or
single movement of machinery is from 1731. Meaning apoplectic seizure is from 1590s (originally the
Stroke of God's Hand). Swimming sense is from 1800.


stroke (v.)

pass the hand gently over, Old English stracian to stroke, related to strican pass over lightly,
from Proto-Germanic *straik-, from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Figurative
sense of soothe, flatter is recorded from 1510s. The noun meaning a stroking movement of the hand is
recorded from 1630s. Related: Stroked; stroking.


stroll (v.)

c.1600, a cant word introduced from the Continent, probably from dialectal German strollen, variant
of Swiss German strolchen to stroll about, loaf, from Strolch vagabond, vagrant, also fortuneteller,
perhaps from Italian astrologo astrologer. Related: Strolled; strolling.


stroll (n.)

1753, from stroll (v.).


stroller (n.)

c.1600, strolling player; 1670s, one who strolls, a wanderer, agent noun from stroll (v.). Meaning
child's push-chair is from 1920.


stroma (n.)

1835 in anatomy, plural stromae, Modern Latin, from Latin stroma bed covering, from Greek stroma
coverlet, covering, mattress, anything spread out for lying or sitting on (see structure (n.)).


strong (adj.)

Old English strang physically powerful, powerful in effect; forceful, severe, firm, bold, brave;
constant, resolute; arduous, violent, from Proto-Germanic *strangaz (cognates: Old Norse strangr
strong, Dutch streng strict, rigorous, Old High German strang strong, bold, hard, German streng
strict, rigorous), possibly from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow. Originally compared strenger, strengest
(compare old/elder/eldest).    Grammatical sense, of noun and verb inflections, is first attested
1841, translating German stark, used in a grammatical sense by J. Grimm (the terms strong and weak
better fit German inflections). Strong suit (1865) is from card-playing. Strong man man of great
strength (especially one who displays it professionally) is recorded from 1690s; meaning dominating
man in a political organization is from 1859.


strong (adv.)

Old English strange strongly, violently, severely, furiously (alongside strongly), from the same
source as strong (adj.). Going strong (1898) is from racing. To come on strong was originally come
it strong (1812).


strong-arm (adj.)

using physical force, 1897, from noun phrase (c.1600), from strong (adj.) + arm (n.). As a verb from
1903. Related: Strong-armed; strong-arming.


strong-box (n.)

1680s, from strong (adj.) + box (n.1).


stronghold (n.)

early 14c., from strong (adj.) + hold (n.) fortified place, refuge.


strongly (adv.)

Old English stranglice firmly, stoutly, boldly, bravely; see strong (adj.) + -ly (2).


strontium (n.)

light metallic element, 1808, coined in Modern Latin by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829)
from Strontian, name of a parish in Argyllshire, Scotland, the site of lead mines where strontium
was first found, in 1787.


strop (n.)

mid-14c., loop or strap on a harness, probably from Old French estrop, making it the older and more
correct form of strap (n.), replaced by it from 16c. Specific sense of leather strap used for
sharpening razors first recorded 1702. The verb in this sense is from 1841. Related: Stropped;
stropping. Distribution of senses between strap and strop is arbitrary.


strophe (n.)

c.1600, from Greek strophe stanza, originally a turning, in reference to the section of an ode sung
by the chorus while turning in one direction, from strephein to turn, from PIE *streb(h)- to wind,
turn (cognates: Greek strophaligs whirl, whirlwind, streblos twisted, stremma that which is
twisted).


strophic (adj.)

1810, from strophe + -ic.


stroppy (adj.)

rebellious, by 1943, British nautical slang, perhaps a slang mangling of obstreperous. Sea Passages:
A Naval Anthology and Introduction to the Study of English [1943, Geoffrey Callender] quotes from a
letter:    Why Nobby should reckon that his raggie should blow the gaff, when there are crushers
everywhere, leaves me guessing; but there it is. In the last dog he rounded on me and called me a
white rat. I got stroppy and told him he was shooting a line: but all he said was, 'Oh! choke your
luff! I'm looking for another oppo you snivelling sand-catcher.' So that looks like paying off.
to which Callender adds, There is nothing in this letter which an active service rating could fail
to understand.


strove

past tense of strive (v.).


struck

past tense and past participle of strike (v.).


structural (adj.)

1814, from structure + -al (1). Related: Structurally.


structuralism (n.)

1891, from structural + -ism.


structure (n.)

mid-15c., action or process of building or construction; 1610s, that which is constructed, a
building or edifice; from Latin structura a fitting together, adjustment; a building, mode of
building; figuratively, arrangement, order, from structus, past participle of struere to pile, place
together, heap up; build, assemble, arrange, make by joining together, related to strues heap, from
PIE *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out.    The widespread descendants of this ancient root are
believed to include: Sanskrit strnoti strews, throws down; Avestan star- to spread out, stretch out;
Greek stronymi strew, stroma bedding, mattress, sternon breast, breastbone; Latin sternere to
stretch, extend; Old Church Slavonic stira, streti spread, strama district; Russian stroji order;
Gothic straujan, Old High German strouwen, Old English streowian to sprinkle, strew; Old English
streon strain, streaw straw, that which is scattered; Old High German stirna forehead, strala arrow,
lightning bolt; Old Irish fo-sernaim spread out, srath a wide river valley; Welsh srat plain.


structure (v.)

put together systematically, by 1855 (occasional use from late 16c.), from structure (n.). Related:
Structured; structuring.


structured (adj.)

1810, past participle adjective from structure (v.). Meaning organized so as to produce results is
from 1959.


strudel (n.)

kind of Austrian pastry, 1893, from German Strudel, literally eddy, whirlpool, from Old High German
stredan to bubble, boil, whirl, eddy, from PIE root *ser- (2) to flow (see serum).


struggle (v.)

late 14c., of uncertain origin, probably a frequentative form (compare trample, scuffle), of
uncertain origin. Skeat suggests Old Norse strugr ill will; others suggest a connection to Dutch
struikelen, German straucheln to stumble. Related: Struggled; struggling.


struggle (n.)

1690s, from struggle (v.).


Struldbrug (n.)

person who never dies but becomes senile and useless, 1726, from Gulliver's Travels, a made-up word.


strum (v.)

1775, possibly imitative of the sound of running the fingers across the strings of a musical
instrument. Related: Strummed; strumming. As a noun from 1793.


strumpet (n.)

harlot; bold, lascivious woman, early 14c., of uncertain origin. One theory connects it with Latin
stuprata, fem. past participle of stuprare have illicit sexual relations with, or Late Latin strupum
dishonor, violation. But evidence for this is wanting and others suggest Middle Dutch strompe a
stocking, or strompen to stride, to stalk (as a prostitute might a customer). The major sources
don't seem to give much preference to any of these. Weekley notes Gregory's Chronicle (c.1450) has
streppett in same sense. In 18c.-early 19c., often abbreviated as strum and also used as a verb,
which led to some odd dictionary entries:    TO STRUM: to have carnal knowledge of a woman, also to
play badly on the harpsichord or any other stringed instrument. [Capt. Francis Grose, A Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


strung

past tense and past participle of string (v.). From 1680s as an adjective; in reference to nerves,
feelings, etc., from 1840. Strung out is from 1902 as spread out in a line; slang meaning addicted
is recorded from 1959.


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


strut (n.)

supporting brace, 1580s, perhaps from strut (v.), or a cognate word in Scandinavian (compare
Norwegian strut a spout, nozzle) or Low German (compare Low German strutt rigid); ultimately from
Proto-Germanic *strutoz-, from root *strut- (see strut (v.)).


struthious (adj.)

of the ostrich, 1773, from Latin struthio ostrich, from Greek strouthion (see ostrich) + -ous.


Struwwelpeter (n.)

German, name of a character in the children's book by Heinrich Hoffman (1809-1894). There was an
English edition by 1848.


strychnine (n.)

powerful poisonous alkaloid, 1819, from French strychnine, from Modern Latin Strychnos, the genus
name of the plant (nux vomica) from which the poison is obtained, from Greek strychnon, a kind of
nightshade, of uncertain origin. The chemical was discovered 1818 by Pelletier and Caventou in the
Asian tree Strychnos ignatii.


Stuart

name of the British royal family from 1603 to 1668; see steward. Attested from 1873 as an
attribution for styles from that period.


stub (n.)

Old English stybb stump of a tree, from Proto-Germanic *stubjaz (cognates: Middle Dutch stubbe, Old
Norse stubbr), from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Extended
14c. to other short, thick, protruding things. Meaning remaining part of something partially
consumed is from 1520s.


stub (v.)

mid-15c., dig up stumps, dig up by the roots, from stub (n.). The sens of strike (one's toe) against
something projecting from a surface is first recorded 1848. Meaning to extinguish a cigarette is
from 1927. Related: Stubbed; stubbing.


stubble (n.)

c.1300, stumps of grain stalks left in the ground after reaping, from Old French estuble stubble
(Modern French &eacute;teule), from Vulgar Latin stupla, reduced form of Latin stipula stalk, straw
(see stipule). Applied from 1590s to bristles on a man's unshaven face.


stubbly (adj.)

c.1600, from stubble (n.) + -y (2). Related: Stubbliness.


stubborn (adj.)

late 14c., of uncertain origin. Earliest form is stiborn. OED, Liberman doubt any connection with
stub (n.). Related: Stubbornly; stubbornness.


stubby (adj.)

short and thick, 1570s, from stub (n.) + -y (2); of persons, from 1831.


stucco (n.)

fine plaster used as a wall coating, 1590s, from Italian stucco, from a Germanic source (compare Old
High German stukki crust, piece, fragment), from Proto-Germanic *stukkjam, from PIE root *(s)teu-
(1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see stock (n.1)). The verb is attested from 1726. Related:
Stuccoed; stuccoing.


stuck (adj.)

unable to go any further, 1885, past participle adjective from stick (v.). Colloquial stuck-up
offensively conceited, assuming an unjustified air of superiority is recorded from 1829.


stud (n.1)

nailhead, knob, late 13c., from Old English studu pillar, prop, post, from Proto-Germanic *stud-
(cognates: Old Norse sto&eth; staff, stick, properly stay, Middle High German stud, Old English stow
place), from PIE *stu-, variant of root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense expanded by late 14c. to
include ornamental devices fixed in and projecting from a surface. From the Old English meaning
comes the specific sense one of the small beams of a building which form a basis for the walls.


stud (n.2)

horse used for breeding, Old English stod herd of horses, place where horses are kept for breeding,
from Proto-Germanic *stodo (cognates: Old Norse sto&eth;, Middle Low German stod, Old High German
stuot herd of horses, German Stute mare), from PIE root *sta- to stand, with derivatives meaning
place or thing that is standing (cognates: Old Church Slavonic stado herd, Lithuanian stodas a drove
of horses; see stet). Sense of male horse kept for breeding is first recorded 1803; meaning man who
is highly active and proficient sexually is attested from 1895; that of any young man is from 1929.
Stud-poker (1864) is said to be from stud-horse poker, but that phrase is not found earlier than
1879.


stud (v.)

c.1500, set with studs; 1560s in studded with as though sprinkled with nails with conspicuous heads;
from stud (n.1).


student (n.)

late 14c., from Old French estudiant student, scholar, one who is studying (Modern French
&#233;tudiant), noun use of past participle of estudiier, from Medieval Latin studiare to study,
from Latin studium (see study (v.)). Student-teacher of a teacher in training working in a classroom
is from 1851, American English.


studied (adj.)

1520s, learned; c.1600, studiously elaborate, past participle adjective from study (v.).


studio (n.)

1819, work-room of a sculptor or painter, usually one with windows to admit light from the sky, from
Italian studio room for study, from Latin studium (see study (v.)). Motion picture sense first
recorded 1911; radio broadcasting sense 1922; television sense 1938. Studio apartment first recorded
1903.


studious (adj.)

mid-14c. (implied in studiously) zealous, diligent, eager, from Latin studiosus devoted to study,
assiduous, zealous, from studium eagerness, zeal (see study). From late 14c. as eager to learn,
devoted to learning, also, as noun, those who study or read diligently. Related: Studiousness.


studly (adj.)

by 1971, American English, from stud (n.2) in the virile male sense + -ly (1). Related: Studliness.


study (v.)

early 12c., to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate (translating Latin occupatur), from Old
French estudiier to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine (13c., Modern French
&eacute;tudier), from Medieval Latin studiare, from Latin studium study, application, originally
eagerness, from studere to be diligent (to be pressing forward), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push,
stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Martha swanc and becarcade to gefor&eth;igene &thorn;an
H&aelig;lende and his &thorn;eowen &thorn;a lichamlice behef&eth;en. Seo studdede emb &thorn;a
uterlice &thorn;ing. [Homily for the Feast of the Virgin Mary, c.1125]    From c.1300 as apply
oneself to the acquisition of learning, pursue a formal course of study, also read a book or
writings intently or meditatively. From mid-14c. as reflect, muse, think, ponder. Meaning regard
attentively is from 1660s. Related: Studied; studying.


study (n.)

c.1300, application of the mind to the acquisition of knowledge, intensive reading and contemplation
of a book, writings, etc., from Old French estudie care, attention, skill, thought; study, school
(Modern French &#233;tude), from Latin studium study, application (see study (v.)). Also from c.1300
as a state of deep thought or contemplation; a state of mental perplexity, doubt, anxiety; state of
amazement or wonder. From mid-14c. as careful examination, scrutiny. Sense of room furnished with
books is from late 14c. Meaning a subject of study is from late 15c. Study hall is attested from
1891, originally a large common room in a college.


stuff (n.)

early 14c., quilted material worn under chain mail, from Old French estoffe quilted material,
furniture, provisions (Modern French &eacute;toffe), from estoffer to equip or stock, which
according to French sources is from Old High German stopfon to plug, stuff, or from a related
Frankish word (see stop (v.)), but OED has strong objections to this.    Sense extended to material
for working with in various trades (c.1400), then matter of an unspecified kind (1570s). Meaning
narcotic, dope, drug is attested from 1929. To know (one's) stuff have a grasp on a subject is
recorded from 1927.


stuff (v.)

mid-14c., furnish with (goods, provisions, etc.), also reinforce (troops), from Old French estofer
pad, upholster, fit out (Modern French &#233;toffer), from estoffe, and probably also in part from
stuff (n.).    From c.1400 as fill, cram full; fill (the belly) with food or drink, gorge; from
early 15c. as to clog (the sinuses, etc.); from late 14c. as fill (a mattress, etc.) with padding,
line with padding; also in the cookery sense, in reference to filing the interior of a pastry or the
cavity of a fowl or beast. The ballot-box sense is attested from 1854, American English; in
expressions of contempt and suggestive of bodily orifices, it dates from 1952.


stuffed (adj.)

mid-15c., in reference to garments, padded with stuffing, past participle adjective from stuff-
(v.). Hence stuffed shirt pompous, ineffectual person (1913).


stuffing (n.)

1520s, material used for filling a cushion; 1530s, seasoned mixture used to stuff fowls before
cooking, verbal noun from stuff (v.) in the sense fill the inside of a bird before cooking (late
14c.).


stuffy (adj.)

1550s, full of stuff, full of substance (obsolete); 1831 as poorly ventilated; from stuff (n.) + -y
(2). Sense of pompous, smug is from 1895. Related: Stuffily; stuffiness.


Stuka (n.)

German dive bomber of World War II, 1940, from German shortening of Sturzkampfflugzeug, from Sturz
fall + Kampf battle + Flugzeug aircraft.


stultification (n.)

1803, noun of action from stultify.


stultify (v.)

1766, allege to be of unsound mind (legal term), from Late Latin stultificare turn into foolishness,
from Latin stultus foolish (literally uneducated, unmovable, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). The first element is cognate with Latin stolidus slow,
dull, obtuse (see stolid). Meaning cause to appear foolish or absurd is from 1809. Hence stultiloquy
foolish talk, silly babbling (1650s). Related: Stultified; stultifying.


stumble (v.)

c.1300, to trip or miss one's footing (physically or morally), probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare dialectal Norwegian stumla, Swedish stambla to stumble), probably from a variant of the
Proto-Germanic base *stam-, source of Old English stamerian to stammer, German stumm, Dutch stom
dumb, silent. Possibly influenced in form by stumpen to stumble, but the -b- may be purely
euphonious. Meaning to come (upon) by chance is attested from 1550s. Related: Stumbled; stumbling.
Stumbling-block first recorded 1526 (Tindale), used in Rom. xiv:13, where usually it translates
Greek skandalon.


stumble (n.)

1540s, act of stumbling, from stumble (v.). Meaning a failure, false step is from 1640s.


stumblebum (n.)

alcoholic derelict, 1932, from stumble (v.) + bum (n.2).


stump (n.)

part of a tree trunk left in the ground after felling, mid-15c. (implied from late 13c. in
surnames); from mid-14c. as remaining part of a severed arm or leg; from or cognate with Middle Low
German stump (from adjective meaning mutilated, blunt, dull), Middle Dutch stomp stump, from Proto-
Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stumpr, Old High German stumph, German stumpf stump, German
Stummel piece cut off), from PIE *stebh- post, stem; to support  (see step (v.).


stump (v.)

early 13c., to stumble over a tree-stump or other obstacle (obsolete), from the source of stump
(n.). From 1590s as reduce to a stump. Sense of walk stiffly and clumsily is first recorded c.1600.
Sense of baffle, bring to a halt by obstacles or impediments is first recorded 1807, American
English, perhaps in reference to plowing newly cleared land, but compare earlier sense to challenge,
dare (1766).    Meaning go on a speaking tour during a political campaign is from 1838, American
English, from phrase stump speech (1820), large tree stumps being a natural perch for rural orators
(this custom is attested from 1775), especially in new settlements. Related: Stumped; stumping.


stumpy (adj.)

c.1600, from stump (n.) + -y (2). In reference to persons of stump-like figure, from 1822.


stun (v.)

early 14c., to daze or render unconscious (from a blow, powerful emotion, etc.), probably a
shortening of Old French estoner to stun (see astonish). Related: Stunned; stunning.


stung

past tense and past participle of sting (v.).


stunk

past tense and past participle of stink (v.).


stunner (n.)

1829, in pugilism, agent noun from stun. Meaning beautiful woman attested by 1848 on notion of one
who astounds or amazes.


stunning (adj.)

1660s, dazzling, present participle adjective from stun (v.). Popularized for splendid, excellent
c.1849. Related: Stunningly.


stunt (v.)

check in growth, dwarf, 1650s, from verb uses of Middle English adjective stunnt foolish, from Old
English stunt short-witted, foolish (as in stuntspr&aelig;c foolish talk), from Proto-Germanic
*stuntaz (source of Old Norse stuttr short). Related: Stunted; stunting.


stunt (n.)

feat to attract attention, 1878, American English college sports slang, of uncertain origin.
Speculated to be a variant of colloquial stump dare, challenge (1871), or of German stunde,
literally hour. The movie stunt man is attested from 1930.


stupe (n.)

stupid person, 1762, shortening of stupid.


stupefaction (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin stupefactionem (nominative stupefactio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin stupefacere (see stupefy).


stupefy (v.)

early 15c., from Latin stupefacere make stupid or senseless, benumb, stun, from stupere be stunned
(see stupid) + facere to make (see factitious).


stupendous (adj.)

1660s, correction of earlier stupendious causing astonishment, astounding (1540s), from Late Latin
stupendus to be wondered at, gerundive of Latin stupere be stunned, be struck senseless, be aghast,
astounded, or amazed (see stupid). Related: Stupendously; stupendousness.


stupid (adj.)

1540s, mentally slow, lacking ordinary activity of mind, dull, inane, from Middle French stupide
(16c.) and directly from Latin stupidus amazed, confounded; dull, foolish, literally struck
senseless, from stupere be stunned, amazed, confounded, from PIE *stupe- hit, from root *(s)teu- (1)
to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Related: Stupidly; stupidness.    Native words for
this idea include negative compounds with words for wise (Old English unwis, unsnotor, ungleaw),
also dol (see dull (adj.)), and dysig (see dizzy (adj.)). Stupid retained its association with
stupor and its overtones of stunned by surprise, grief, etc. into mid-18c. The difference between
stupid and the less opprobrious foolish roughly parallels that of German t&ouml;richt vs. dumm but
does not exist in most European languages.


stupidity (n.)

1540s, want of intelligence, from Latin stupiditatem (nominative stupiditas) dullness, stupidity,
senselessness, from stupidus confounded, amazed; dull, foolish (see stupid). It also at various
times meant lack of feeling or emotion (1560s); stupor, numbness (c.1600).


stupor (n.)

late 14c., from Latin stupor insensibility, numbness, dullness, from stupere be stunned (see
stupid).


stuporous (adj.)

1843, from stupor + -ous. Related: Stuporously; stuporousness.


sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


sturgeon (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French sturgeon, Old French esturjon, from Frankish *sturjo- or another Germanic
source, from Proto-Germanic *sturjon- (cognates: Old High German sturio sturgeon, Old English
styria). Cognate with Lithuanian ersketras, Russian osetr sturgeon; the whole group is of obscure
origin, perhaps from a lost pre-Indo-European tongue of northern Europe, or from the root of stir
(v.). Medieval Latin sturio, Italian storione, Spanish esturion are Germanic loan-words.


Sturm und Drang (n.)

1844, literally storm and stress, late 18c. German romanticism period, taken from the title of a
1776 romantic drama by Friedrich Maximilian von Klinger (1752-1831), who gave it this name at the
suggestion of Christoph Kauffmann. See storm (n.) + throng (n.).


Sturmabteilung (n.)

1923, from German, literally storm detachment; paramilitary force of the Nazi Party, founded 1921,
repressed 1934, also know by its initials, S.A.; also see Brown Shirt.


stutter (v.)

1560s, frequentative form of stutt to stutter, from Middle English stutten to stutter, stammer (late
14c.), cognate with Middle Low German stoten to knock, strike against, collide, from Proto-Germanic
*staut- push, thrust (cognates: Old English stotan, Old High German stozan, Gothic stautan to push,
thrust), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to hit, beat, knock against (see steep (adj.)). The noun is attested
from 1854. Related: Stuttered; stuttering; stutterer.


sty (n.1)

pen for pigs, Old English sti, stig hall, pen (as in sti-fearh sty-pig), from Proto-Germanic *stijan
(cognates: Old Norse stia sty, kennel, Danish sti, Swedish stia pen for swine, sheep, goats, etc.,
Old High German stiga pen for small cattle). Meaning filthy hovel is from 1590s.


sty (n.2)

inflamed swelling in the eyelid, 1610s, probably a back-formation from Middle English styany (as
though sty on eye), mid-15c., from Old English stigend sty, literally riser, from present participle
of stigan go up, rise, from Proto-Germanic *stigan, from PIE root *steigh- to stride, step, rise
(see stair).


sty (v.)

go up, ascend (obsolete), Old English stigan (past tense stah, past participle stigun, common
Germanic (Old Norse, Old Frisian stiga, Middle Dutch stighen, Old Saxon, Old High German stigan,
German steigen, Gothic steigan), from PIE root *steigh-  go, rise, stride, step, walk (see stair).


Stygian (adj.)

pertaining to Styx or the nether world, 1560s, from Latin Stygius, from Greek Stygios, from Styx
(genitive Stygos); see Styx.


style (n.)

early 14c., stile, writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative,
treatise; also characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression, and way of
life, manner, behavior, conduct, from Old French stile, estile style, fashion, manner; a stake,
pale, from Latin stilus stake, instrument for writing, manner of writing, mode of expression,
perhaps from the same source as stick (v.)). Spelling modified incorrectly by influence of Greek
stylos pillar, which probably is not directly related. As distinguished from substance, 1570s.
Meaning mode of dress is from 1814.


style (v.)

c.1500, address with a title; 1560s, to give a name to, from style (n.). Meaning to arrange in
(fashionable) style (especially of hair) is attested from 1934. Slang sense of act or play in a
showy way is by 1974, U.S. Black slang. Related: Styled; styling.


stylet (n.)

1690s in surgical and scientific senses, from French stylet, from Italian, from Latin stylus (see
style (n.)).


stylish (adj.)

conformable to approved fashion or taste, 1795, from style (n.) + -ish. Good is understood. Related:
Stylishly; stylishness.


stylist (n.)

1795 of writers distinguished for excellence or individuality of style; 1937 of hairdressers, from
style (n.) + -ist.


stylistic (adj.)

of or relating to style, 1843; see style (n.) + -istic.


stylite (n.)

ascetic living on the top of a pillar, 1630s, from Ecclesiastical Greek stylites, from stylos pillar
(see stet).


stylize (v.)

1894 (implied in stylized), from style (n.) + -ize. Perhaps a translation of German stilisieren.


stylus (n.)

1728, stem-like part of a flower pistil, alteration of Latin stilus stake, stylus; spelling
influenced by Greek stylos pillar (see stet). Meaning instrument for writing is from 1807.


stymie (v.)

1857, in golf, from stymie (n.) condition in which an opponent's ball blocks the hole (1834),
perhaps from Scottish stymie person who sees poorly, from stime the least bit (early 14c.), of
uncertain origin. General sense of block, hinder, thwart is from 1902. Related: Stymied.


styptic (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French stiptique or directly from Latin stypticus astringent, from Greek styptikos,
from styphein to constrict, draw together. As a noun, c.1400, from Late Latin stypticum. Related:
Styptical.


styrene (n.)

colorless hydrocarbon, 1885, from Styrax, name of a genus of trees (the chemical is found in their
resin), 1786, from Latin styrax, from Greek styrax, the tree name, of Semitic origin (compare Hebrew
tsori terebinth resin). Form influenced by Greek styrax shaft of a lance.


Styrofoam (n.)

1950, trademark name (Dow Chemical Co.), from -styr- (from polystyrene) + connective -o- + foam
(n.).


Styx

late 14c., the Greek river of the Underworld, literally the Hateful, cognate with Greek stygos
hatred, stygnos gloomy, from stygein to hate, abominate, from PIE *stug-, extended form of root
*steu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat. Oaths sworn by it were supremely binding and even the gods
feared to break them. The adjective is Stygian.


suasion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French suasion (14c.) and directly from Latin suasionem (nominative suasio) a
recommending, advocacy, support, noun of action from past participle stem of suadere to urge,
incite, promote, advise, persuade, literally recommend as good (related to suavis sweet), from PIE
*swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). Survives chiefly in phrase moral suasion (1640s). Latin
Suada was the goddess of persuasion.


suasive (adj.)

c.1600, from Middle French suasif, or else formed in English from Latin suasus (see suasion) + -ive.
Related: Suasively; suasiveness.


suave (adj.)

early 15c., gracious, kindly, pleasant, delightful, from Latin suavis agreeable, sweet, pleasant (to
the senses), delightful, from PIE root *swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). In reference to
persons, sense of smoothly agreeable first recorded 1815 (implied in suavity). Related: Suavely.


suavity (n.)

c.1400, pleasantness, delightfulness; kindness, gentleness, from Latin suavitatem (nominative
suavitas) sweetness, agreeableness, from suavis (see suave). Some later senses are from French
suavit&#233;, from Old French soavite gentleness, sweetness, softness, from the Latin word.


sub (n.)

shortened form of substitute (n.), 1830; the verb in this sense is from 1853. Related: Subbed;
subbing. From 1917 as short for submarine (n.).


sub judice

Latin, literally under a judge, from ablative singular of iudex judge, from iudicare (see judge
(v.)). Under judicial consideration, hence not yet decided.


sub rosa

privately, secretly, Latin, literally under the rose, which was regarded as a symbol of secrecy.


sub voce

Latin, literally under the word or heading. A common dictionary reference, usually abbreviated s.v.


sub-

word-forming element meaning under, beneath; behind; from under; resulting from further division,
from Latin preposition sub under, below, beneath, at the foot of, also close to, up to, towards; of
time, within, during; figuratively subject to, in the power of; also a little, somewhat (as in sub-
horridus somewhat rough).    This is said to be from PIE *(s)up- (perhaps representing *ex-upo-), a
variant form of the root *upo- from below, hence turning upward, upward, up, up from under, over,
beyond (cognates: Sanskrit upa near, under, up to, on, Greek hypo under, Gothic iup, Old Norse, Old
English upp up, upward, Hittite up-zi rises). The Latin word also was used as a prefix and in
various combinations.    In Latin assimilated to following -c-, -f-, -g-, -p-, and often -r- and
-m-. In Old French the prefix appears in the full Latin form only in learned adoptions of old Latin
compounds [OED], and in popular use it was represented by sous-, sou-; as in French souvenir from
Latin subvenire, souscrire (Old French souzescrire) from subscribere, etc.    The original meaning
is now obscured in many words from Latin (suggest, suspect, subject, etc.). The prefix is active in
Modern English, sometimes meaning subordinate (as in subcontractor); inferior (17c., as in
subhuman); smaller (18c.); a part or division of (c.1800, as in subcontinent).


sub-acute (adj.)

also subacute, 1752, from sub- + acute.


sub-aqueous (adj.)

also subaqueous, 1670s, from sub- + aqueous.


sub-arctic (adj.)

1834, from sub- + arctic.


sub-atomic (adj.)

also subatomic, 1874, from sub-atom (1868, from sub- + atom) + -ic.


sub-category (n.)

also subcategory, 1855, from sub- + category (n.).


sub-deb (n.)

girl who will soon 'come out;' hence, girl in her mid-teens, 1917, from sub- + deb.


sub-giant (n.)

also subgiant, in astronomy, of stars, 1937, from sub- + giant (n.).


sub-machine gun (n.)

light, portable machine gun, 1926, from sub- + machine gun.


sub-Saharan (adj.)

1955, from sub- + Saharan (see Sahara).


subaltern (n.)

junior military officer, 1680s, earlier more generally, person of inferior rank (c.1600), noun use
of adjective subaltern having an inferior position, subordinate (1580s), from Middle French
subalterne, from Late Latin subalternus, from Latin sub under (see sub-) + alternus every other
(one), one after the other (see alternate (adj.)).


subclass (n.)

also sub-class, 1802, from sub- + class (n.).


subcommittee (n.)

also sub-committee, c.1600, from sub- + committee.


subconscious (adj.)

1823, not wholly conscious, feebly conscious (implied in subconsciously), from sub- + conscious.
First attested in De Quincey. The noun, in the psychological sense (mental processes taking place
without consciousness), is attested from 1886, from adjectival sense occurring in the mind, but not
in consciousness; earlier noun was subconsciousness (1845).


subcontinent (n.)

also sub-continent, 1845, from sub- + continent (n.). Related: Subcontinental.


subcontract (n.)

also sub-contract, contract for carrying out all or part of a previous contract, 1817, from sub- +
contract (n.). As a verb from 1828 (in Shakespeare it means be betrothed again). Related:
Subcontracted; subcontracting.


subcontractor (n.)

1810, from sub- + contractor, or else an agent noun from subcontract.


subculture (n.)

1886, in reference to bacterial cultures, from sub- + culture (n.). From 1922 in reference to human
cultures.


subcutaneous (adj.)

also sub-cutaneous, under the skin, 1650s, from sub- + cutaneous. Related: Subcutaneously.


subdenomination (n.)

also sub-denomination, 1620s, from sub- + denomination.


subdivide (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), from Late Latin subdividere from sub in the sense of resulting from further
division (see sub-) + Latin dividere (see division). Intransitive sense is from 1590s.


subdivision (n.)

early 15c., process of dividing into smaller parts; mid-15c., portion of land that has been divided,
noun of action from subdivide. Sense of plot of land broken into lots for housing development is
from 1911.


subdominant (n.)

also sub-dominant, 1793, in music, from sub- + dominant (n.).


subduce (v.)

mid-15c., to delete; 1540s, to withdraw oneself (from a place, allegiance, etc.), from Latin
subducere to draw away, withdraw, remove, from sub- (see sub-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)).
Related: Subduced; subducing.


subduct (v.)

1570s, subtract, from Latin subductus, past participle of subducere to draw away, take away (see
subduce). Geological sense is from 1971, a back-formation from subduction. Related: Subducted;
subducting.


subduction (n.)

early 15c., withdrawal, removal (originally of noxious substances from the body), from Latin
subductionem (nominative subductio) a withdrawal, drawing up, hauling ashore, noun of action from
past participle stem of subducere to draw away, take away (see subduce). Geological sense is
attested from 1970, from French (1951).


subdue (v.)

late 14c., to conquer and reduce to subjection, from Old French souduire, but this meant deceive,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, lead away, carry off; withdraw (see subduce). The primary
sense in English seems to have been taken in Anglo-French from Latin subdere and attached to this
word. Related: Subdued; subduing. As an associated noun, subdual is attested from 1670s (subduction
having acquired other senses).


subdued (adj.)

c.1600, subjugated, past participle adjective from subdue. Meaning calmed down, reduced in intensity
is recorded from 1822.


subfusc (adj.)

moderately dark, brownish, 1710, from Latin subfuscus, variant of suffuscus, from sub- (see sub-) +
fuscus dark, dusky (see obfuscate). Related: Subfuscous dusky.


subgroup (n.)

also sub-group, 1825, from sub- + group (n.).


subhead (n.)

smaller heading or title in a book, chapter, newspaper, etc., 1875, from sub- + head (n.) in the
sense of heading, headline. Meaning subordinate section of a subject is from 1670s.


subhuman (adj.)

1790, from sub- + human. The noun is first recorded 1957.


subjacent (adj.)

1590s, from Latin subiacentem (nominative subiacens) lying beneath, present participle of subiacere
to lie underneath, lie near, adjoin, from sub- under, also close to (see sub-) + iacere to throw
(see jet (v.)).


subject (n.)

early 14c., person under control or dominion of another, specifically a government or ruler, from
Old French sogit, suget, subget a subject person or thing (12c., Modern French sujet), from noun use
of Latin subiectus lying under, below, near bordering on, figuratively subjected, subdued, past
participle of subicere, subiicere to place under, throw under, bind under; to make subject,
subordinate, from sub under (see sub-) + combining form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). In 14c.,
sugges, sogetis, subgit, sugette; form re-Latinized in English 16c.    Meaning person or thing
regarded as recipient of action, one that may be acted upon is recorded from 1590s. Grammatical
sense is recorded from 1630s, from Latin subjectum grammatical subject, noun use of the neuter of
the Latin past participle. Likewise some restricted uses in logic and philosophy are borrowed
directly from Latin subjectum as foundation or subject of a proposition, a loan-translation of
Aristotle's to hypokeimenon. Meaning subject matter of an art or science is attested from 1540s,
probably short for subject matter (late 14c.), which is from Medieval Latin subjecta materia, a loan
translation of Greek hypokeimene hyle (Aristotle), literally that which lies beneath.


subject (v.)

late 14c., to make (a person or nation) subject to another by force, also to render submissive or
dependent, from Medieval Latin subiectare place beneath, frequentative of Latin subicere to make
subject, subordinate (see subject (n.)). Meaning to lay open or expose to (some force or occurrence)
is recorded from early 15c. (implied in subjected). Related: Subjecting.


subject (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French suget, subject (Modern French sujet), from Latin subiectus (see subject
(n.)).


subjectification (n.)

1880, noun of action from subjectify.


subjectify (v.)

1858, from subject (n.) + -ify. Related: Subjectified; subjectifying.


subjection (n.)

late 14c., obedience, submission; servitude, bondage; lordship, control, from Anglo-French
subjectioun, Old French subjection submission; subjugation; inferior condition; captivity (12c.,
Modern French suj&#233;tion), from Latin subjectionem (nominative subjectio) a putting under, noun
of action from past participle stem of subicere (see subject (n.)).


subjective (adj.)

c.1500, characteristic of one who is submissive or obedient, from Late Latin subiectivus of the
subject, subjective, from subiectus lying under, below, near bordering on, figuratively subjected,
subdued(see subject (n.)). In early Modern English as existing, real; more restricted meaning
existing in the mind (the mind as the thinking subject) is from 1707, popularized by Kant and his
contemporaries; thus, in art and literature, personal, idiosyncratic (1767). Related: Subjectively;
subjectiveness.


subjectivism (n.)

1845; see subjective + -ism. Recorded earlier in German (and Swedish). Related: Subjectivist.


subjectivity (n.)

1803, from subjective + -ity. Popularized in Kantian terminology; compare French subjectivit&#233;,
German subjektivit&#228;t.


subjoin (v.)

add to the end of, 1570s, from Middle French subjoin-, past participle stem of subjoindre, from
Latin subjungere to affix, append (see subjunctive). Related: Subjoined; subjoining.


subjugable (adj.)

1850, from stem of Latin subiugare (see subjugation) + -able.


subjugate (v.)

early 15c., a back-formation from subjugation or else from Latin subiugatus, past participle of
subiugare to subjugate. Related: Subjugated; subjugating.


subjugation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin subiugationem (nominative subiugatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin subiugare to subdue, literally bring under the yoke, from sub under (see
sub-) + iugum (see jugular).


subjugator (n.)

1795, agent noun in Latin form from subjugate.


subjunctive (n.)

mood employed to denote an action or state as conceived and not as a fact, 1620s, from earlier
adjectival use of subjunctive (1520s), from Late Latin subiunctivus serving to join, connecting,
from subiunct-, past participle stem of Latin subiungere to append, add at the end, place under,
from sub under (see sub-) + iungere to join (see jugular). The Latin modus subiunctivus probably is
a grammarians' loan-translation of Greek hypotaktike enklisis subordinated, so called because the
Greek subjunctive mood is used almost exclusively in subordinate clauses.


sublease (n.)

also sub-lease, 1826, from sub- + lease (n.). As a verb from 1830s. Related: Subleased; subleasing.


sublet (v.)

1766, from sub- + let (v.).


sublimate (v.)

1590s, raise to a high place, back-formation from sublimation or else from Medieval Latin
sublimatus, past participle of sublimare to lift up. The word was used in English from 1560s as a
past participle adjective meaning purified, refined by sublimation. Chemical/alchemical sense of
heat a solid into vapor and allow it to cool again as a way of extracting a pure substance from
dross is from c.1600. Related: Sublimated; sublimating. As a noun from 1620s.


sublimation (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, process of purifying by vaporizing then allowing to cool, from Medieval Latin
sublimationem (nominative sublimatio) refinement, literally a lifting up, deliverance, noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin sublimare to raise, elevate, from sublimis lofty, high,
exalted; eminent, distinguished (see sublime).


sublime (adj.)

1580s, expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner, from Middle French sublime (15c.), or directly
from Latin sublimis uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished, possibly
originally sloping up to the lintel, from sub up to + limen lintel, threshold, sill (see limit
(n.)). The sublime (n.) the sublime part of anything, that which is stately or imposing is from
1670s. For Sublime Porte, former title of the Ottoman government, see Porte.


subliminal (adj.)

1873, below the threshold (of consciousness or sensation), formed from Latin stem of sublime (Latin
limen, genitive liminis) + -al (1)). Apparently a loan-translation of German unter der Schwelle (des
Bewusstseins) beneath the threshold (of consciousness), from Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776-1841),
author of a textbook on psychology published in 1824. The scare over subliminal advertising came in
1957. Related: Subliminally.


sublimity (n.)

early 15c., loftiness, exaltation, worthiness, nobility, glory, from Latin sublimitatem (nominative
sublimitas) loftiness, exaltation, from sublimis (see sublime).


sublingual (adj.)

1660s; see sub- + lingual. Compare French  sublingual (15c.). Related: Sublingually.


sublunary (adj.)

1590s, situated under the moon, hence earthly, mundane (old cosmology), from Modern Latin
sublunaris, from sub- (see sub-) + lunaris (see lunar).


subluxation (n.)

partial dislocation, 1680s, from Latin subluxationem (nominative subluxatio).


submarine (adj.)

1640s, from sub- + marine (adj.).


submarine (n.)

submarine boat, 1899, from submarine (adj.). Earlier a creature living under the sea (1703). The
short form sub is first recorded 1917. As a type of sandwich from 1955, so called from the shape of
the roll. Related: Submariner.


submerge (v.)

c.1600 (transitive), from French submerger (14c.) or directly from Latin submergere to plunge under,
sink, overwhelm, from sub under (see sub-) + mergere to plunge, immerse (see merge). Intransitive
meaning sink under water, sink out of sight is from 1650s, made common 20c. in connection with
submarines. Related: Submerged; submerging.


submerse (v.)

early 15c., to submerge, plunge (transitive), from Latin submersus, past participle of submergere
(see submerge). Modern use (18c.) might be a back-formation from submersion. Related: Submersed;
submersing.


submersible (adj.)

1862, from submerse or from Latin submers-, past participle stem of submergere + -ible. As a noun,
from 1900, a submersible craft. Alternative adjective submergible is attested from 1820, from
submerge.


submersion (n.)

early 15c., suffocation by being plunged into water, from Late Latin submersionem (nominative
submersio) a sinking, submerging, noun of action from past participle stem of submergere to sink
(see submerge). General sense from early 17c.


submission (n.)

late 14c., act of referring to a third party for judgment or decision, from Old French submission or
directly from Latin submissionem (nominative submissio) a lowering, letting down; sinking, noun of
action from past participle stem of submittere to let down, put down, lower, reduce, yield (see
submit).    Sense of humble obedience is first recorded mid-15c. Modern French submission has been
replaced by doublet soumission. English in 16c.-17c. also had an adjective submiss humble,
submissive.  Submissionist in various political historical contexts is from 1828.


submissive (adj.)

1580s, inclined to submit, yielding to authority, from Latin submiss-, past participle stem of
submittere (see submission) + -ive. Masochistic sexual sense is attested by 1969. As a noun in this
sense, by 1985. Related: Submissively; submissiveness.


submit (v.)

late 14c., to place (oneself) under the control of another, to yield oneself, from Latin submittere
to yield, lower, let down, put under, reduce, from sub under (see sub-) + mittere let go, send (see
mission). Transitive sense of refer to another for consideration first recorded 1550s. Related:
Submitted; submitting.


submittal (n.)

act or process of submitting, 1866, from submit (v.) + -ance. Marked rare in Century Dictionary and
OED. Submittance (17c.) also is used.


subnormal (adj.)

1875, from sub- + normal. The noun is from 1710 in geometry; 1916, of persons.


suboptimal (adj.)

also sub-optimal, 1901, from sub- + optimal. Related: Suboptimally.


suborbital (adj.)

also sub-orbital, 1803 of the eye; 1959 of a planet, from sub- + orbital (adj.). Related:
Suborbitally.


suborder (n.)

also sub-order, 1807 in biology; 1834 in architecture, from sub- + order (n.). Related: Subordinal.


subordinate (adj.)

mid-15c., having an inferior rank, from Medieval Latin subordinatus placed in a lower order, made
subject, past participle of subordinare place in a lower order, from Latin sub under (see sub-) +
ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain). Related: Subordinance; subordinant; subordinately. For
of or pertaining to the classificatory rank of a suborder, subordinal (1842) is used.


subordinate (v.)

to bring into a subordinate position to something else, to make of less value, to make auxiliary or
dependent, 1590s, from Medieval Latin subordinatus (see subordinate (adj.)). Related: Subordinated;
subordinating.


subordinate (n.)

one inferior in power, rank, office, etc., 1630s, from subordinate (adj.).


subordination (n.)

mid-15c., subordinacioun hierarchical arrangement, from Medieval Latin subordinationem (nominative
subordinatio), noun of action from past participle stem of subordinare (see subordinate (adj.)).
Meaning condition of being duly submissive is from 1736.


suborn (v.)

to procure unlawfully, to bribe to accomplish a wicked purpose, especially to induce a witness to
perjury, to lure (someone) to commit a crime, 1530s, from Middle French suborner seduce, instigate,
bribe (13c.) and directly from Latin subornare employ as a secret agent, incite secretly, originally
equip, fit out, furnish, from sub under, secretly (see sub-) + ornare equip, related to ordo order
(see order (n.)). Related: Suborned; suborning.


subornation (n.)

1520s, from Latin subornationem (nominative subornatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
subornare to provide, furnish; instigate(see suborn).


subpar (adj.)

also sub-par, 1896, from sub- + par.


subplot (n.)

also sub-plot, 1812 in literature, from sub- + plot (n.).


subpoena (n.)

early 15c., sub pena, from Medieval Latin sub poena under penalty, the first words of the writ
commanding the presence of someone under penalty of failure, from Latin sub under (see sub-) +
poena, ablative of poena penalty (see penal). The verb is attested from 1630s.


subprime (adj.)

also sub-prime, of loans, etc., by 1978, in frequent use from 1996, from sub- + prime (adj.).


subregion (n.)

also sub-region, 1830, from sub- + region (n.). Related: Subregional.


subreption (n.)

act of obtaining a favor by fraudulent suppression of facts, c.1600, from Latin subreptionem
(nominative subreptio), noun of action from past participle stem of subripere, surripere (see
surreptitious). Related: Subreptitious.


subrogate (v.)

to substitute, 1530s, from Latin subrogatus, variant of surrogatus, past participle of
subrogare/surrogare put in another's place, substitute, cause to be chosen in place of another (see
surrogate). Related: Subrogated; subrogating.


subrogation (n.)

early 15c., irregular or unlawful placement of someone in an office, from Middle French subrogation
and directly from Latin subrogationem (nominative subrogatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of subrogare (see subrogate).


subscribe (v.)

early 15c., to sign at the bottom of a document, from Latin subscribere write, write underneath,
sign one's name; register, also figuratively assent, agree to, approve, from sub underneath (see
sub-) + scribere write (see script (n.)). The meaning give one's consent (by subscribing one's name)
first recorded mid-15c.; that of contribute money to 1630s; and that of become a regular buyer of a
publication 1711, all originally literal. Related: Subscribed; subscribing.


subscriber (n.)

1590s, agent noun from subscribe.


subscript (n.)

1704, that which is written underneath, from Latin subscriptus, past participle of subscribere write
underneath (see subscribe).


subscription (n.)

c.1400, piece of writing at the end of a document, from Middle French subscription (Modern French
souscription) and directly from Latin subscriptionem (nominative subscriptio) anything written
underneath, a signature, noun of action from past participle stem of subscribere (see subscribe).
Meaning act of subscribing money is from 1640s.


subsection (n.)

also sub-section, 1620s, from sub- + section (n.).


subsequence (n.)

c.1500, from Late Latin subsequentia act of following, succession, from Latin subsequens (see
subsequent). Related: Subsequency.


subsequent (adj.)

following in time, later, mid-15c., from Middle French subsequent (14c.) and directly from Latin
subsequentem (nominative subsequens), present participle of subsequi come after in time, follow
closely, figuratively imitate, conform to, from sub closely, up to (see sub-) + sequi follow (see
suit (n.)). Related: Subsequently; subsequential.


subservience (n.)

1670s, from subservient + -ence. Related: Subserviency (1620s).


subservient (adj.)

1630s, useful, serviceable, from Latin subservientem (nominative subserviens), present participle of
subservire assist, serve, come to the help of, lend support, from sub under (see sub-) + servire
serve (see serve (v.)). The meaning slavishly obedient is first recorded 1794. Related:
Subserviently.


subset (n.)

also sub-set, subordinate set, 1897, originally in mathematics, from sub- + set (n.1).


subside (v.)

1680s, of objects, to sink to the bottom, from Latin subsidere sit down, settle, sink, fall; remain;
crouch down, squat, from sub down (see sub-) + sidere to settle, related to sedere to sit (see
sedentary). Of liquid surfaces, to sink to a lower level, be reduced from 1706. Related: Subsided;
subsiding.


subsidence (n.)

1650s, a settling to the bottom, from Latin subsidentia a settling down, from subsidens, from
subsidere (see subside (v.)).


subsidiarity (n.)

1936, from German Subsidiarit&auml;t, paraphrasing the Latin of Pius XI in his Quadragesimo Anno of
1931; see subsidiary + -ity.


subsidiary (adj.)

1540s, from Latin subsidiarius belonging to a reserve, of a reserve, reserved; serving to assist or
supplement, from subsidium a help, aid, relief, troops in reserve (see subsidy). As a noun, c.1600,
subsidiary thing. In Latin the word was used as a noun meaning the reserve.


subsidise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of subsidize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Subsidised;
subsidising.


subsidize (v.)

1755, from subsidy + -ize.  Originally to pay to hire (mercenaries, foreign troops, etc.), also of
nations, to buy neutrality or alliance. Meaning to bribe is from 1815. Meaning to support by grants
of (often government) money is from 1828. Related: Subsidized; subsidizing.


subsidy (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French subsidie, Old French subside help, aid, assistance, contribution, from
Latin subsidium a help, aid, assistance, (military) reinforcements, troops in reserve, from
subsidere to settle down, stay, remain (see subside).


subsist (v.)

1540s, to exist; c.1600, retain the existing state, from Middle French subsister and directly from
Latin subsistere to stand still or firm, take a stand, take position; abide, hold out, from sub
under, up to (see sub-) + sistere to assume a standing position, stand still, remain; set, place,
cause to stand still (see assist (v.)). Meaning to support oneself (in a certain way) is from 1640s.
Related: Subsisted; subsisting.


subsistence (n.)

early 15c., existence, independence, from Late Latin subsistentia substance, reality, in Medieval
Latin also stability, from Latin subsistens, present participle of subsistere stand still or firm
(see subsist). Latin subsistentia is a loan-translation of Greek hypostasis foundation, substance,
real nature, subject matter; that which settles at the bottom, sediment, literally anything set
under. In the English word, meaning act or process of support for physical life is from 1640s.


subsistent (adj.)

1520s, from Latin subsistentem (nominative subsistens), present participle of subsistere stand still
or firm (see subsistence).


subsoil (n.)

1799, from sub- + soil (n.).


subsonic (adj.)

also sub-sonic, 1937, from sub- + sonic. Compare supersonic.


subspecies (n.)

1690s, from sub- + species.


substance (n.)

c.1300, essential nature, real or essential part, from Old French sustance, substance goods,
possessions; nature, composition (12c.), from Latin substantia being, essence, material, from
substans, present participle of substare stand firm, stand or be under, be present, from sub up to,
under (see sub-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Latin substantia
translates Greek ousia that which is one's own, one's substance or property; the being, essence, or
nature of anything. Meaning any kind of corporeal matter is first attested mid-14c. Sense of the
matter of a study, discourse, etc. first recorded late 14c.


substandard (adj.)

also sub-standard, 1909, from sub- + standard (adj.).


substantial (adj.)

mid-14c., ample, sizeable, from Old French substantiel (13c.) and directly from Latin substantialis
having substance or reality, material, in Late Latin pertaining to the substance or essence, from
substantia being, essence, material(see substance). Meaning existing, having real existence is from
late 14c. Meaning involving an essential part or point is early 15c. Related: Substantially.


substantiate (v.)

1650s, to make real, to give substance to, from Modern Latin substantiatus, past participle of
substantiare, from Latin substantia being, essence, material (see substance). Meaning to demonstrate
or prove is attested from 1803. Related: Substantiated; substantiating.


substantiation (n.)

1760, embodiment; 1832, the making good of a statement, the act of proving, noun of action from
substantiate.


substantive (adj.)

mid-15c., standing by itself, from Old French substantif, from Late Latin substantivus of substance
or being, self-existent, from Latin substantia being, essence, material (see substance). The
grammatical term (late 14c.) was introduced by the French to denote the noun in contradistinction to
the adjective, from Latin nomen substantivum name or word of substance. Related: Substantival;
substantively.


substantive (n.)

in grammatical use, late 14c., short for noun substantive, from Late Latin substantivium, neuter of
substantivus of substance or being (see substantive (adj.)). Latin nomen substantivum was name or
word of substance.


substation (n.)

also sub-station, 1864 in the policing sense, from sub- + station (n.). Power grid sense is attested
from 1889.


substitute (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), from Latin substitutus, past participle of substituere put in place of
another (see substitution). Transitive use is from 1888. Related: Substituted; substituting.


substitute (n.)

one who acts in place of another, early 15c., from Middle French substitut (noun use) and directly
from Latin substitutus, past participle of substituere put in place of another (see substitution).
Military draft sense is from 1777, American English. Team sports sense is from 1849. Of foodstuffs,
from 1879. As an adjective from early 15c.


substitution (n.)

late 14c., appointment of a subordinate or successor, from Middle French substitution or directly
from Late Latin substitutionem (nominative substitutio) a putting in place of (another), noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin substituere put in place of another, place under or next
to, present, submit, from sub under (see sub-) + statuere set up, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with
derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet).


substract (v.)

to subtract, 1540s, now illiterate [OED], An erroneous form of subtract, common in vulger use
[Century Dictionary], from Modern Latin substractus, past participle of substrahere, alternative
form of subtrahere (see subtraction). Related: Subtracted; subtracting.


substrate (n.)

1810, from Modern Latin substratum (see substratum).


substratum (n.)

1630s, from Modern Latin substratum (plural substrata), noun use of neuter singular past participle
of Latin substernere to spread underneath, from sub- (see sub-) + sternere (see stratum).


substructure (n.)

1726, foundation, part of a building which supports another part, from sub- + structure (n.).
Earlier in this sense was substruction (1620s). Related: Substructural.


subsume (v.)

1530s, from Modern Latin subsumere to take under, from Latin sub under (see sub-) + sumere to take
(see exempt (adj.)). Related: Subsumed; subsuming, subsumption.


subtend (v.)

1560s, from Latin subtendere to stretch underneath, from sub under (see sub-) + tendere to stretch
(see tenet). Related: Subtended; subtending.


subterfuge (n.)

1570s, from Middle French subterfuge (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin subterfugium an evasion,
from Latin subterfugere to evade, escape, flee by stealth, from subter beneath, below; in compounds
secretly (from PIE *sup-ter-, suffixed (comparative) form of *(s)up-; see sub-) + fugere flee (see
fugitive).


subterranean (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin subterraneus underground, from sub under (see sub-) + terra earth, the ground
(see terrain) + -an.


subtext (n.)

underlying theme of a work of literature, 1950, from sub- + text (n.). Originally a term in
Konstantin Stanislavsky's theory of acting. Earlier it was used in a literally sense of text
appearing below other text on  a page (1726). Latin subtextere meant to weave under, work in below.


subtile (adj.)

late 14c., clever, dexterous, crafty; not dense, thin, rarefied, from Old French subtil (14c.), a
learned Latinized reformation of earlier sotil (12c.), source of subtle (q.v.). Still used in some
Bible translations in Gen. iii:1, and it survived after 17c. as a parallel formation to subtle in
some material senses (fine, delicate, thin).


subtility (n.)

late 14c., acuteness, skill, cunning, alteration of subtlety (q.v.) on model of subtile, or else
from Old French subtilite, from Latin subtilitas fineness, simplicity.


subtitle (n.)

also sub-title, 1825, subordinate or additional title, usually explanatory, in reference to literary
works, from sub- under + title (n.). Applied to motion pictures by 1908. As a verb from 1858.
Related: Subtitled.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


subtlety (n.)

c.1300, sotilte, skill, ingenuity, from Old French sotilte skillfulness, cunning (Modern French
subtilit&#233;), from Latin subtilitatem (nominative subtilitas) fineness; simplicity, slenderness,
noun of quality from subtilis fine, thin, delicate (see subtle). From late 14c. as cleverness,
shrewdness; trickery, guile, craftiness, also thinness, slenderness, smallness; rarity. The -b-
begins to appear late 14c. in English, in imitation of Latin.


subtly (adv.)

early 14c., sotylleche; see subtle + -ly (2).


subtotal (n.)

1906, from sub- + total (n.). The verb is attested from 1916.


subtract (v.)

1530s, withdraw, withhold, take away, deduct, a back-formation from subtraction (q.v.), or else from
Latin subtractus, past participle of subtrahere take away, draw off. Related: Subtracted;
subtracting. Mathematical calculation sense is from 1550s. Earlier verb form was subtraien (early
15c. in the mathematical sense), which is directly from the Latin verb.    Here he teches &thorn;e
Craft how &thorn;ou schalt know, whan &thorn;ou hast subtrayd, whe&thorn;er &thorn;ou hast wel ydo
or no. [Craft of Numbering, c.1425]


subtraction (n.)

c.1400, withdrawal, removal, from Late Latin subtractionem (nominative subtractio) a drawing back,
taking away, from past participle stem of Latin subtrahere take away, draw off, draw from below,
from sub from under (see sub-) + trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). The mathematical sense is
attested from early 15c.  &THORN;ou most know &thorn;at subtraccion is drawynge of one nowmber oute
of ano&thorn;er nomber. [The Crafte of Nombrynge, c.1425]


subtrahend (n.)

1670s, from Latin subtrahendus (numerus) (number) to be subtracted, from gerundive of subtrahere
take away, draw off (see subtraction).


subtropical (adj.)

1830, from sub- + tropical.


suburb (n.)

early 14c., area outside a town or city, whether agricultural or residential but most frequently
residential, from Old French suburbe suburb of a town, from Latin suburbium an outlying part of a
city (especially Rome), from sub below, near (see sub-) + urbs (genitive urbis) city (see urban).
Glossed in Old English as underburg. Just beyond the reach of municipal jurisdiction, suburbs had a
bad reputation in 17c. England, especially those of London, and suburban had a sense of inferior,
debased, licentious (as in suburban sinner, slang for loose woman, prostitute). By 1817, the tinge
had shifted to of inferior manners and narrow views. Compare also French equivalent faubourg.
[T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life
is carried on without the discipline of rural occupations and without the cultural resources that
the Central District of the city still retains. [Lewis Mumford, 1922]


suburban (adj.)

1620s, from suburb + -an. Somewhat earlier were suburbian, suburbial (c.1600). Latin had suburbanus
near the city (of Rome), and in Church Latin suburbicarian was applied to the six diocese near Rome.


suburbanite (n.)

1862, from suburban + -ite (1). Middle English used suburban (n.) in this sense (mid-14c.). An Old
English word for suburbanites was underburhware.


suburbanization (n.)

1898, noun of action from suburbanize. Also suburbanisation.


suburbanize (v.)

1888 (implied in suburbanized), from suburban + -ize. Related: Suburbanizing. Also suburbanise.


suburbia (n.)

1876, from suburb + -ia, perhaps on the model of utopia.


subvention (n.)

early 15c., from Old French subvencion support, assistance, taxation (14c.), from Late Latin
subventionem (nominative subventio) assistance, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
subvenire come to one's aid, assist, reinforce, from sub up to (see sub-) + venire to come (see
venue).


subversion (n.)

late 14c., physical destruction, demolition, ruination; overthrow of a system or law, from Old
French subversion downfall, overthrow (12c.), from Late Latin subversionem (nominative subversio) an
overthrow, ruin, destruction, noun of action from past participle stem of subvertere (see subvert).


subversive (adj.)

1640s, from Latin subvers-, past participle stem of subvertere (see subvert) + -ive. As a noun,
attested from 1887. Related: Subversively; subversiveness.


subvert (v.)

late 14c., to raze, destroy, overthrow, undermine, overturn, from Old French subvertir overthrow,
destroy (13c.), or directly from Latin subvertere to turn upside down, overturn, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Subverted; subverting.


subway (n.)

1825, underground passage (for water pipes or pedestrians, later for electrical wires), from sub- +
way (n.). The sense of underground railway in a city is first recorded 1892, in reference to London.


suc-

the usual form of sub- before -c-, an assimiliation from Latin.


succedaneum (n.)

substitute, 1640s, from neuter of Latin succedaneus succeeding, acting as substitute (see succeed).
Especially of inferior drugs substituted for better ones. Related: Succedaneous.


succeed (v.)

late 14c., intransitive and transitive, come next after, follow after another; take the place of
another, be elected or chosen for a position, from Old French succeder to follow on (14c.) and
directly from Latin succedere come after, follow after; go near to; come under; take the place of,
also go from under, mount up, ascend, hence get on well, prosper, be victorious, from sub next to,
after (see sub-) + cedere go, move (see cede).    Meaning to continue, endure is from early 15c. The
sense of turn out well, have a favorable result in English is first recorded late 15c., with
ellipsis of adverb (succeed well). Of persons, to be successful, from c.1500. Related: Succeeded;
succeeding.


success (n.)

1530s, result, outcome, from Latin successus an advance, a coming up; a good result, happy outcome,
noun use of past participle of succedere come after (see succeed). Meaning accomplishment of desired
end (good success) first recorded 1580s. Meaning a thing or person which succeeds, especially in
public, is from 1882.  The moral flabbiness born of the bitch-goddess SUCCESS. That -- with the
squalid interpretation put on the word success -- is our national disease. [William James to H.G.
Wells, Sept. 11, 1906] Success story is attested from 1902. Among the French phrases reported by OED
as in use in English late 19c. were succ&egrave;s d'estime cordial reception given to a literary
work out of respect rather than admiration and succ&egrave;s de scandale success (especially of a
work of art) dependent upon its scandalous character.


successful (adj.)

1580s, from success + -ful. Originally having or resulting in any kind of success; since late 19c.
it has tended to mean wealthy, resulting in financial prosperity unless otherwise indicated.
Related: Successfully.


succession (n.)

early 14c., fact or right of succeeding someone by inheritance, from Old French succession
inheritance; a following on (13c.), from Latin successionem (nominative successio) a following
after, a coming into another's place, result, noun of action from successus, past participle of
succedere (see succeed). Meaning fact of being later in time is late 14c. Meaning a regular sequence
is from mid-15c.


successive (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin successivus successive, from success-, stem of Latin succedere to
come after (see succeed). Related: Successively.


successor (n.)

one who comes after, late 13c., from Anglo-French successor and Old French successour successor,
heir (12c., Modern French successeur), from Latin successor follower, successor, agent noun from
past participle stem of succedere to come after (see succeed).


succinct (adj.)

early 15c., having one's belt fastened tightly, from Middle French succincte, from Latin succinctus
prepared, ready; contracted, short, past participle of succingere tuck up (clothes for action), gird
from below, from assimilated form of sub up from under (see sub-) + cingere to gird (see cinch
(n.)). Sense of brief, concise first recorded 1530s. Related: Succinctness.


succinctly (adv.)

1530s, from succinct + -ly (2).


succinite (n.)

1816, amber-colored mineral, from -ite (1) + Latin succinum amber, which Klein calls a loan word
from a Northern European language that has been assimilated in form to Latin succus, sucus juice,
sap. Related: Succinic, from French succinique.


succor (n.)

c.1200, socour, earlier socours aid, help, from Anglo-French succors help, aid, Old French socors,
sucurres aid, help, assistance (Modern French secours), from Medieval Latin succursus help,
assistance, from past participle of Latin succurrere run to help, hasten to the aid of, from
assimilated form of sub up to (see sub-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Final -s mistaken in
English as a plural inflection and dropped late 13c. Meaning one who aids or helps is from c.1300.


succor (v.)

late 13c., help or relieve when in difficulty, from Old French succurre to help, assist (Modern
French secourir), from Latin succerrere to help, assist (see succor (n.)). Related: Succored;
succoring.


succotash (n.)

1751, from a word in a Southern New England Algonquian language, such as Narragansett misckquatash
boiled whole kernels of corn. Used by 1793 in New England in reference to a dish of boiled corn and
green beans (especially lima beans).


succour

chiefly British English spelling of succor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


succubus (n.)

late 14c., alteration (after incubus, giving a masc. form to a word generally felt as of female
meaning) of Late Latin succuba strumpet, applied to a fiend (generally in female form) having sexual
connection with men in their sleep, from succubare to lie under, from sub- under (see sub-) + cubare
to lie down (see cubicle). Related: Succubine (adj.).


succulence (n.)

1787, from succulent + -ence. Related: Succulency (1610s).


succulent (adj.)

c.1600, from French succulent (16c.), from Latin succulentus having juice, juicy, from succus juice,
sap; related to sugere to suck, and possibly cognate with Old English socian to soak, sucan to suck
(see sup (v.2)). The noun meaning plant with juicy tissues is from 1825.


succumb (v.)

late 15c., from Old French succomber succumb, die, lose one's (legal) case, and directly from Latin
succumbere submit, surrender, yield, be overcome; sink down; lie under; cohabit with, from sub down
(see sub-) + -cumbere take a reclining position, related to cubare lie down (see cubicle).
Originally transitive; sense of sink under pressure is first recorded c.1600. As a euphemism for to
die, from 1849. Related: Succumbed; succumbing.


such (adj.)

c.1200, Old English swylc, swilc just as, as, in like manner; as if, as though; such a one, he
(pronoun and adjective), from a Proto-Germanic compound *swalikaz so formed (cognates: Old Saxon
sulik, Old Norse slikr, Old Frisian selik, Middle Dutch selc, Dutch zulk, Old High German sulih,
German solch, Gothic swaleiks), from swa so (see so) + *likan form, source of Old English gelic
similar (see like (adj.)). Colloquial suchlike (early 15c.) is pleonastic.


suck (v.)

Old English sucan to suck, from a Germanic root of imitative origin (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High
German sugan, Old Norse suga, Danish suge, Swedish suga, Middle Dutch sughen, Dutch zuigen, German
saugen to suck), possibly from the same source as Latin sugere to suck, succus juice, sap; Old Irish
sugim, Welsh sugno to suck; see sup (v.2). As a noun from c.1300.    Meaning do fellatio is first
recorded 1928. Slang sense of be contemptible first attested 1971 (the underlying notion is of
fellatio). Related: Sucked; sucking. Suck eggs is from 1906. Suck hind tit be inferior is American
English slang first recorded 1940.    The old, old saying that the runt pig always sucks the hind
teat is not so far wrong, as it quite approximates the condition that exists. [The Chester White
Journal, April 1921]


sucker (n.)

young mammal before it is weaned, late 14c., agent noun from suck. Slang meaning person who is
easily deceived is first attested 1836, American English, on notion of naivete; but another theory
traces the slang meaning to the fish called a sucker (1753), on the notion of being easy to catch in
their annual migrations (the fish so called from the shape of its mouth). As a type of candy from
1823; especially lollipop by 1907. Meaning shoot from the base of a tree or plant is from 1570s.
Also the old name of inhabitants of Illinois.


sucker (v.)

to deceive, to make a dupe of, 1939, from sucker (n.) in the related sense. Related: Suckered;
suckering.


suckerpunch (n.)

also sucker-punch, 1926, from sucker in the dupe sense + punch (n.3). Figurative use by 1929. As a
verb by 1942. Related: Sucker-punched.


suckle (v.)

c.1400, perhaps a causative or frequentative form of Middle English suken to suck (see suck), but
OED suggests instead a back-formation from suckling (though this word is attested only from mid-
15c.). Related: Suckled; suckling.


suckling (n.)

mid-15c., infant at the breast, from suck + diminutive suffix -ling. Similar formation in Middle
Dutch sogeling, Dutch zuigeling, German S&auml;ugling. Meaning calf or other young mammal is from
1520s. Meaning act of breast-feeding is attested from 1799. Adjectival sense not yet weaned is from
1799.


sucre (n.)

monetary unit of Ecuador, 1886, named for Antonio Jos&eacute; de Sucre (1795-1830), Venezuelan
general and liberator of Ecuador.


sucro-

before vowels sucr-, scientific word-forming element meaning sugar, from Latinized form of French
sucre sugar (see sugar (n.)).


sucrose (n.)

cane-sugar, white crystalline sugar used as a sweetener, 1857, from French sucre sugar (see sugar
(n.)) + chemical suffix -ose (2).


suction (n.)

1620s, act or process of sucking, from Late Latin suctionem (nominative suctio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin sugere to suck (see sup (v.2)). As action produced by a vacuum from
1650s.


suctorial (adj.)

1826, pertaining to or adapted for sucking, from Modern Latin suctorius, from Latin suct-, past
participle stem of sugere to suck (see sup (v.2)). Meaning having a sucking organ is from 1829.


Sudan

1842, from Arabic Bilad-al-sudan, literally country of the blacks (originally the stretch of Africa
between the Sahara and the equator), from sud, plural of aswad (fem. sauda) black. In early use also
Soudan, from French. Related: Sudanese.


sudarium (n.)

napkin for wiping the face, especially the cloth of St. Veronica, on which an image of Christ's face
was believed to be imprinted, c.1600, from Latin sudare to sweat, from sudor sweat (see sweat (n.)).
Earlier in nativized form sudary (mid-14c.).


sudatorium (n.)

room in a bath for sweating, 1756, from Latin sudatus, past participle of sudare to sweat, from
sudor sweat (see sweat (v.)) + -orium (see -ory).


sudden (adj.)

early 14c., sodaine, from Anglo-French sodein or directly from Old French sodain, subdain immediate,
sudden (Modern French soudain), from Vulgar Latin *subitanus, variant of Latin subitaneus sudden,
from subitus past participle of subire go under; occur secretly, come or go up stealthily, from sub
up to (see sub-) + ire come, go (see ion). The present spelling was not finally established till
after 1700 [OED].    Noun meaning that which us sudden, a sudden need or emergency is from 1550s,
obsolete except in phrase all of a sudden first attested 1680s, also of a sudayn (1590s), upon the
soden (1550s). Sudden death, tie-breakers in sports, first recorded 1927; earlier in reference to
coin tosses (1834). Related: Suddenness.


suddenly (adv.)

late 13c., sodeinli; see sudden + -ly (2).


Sudeten

from German, named for the Sudeten Mountains; mentioned by Ptolemy (2c.) but the name is of unknown
origin, perhaps Illyrian.


sudorific (adj.)

causing sweat, 1620s, from Latin sudor (see sweat (n.)) + -ficus, from stem of facere to make, do
(see factitious).


suds (n.)

1540s, dregs, leavings, muck, especially in East Anglia, ooze left by flood (according to OED this
may be the original sense), perhaps borrowed from Middle Dutch sudse marsh, bog, or related words in
Frisian and Low German, cognate with Old English soden boiled, from Proto-Germanic *suth-, from PIE
*seut- to seethe, boil (see seethe). Meaning soapy water dates from 1580s; slang meaning beer first
attested 1904. Related: Sudsy.


sue (v.)

c.1200, continue, persevere, from Anglo-French suer follow after, continue, Old French suir, sivre
pursue, follow after, sue in court (Modern French suivre), from Vulgar Latin *sequere follow, from
Latin sequi follow (see sequel). Sense of start a lawsuit against first recorded c.1300, on notion
of following up a matter in court. Sometimes short for ensue or pursue. Meaning make entreaty,
petition, plead (usually with for) is from late 14c. Related: Sued; suing.


Sue

fem. proper name, a shortened or familiar form of Susan.


suede (n.)

undressed kid skin, 1884 (as an adjective from 1874), from gants de Su&egrave;de (1859), literally
gloves of Sweden, from French Su&egrave;de Sweden (see Swede). Suede shoes attested from 1885.


suet (n.)

late 14c., solid fat formed in the torsos of cattle and sheep, probably from an Anglo-French
diminutive of Old French siu fat, lard, grease, tallow (Modern French suif), from Latin sebum
tallow, grease (see sebum). Related: Suety.


Suez

Red Sea port, from Arabic as-suways, from Egyptian suan beginning, in reference to the port at the
head of the Red Sea. The modern Suez Canal opened in 1869.


suf-

assimilated form of sub- before -f-.


suffer (v.)

mid-13c., allow to occur or continue, permit, tolerate, fail to prevent or suppress, also to be made
to undergo, endure, be subjected to (pain, death, punishment, judgment, grief), from Anglo-French
suffrir, Old French sofrir bear, endure, resist; permit, tolerate, allow (Modern French souffrir),
from Vulgar Latin *sufferire, variant of Latin sufferre to bear, undergo, endure, carry or put
under, from sub up, under (see sub-) + ferre to carry (see infer).    Replaced Old English
&thorn;olian, &thorn;rowian. Meaning submit meekly to is from early 14c. Meaning undergo, be subject
to, be affected by, experience; be acted on by an agent is from late 14c. Related: Suffered;
sufferer; suffering. Suffering ______! as an exclamation is attested from 1859.


sufferable (adj.)

c.1300, patient, long-suffering; mid-14c., allowed, permissible; late 14c., able to be endured; from
Anglo-French, Old French sofrable tolerable, acceptable; able to bear or endure, from Medieval Latin
sufferabilis; see suffer + -able. Related: Sufferably.


sufferance (n.)

c.1300, enduring of hardship, affliction, etc., also allowance of wrongdoing, from Old French
suffrance, from Late Latin sufferentia, from sufferens, present participle of sufferre to bear,
undergo, endure (see suffer).


suffering (n.)

patient enduring of pain, inconvenience, loss, etc., mid-14c.; undergoing of punishment, affliction,
etc., late 14c., verbal noun from suffer (v.). Meaning a painful condition, pain felt is from late
14c.


suffice (v.)

early 14c. (intransitive); late 14c. (transitive), from present participle stem of Old French sofire
be sufficient, satisfy (Modern French suffire), from Latin sufficere put under, lay a foundation
under; supply as a substitute; be enough, be adequate, from sub up to (see sub-) + root of facere to
make (see factitious). Phrase suffice it to say (1690s) is a rare surviving subjunctive.


sufficiency (n.)

late 15c., from Late Latin sufficientia, from Latin sufficiens adequate (see sufficient) + -cy.
Sufficience is from late 14c.


sufficient (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French soficient satisfactory, or directly from Latin sufficientem (nominative
sufficiens) adequate, present participle of sufficere to supply as a substitute (see suffice).


sufficiently (adv.)

late 14c., from sufficient + -ly (2).


suffix (n.)

1778, from Modern Latin suffixum, noun use of neuter of Latin suffixus fastened, past participle of
suffigere fasten, fix on, fasten below, from sub upon (see sub-) + figere fasten (see fix (v.)).
Related: Suffixal.


suffix (v.)

in the grammatical sense, 1778, from suffix (n.). Earlier to put or place under (c.1600). Related:
Suffixed; suffixing.


suffocate (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), deprive of air, choke, kill by preventing access of air to the lungs, also
figurative, stifle, smother, extinguish, from Latin suffocatus, past participle of suffocare to
choke (see suffocation). Intransitive use, become choked, stifled, or smothered, is from 1702.
Related: Suffocated; suffocating.


suffocation (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French suffocation, from Latin suffocationem (nominative suffocatio) a
choking, stifling, noun of action from past participle stem of suffocare suffocate, throttle,
stifle, strangle, originally to narrow up, from sub up (from under) (see sub-) + fauces (plural)
throat, narrow entrance (see faucet).


Suffolk

Old English Su&thorn;folcci (895), literally the South Folk; compare Norfolk.


suffragan (n.)

late 14c., bishop who assists another bishop, especially one with no right of ordinary jurisdiction,
from Anglo-French and Old French suffragan (13c.), from Medieval Latin suffraganeus an assistant,
noun use of adjective, assisting, supporting, applied especially to a bishop, from Latin suffragium
support (see suffrage). Related: Suffragant.


suffrage (n.)

late 14c., intercessory prayers or pleas on behalf of another, from Old French sofrage plea,
intercession (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin suffragium, from Latin suffragium support,
ballot, vote; right of voting; a voting tablet, from suffragari lend support, vote for someone,
conjectured to be a compound of sub under (see sub-) + fragor crash, din, shouts (as of approval),
related to frangere to break (see fraction). On another theory (Watkins, etc.) the second element is
frangere itself and the notion is use a broken piece of tile as a ballot (compare ostracism).
Meaning a vote for or against anything is from 1530s. The meaning political right to vote in English
is first found in the U.S. Constitution, 1787.


suffragette (n.)

female supporter of the cause of women's voting rights, 1906, from suffrage, with French fem. ending
-ette, but not in the sense in which it was in vogue at the time.   <b>suffragette</b>. A more
regrettable formation than others such as leaderette &amp; flannelette, in that it does not even
mean a sort of suffrage as they mean a sort of leader &amp; of flannel, &amp; therefore tends to
vitiate the popular conception of the termination's meaning. The word itself may now be expected to
die, having lost its importance; may its influence on word-making die with it! [Fowler, 1926]
Compare suffragist.


suffragist (n.)

1822, advocate of extension of the political franchise in Britain, without regard to gender, or, in
the U.S., of voting rights for free blacks; from suffrage + -ist. After c.1885 especially with
reference to voting rights for women.


suffuse (v.)

1580s, from Latin suffusus, past participle of suffundere overspread, pour beneath, pour upon (see
suffusion). Related: Suffused; suffusing.


suffusion (n.)

late 14c., from Latin suffusionem (nominative suffusio) a pouring over, noun of action from past
participle stem of suffundere pour upon, overspread, suffuse, from sub under (see sub-) + fundere to
pour (see found (v.2)).


suffusive (adj.)

1775; see suffuse + -ive. Related: Suffusively.


Sufi (n.)

member of a Muslim mystical order, 1650s (earlier Sufian, 1580s), from Arabic sufi, literally man of
wool (i.e., man wearing woolen garments, as opposed to silk), from suf wool. According to Klein, so-
called from the habit of putting on the holy garment (labs-as-suf) to devote oneself to mysticism.
Related: Sufic.


Sufism (n.)

mystical teachings of the Sufis, 1817, Sufiism (modern form by 1836), from Sufi + -ism.


sug-

assimilated form of sub- before -g-.


sugar (n.)

late 13c., sugre, from Old French sucre sugar (12c.), from Medieval Latin succarum, from Arabic
sukkar, from Persian shakar, from Sanskrit sharkara ground or candied sugar, originally grit, gravel
(cognate with Greek kroke pebble). The Arabic word also was borrowed in Italian (zucchero), Spanish
(azucar, with the Arabic article), and German (Old High German zucura, German Zucker), and its forms
are represented in most European languages (such as Serbian cukar, Polish cukier, Russian sakhar).
Its Old World home was India (Alexander the Great's companions marveled at the honey without bees)
and it remained exotic in Europe until the Arabs began to cultivate it in Sicily and Spain; not
until after the Crusades did it begin to rival honey as the West's sweetener. The Spaniards in the
West Indies began raising sugar cane in 1506; first grown in Cuba 1523; first cultivated in Brazil
1532. The reason for the -g- in the English word is obscure (OED compares flagon, from French
flacon). The pronunciation shift from s- to sh- is probably from the initial long vowel sound syu-
(as in sure).    As a type of chemical compound from 1826. Slang euphemistic substitute for an
imprecation [OED] is attested from 1891. As a term of endearment, first recorded 1930. Sugar-cane is
from 1560s. Sugar-maple is from 1731. Sugar loaf was originally a moulded conical mass of refined
sugar (early 15c.); now obsolete, but sense extended 17c. to hills, hats, etc. of that shape.


sugar (v.)

early 15c., to sweeten with sugar, also figuratively, to make more pleasing, mitigate the harshness
of, from sugar (n.).  Related: Sugared; sugaring.


sugar daddy (n.)

also sugar-daddy, elderly man who lavishes gifts on a young woman [OED], 1926, from sugar + daddy.


sugar-coat (v.)

also sugarcoat, 1870, originally of medicine; figuratively, make more palatable, from 1910; from
sugar (n.) + coat (v.). Related: Sugarcoated; sugarcoating.


sugar-plum (n.)

c.1600, figurative, something sweet or agreeable; see sugar (n.) + plum (n.). As a type of small,
round, flavored candy, from 1660s.


sugary (adj.)

1590s, literal and figurative, from sugar (n.) + -y (2). Related: Sugariness.


suggest (v.)

1520s, place before another's mind; put forward a proposition, from Latin suggestus, past participle
of suggerere bring up, bring under, lay beneath; furnish, afford, supply; prompt (see suggestion).
Meaning to act so as to call up the idea of (something else) is from 1709. Related: Suggested;
suggesting.


suggestible (adj.)

1851, capable of being influenced, from suggest + -ible. Meaning that can be suggested is from 1836.
Related: Suggestibly; suggestibility.


suggestion (n.)

mid-14c., a prompting to evil, from Anglo-French and Old French suggestioun hint, temptation, from
Latin suggestionem (nominative suggestio) an addition, intimation, suggestion, noun of action from
suggestus, past participle of suggerere bring up, bring under, lay beneath; furnish, afford, supply;
prompt, from sub up (see sub-) + gerere bring, carry (see gest). Sense evolution in Latin is from
heap up, build to bring forward an idea. Meaning proposal, statement, declaration appeared by late
14c., but original English notion of evil prompting remains in suggestive. Hypnotism sense is from
1887.


suggestive (adj.)

1630s, conveying a hint, from suggest + -ive. From 1888 specifically as a faintly euphemistic
reference to proposals of indecent behavior. Related: Suggestively; suggestiveness.


sui generis

1787, Latin, literally of one's own kind, peculiar. First element from sui, genitive of suus his,
her, its, one's, from Old Latin sovos, from PIE root *swe-, pronoun of the third person (see idiom).


sui juris

1610s, of full legal age and capacity, in ancient Rome, of the status of one not subject to the
patria potestas. For first element, see sui generis; for second element, see jurist.


suicidal (adj.)

leading or tending to suicide, 1777, from suicide + -al (1). Related: Suicidally.


suicide (n.)

deliberate killing of oneself, 1650s, from Modern Latin suicidium suicide, from Latin sui of oneself
(genitive of se self), from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e- (see idiom) + -cidium a
killing (see -cide). Probably an English coinage; much maligned by Latin purists because it may as
well seem to participate of sus, a sow, as of the pronoun sui [Phillips]. The meaning person who
kills himself deliberately is from 1728. In Anglo-Latin, the term for one who commits suicide was
felo-de-se, literally one guilty concerning himself.    Even in 1749, in the full blaze of the
philosophic movement, we find a suicide named Portier dragged through the streets of Paris with his
face to the ground, hung from a gallows by his feet, and then thrown into the sewers; and the laws
were not abrogated till the Revolution, which, having founded so many other forms of freedom,
accorded the liberty of death. [W.E.H. Lecky, History of European Morals, 1869]    In England,
suicides were legally criminal if of age and sane, but not if judged to have been mentally deranged.
The criminal ones were mutilated by stake and given degrading burial in highways until 1823. Suicide
blonde (one who has dyed by her own hand) first attested 1921. Baseball suicide squeeze is attested
from 1937.


suit (n.)

c.1300, sute, also suete, suite, seute, a band of followers; a retinue, company; also set of
matching garments worn by such persons, matching livery or uniform; hence  kind, sort; the same
kind, a match; also pursuit, chase, and in law, obligation (of a tenant) to attend court; attendance
at court, from Anglo-French suit, siwete, from Old French suite, sieute pursuit, act of following,
hunt; retinue; assembly (12c., Modern French suite), from Vulgar Latin *sequita, fem. of *sequitus,
from Latin secutus, past participle of sequi to attend, follow (see sequel).    Legal sense of
lawsuit; legal action is from mid-14c. Meaning the wooing of a woman is from late 15c. Meaning set
of clothes to be worn together is attested from late 14c., also matching material or fabric, from
notion of the livery or uniform of court attendants. As a derisive term for businessman, it dates
from 1979. Meaning matched set of objects, number of objects of the same kind or pattern used
together is from late 14c., as is that of row, series, sequence. Meaning set of playing cards
bearing the same symbol is first attested 1520s, also ultimately from the notion of livery. To
follow suit (1670s) is from card-playing.


suit (v.)

be agreeable or convenient, fall in with the views of, 1570s, from suit (n.), perhaps from the
notion of join a retinue clad in like clothes. Earlier seek out (mid-15c.); be becoming (mid-14c.).
Meaning make agreeable or convenient is from 1590s. Meaning provide with clothes is from 1570s; that
of dress oneself is from 1590s; with up (adv.) from 1945. Expression suit yourself attested by 1851.
Related: Suited; suiting.


suitability (n.)

1680s, from suitable + -ity.


suitable (adj.)

1580s, from suit (v.) + -able. Earlier suit-like (1560s); suitly (mid-15c.). Related: Suitably;
suitableness.


suitcase (n.)

1898, from suit (n.) + case (n.2). Originally a case for holding a suit of clothes. In reference to
small nuclear weapons, 1954.


suite (n.)

1670s, train of followers or attendants, from French suite, from Old French suite, sieute act of
following, attendance (see suit (n.), which is an earlier borrowing of the same French word). The
meanings set of instrumental compositions (1680s), connected set of rooms (1716), and set of
furniture (1805) were imported from French usages or re-spelled on the French model from suit in its
sense of a number of things taken collectively and constituting a sequence; collection of things of
like kind.


suitor (n.)

c.1300, a frequenter; late 14c., follower, disciple, from Anglo-French seutor, suitor or directly
from Late Latin secutor follower, pursuer, from sect- past participle stem of sequi to follow (see
suit (n.)). Meaning plaintiff in a lawsuit is from mid-15c. Meaning one who seeks (a woman) in
marriage is from 1580s.


Sukey

also Sukie, familiar form of fem. proper name Susan, Susanna. As a tea kettle from 1823.


Sulawesi

see Celebes.


sulcate (adj.)

furrowed, grooved, 1760, from Latin sulcatus, past participle of sulcare to make furrowed, from
sulcus furrow, trench, ditch (see sulcus).


sulcus (n.)

plural sulci, fissure between convolutions of the brain, 1833, from medical use of Latin sulcus
furrow, trench, ditch, wrinkle, apparently literally the result of plowing, from PIE *selk- to pull,
draw (cognates: Greek holkos furrow, Old English sulh plow, Lithuanian velku I draw).


sulfa

1942, short name for the group of drugs derived from sulfanilamide (amide of sulfanilic acid, 1937,
which is so called because it is a sulphonic derivative of the dye-stuff aniline), and shortened
from that word. The usual British English spelling is sulpha.


sulfate (n.)

salt of sulfuric acid, 1790 (sulphat), from French sulphate (1787), from Modern Latin sulphatum
acidum, from Latin sulpur, sulphur (see sulfur) + chemical ending -ate (3). The spelling with -ph-
is standard in Britain.


sulfide (n.)

compound of sulfur with another element, 1831, from French sulfide; see sulfur + -ide.


sulfite (n.)

salt of sulfurous acid, 1790, from sulfur + -ite (2).


sulfur (n.)

also sulphur, c.1300, from Anglo-French sulfere, Old French soufre sulfur, fire and brimstone,
hellfire (13c.), later also sulphur, from Late Latin sulfur, from Latin sulphur, probably from a
root meaning to burn. Ousted native brimstone and cognate Old English swefl, German schwefel,
Swedish swafel, Dutch zwavel. The spelling with -ph- is standard in Britain, but its suggestion of a
Greek origin is misleading.


sulfuric (adj.)

of, pertaining to, or obtained from sulfur, also sulphuric, 1790, from French sulfurique; see sulfur
+ -ic. The spelling with -ph- is standard in Britain.


sulfurous (adj.)

1520s, containing or resembling sulfur, of the nature of brimstone, from Latin sulphurosus full of
sulfur, or a native formation from sulfur + -ous. Hence figurative use with suggestions of hellfire
(c.1600). Scientific chemistry sense is from 1790. The spelling with -ph- is standard in Britain.
Earlier in the brimstone-like sense was sulphureose (early 15c.), and Old English had sweflen.
Related: Sulfurously; sulphurously; sulfurousness.


sulk (v.)

1781, back-formation of sulky (adj.). Related: Sulked; sulking. As a noun from 1792.


sulky (adj.)

quietly sullen, 1744, of uncertain origin. Connection has been suggested to obsolete, rare sulke
hard to sell (1630s) and to Old English asolcen idle, lazy, slow, past participle adjective from
aseolcan become sluggish, be weak or idle (related to besylcan be languid), from Proto-Germanic
*seklan (cognates: Middle High German selken to drop, fall). But words of similar meaning often are
held to be imitative (compare miff, mope, boudoir). Related: Sulkily; sulkiness.


sulky (n.)

light carriage with two wheels, 1756, apparently a noun use of sulky (adj.), on notion of
standoffishness, because the carriage has room for only one person and obliges the rider to be
alone.


sullen (adj.)

1570s, alteration of Middle English soleyn unique, singular, from Anglo-French *solein, formed on
the pattern of Old French solain lonely, from soul single, from Latin solus by oneself, alone (see
sole (adj.)). The sense shift in Middle English from solitary to morose (i.e. remaining alone
through ill-humor) occurred late 14c. Related: Sullenly; sullenness.


sully (v.)

1590s, probably from Middle French souiller to soil, also figurative, from Old French soillier make
dirty (see soil (v.)). Related: Sullied (1570s); sullying.


sulphur (n.)

see sulfur. The form prefered in Britain; however, the spelling's suggestion of a Greek origin is
misleading.


sulphureous (adj.)

1550s, from Latin sulphureus of sulfur, from sulphur (see sulfur).


sulphuric (adj.)

see sulfuric.


sulphurous (adj.)

see sulfurous.


sultan (n.)

1550s, from Middle French sultan ruler of Turkey (16c.), ultimately from Arabic sultan ruler,
prince, monarch, king, queen, originally power, dominion. According to Klein's sources, this is from
Aramaic shultana power, from shelet have power. Earlier English word was soldan, soudan (c.1300),
used indiscriminately of Muslim rulers and sovereigns, from Old French souldan, soudan, from
Medieval Latin sultanus. Related: Sultanic.


sultana (n.)

wife, mother, daughter, or concubine of a sultan, 1580s, from Italian sultana, fem. of sultano (see
sultan). Middle English had soudanesse sultaness (late 14c.).


sultanate (n.)

1794, from sultan + -ate (1).


sultry (adj.)

1590s, oppressively hot, close and moist (of weather), ultimately from swelter + alteration of -y
(2), either as a contraction of sweltry or from obsolete verb sulter to swelter (1580s), alteration
of swelter. Figurative sense of hot with lust is attested from 1704; of women, lascivious, sensual,
arousing desire it is recorded from 1940. Related: Sultriness.


sum (n.)

c.1300, summe, quantity or amount of money, from Anglo-French and Old French summe, somme amount,
total; collection; essential point; summing up, conclusion (13c., Modern French somme), from Latin
summa the top, summit; chief place, highest rank; main thing, chief point, essence, gist; an amount
(of money), noun use (via phrases such as summa pars, summa res) of fem. of summus highest,
uppermost, from PIE *sup-mos-, from root *uper over (see super-).    The sense development from
highest to total number, the whole probably is via the Roman custom of adding up a stack of figures
from the bottom and writing the sum at the top, rather than at the bottom as now (compare the bottom
line).    General sense of numerical quantity of anything, a total number is from late 14c. Meaning
essence of a writing or speech also is attested from mid-14c. Meaning aggregate of two or more
numbers is from early 15c.; sense of arithmetical problem to be solved is from 1803. Sum-total is
attested from late 14c., from Medieval Latin summa totalis.


sum (v.)

early 14c., to count, count up, calculate, reckon, from Old French sommer to count, add up, or
directly from Medieval Latin summare, from summa (see sum (n.)). Meaning briefly state the substance
of is first recorded 1620s (since c.1700 usually with up). Related: Summed; summing.


sum-

assimilated form of sub- before -m-.


sumac (n.)

also sumach, c.1300, preparation of dried, chopped leaves of a plant of the genus Rhus (used in
tanning and dyeing and as an astringent), from Old French sumac (13c.), from Medieval Latin sumach,
from Arabic summaq, from Syrian summaq red. Of the tree itself from 1540s; later applied to a North
American plant species.


Sumatra

said to be from Sanskrit Samudradvipa ocean-island. Related: Sumatran.


Sumerian (adj.)

1874, from French Sum&eacute;rien (1872), pertaining to Sumer, name of a district in ancient
Babylonia, once the seat of a great civilization. As the name of a language from 1887. Related:
Sumeria.


summa cum laude

Latin, literally with highest praise.


summarily (adv.)

1520s, briefly, in few words, from summary + -ly (2). Meaning without hesitation or formality is
from 1620s.


summarise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of summarize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Summarised;
summarising; summarisation.


summarization (n.)

1860, noun of action from summarize.


summarize (v.)

1837, American English, from summary + -ize. Related: Summarized; summarizing.


summary (adj.)

early 15c., brief, abbreviated; containing the sum or substance only, from Medieval Latin summarius
of or pertaining to the sum or substance, from Latin summa whole, totality, gist (see sum (n.)).
Compare Latin phrase ad summam on the whole, generally, in short. Sense of done promptly, performed
without hesitation or formality is from 1713.


summary (n.)

a summary statement or account, c.1500, from Latin summarium an epitome, abstract, summary, from
summa totality, gist (see sum (n.)).


summate (v.)

to add, combine, 1900, from Medieval Latin summatus, past participle of summare to sum (see
summation). Related: Summated; summating.


summation (n.)

1760, process of calculating a sum, from Modern Latin summationem (nominative summatio) an adding
up, noun of action from Late Latin summatus, past participle of summare to sum up, from Latin summa
(see sum (n.)). Meaning a summing up is from 1836.


summative (adj.)

1836, from Modern Latin summat-, stem of summatus (see summation) + -ive.


summer (n.1)

hot season of the year, Old English sumor summer, from Proto-Germanic *sumur- (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Norse, Old High German sumar, Old Frisian sumur, Middle Dutch somer, Dutch zomer, German
Sommer), from PIE root *sem- (2) summer (cognates: Sanskrit sama season, half-year, Avestan hama in
summer, Armenian amarn summer, Old Irish sam, Old Welsh ham, Welsh haf summer).    As an adjective
from c.1300. Summer camp as an institution for youth is attested from 1886; summer resort is from
1823; summer school first recorded 1810; theatrical summer stock is attested from 1941 (see stock
(n.2)). Old Norse sumarsdag, first day of summer, was the Thursday that fell between April 9 and 15.


summer (n.2)

horizontal bearing beam, late 13c., from Anglo-French sumer, Old French somier main beam, originally
pack horse, from Vulgar Latin *saumarius, from Late Latin sagmarius pack horse, from sagma
packsaddle (see sumpter).


summer (v.)

to pass the summer, mid-15c., from summer (n.1). Related: Summered; summering.


summerize (v.)

1797, to spend the summer, from summer (n.1) + -ize. From 1935 as to prepare (something) for summer.
Related: Summerized; summerizing.


summerlong (adj.)

Old English sumor lang; see summer (n.1) + long (adj.).


summertime (n.)

also summer-time, late 14c., somer tyme, from summer (n.1) + time (n.). Earlier were summertide
(mid-13c.), sumeres tid (late Old English). In Britain, as two words, with reference to what in U.S.
is daylight saving time, recorded from 1916.


summery (adj.)

1812, from summer (n.1) + -y (2).


summit (n.)

c.1400, highest point, peak, from Middle French somete, from Old French somete summit, top,
diminutive of som, sum highest part, top of a hill, from Latin summum, neuter of noun use of summus
highest, related to super over (see sum (n.)). The meaning meeting of heads of state (1950) is from
Winston Churchill's metaphor of a parley at the summit.


summon (v.)

c.1200, call, send for, ask the presence of, especially call, cite, or notify by authority to be at
a certain place at a certain time (late 13c.), from Anglo-French sumunre and directly from Old
French somonre, variant of sumundre, somondre summon, from Vulgar Latin *summundre to call, cite,
from Latin summonere hint to, remind privately, from sub under (see sub-) + monere warn, advise (see
monitor (n.)). In part also from Medieval Latin use of summonere. Meaning arouse, excite to action
is from 1580s. Related: Summoned; summoning.


summoner (n.)

petty officer who cites persons to appear in court, secular or ecclesiastical, early 14c. (mid-13c.
as a surname), from Anglo-French sumenour, Old French somoneor, from Medieval Latin summonitorem,
from past participle stem of summonere (see summon). Contracted form sumner is from mid-14c.


summons (n.)

authoritative call to be at a certain place for a certain purpose, late 13c., from Old French
sumunse, noun use of fem. past participle of somondre (see summon (v.)). As a verb from 1650s.


summum bonam (n.)

Latin, literally highest good (in ethics), from Cicero; see summit, bene-. Plural summa bona.


sumo (n.)

1880, from Japanese sumo to compete.


sump (n.)

mid-15c., marsh, morass (from mid-13c. in place names), from Middle Dutch somp or Middle Low German
sump, from Proto-Germanic *sumpaz, from PIE *swombho- spongy. Meaning pit to collect water is first
found 1650s. Sump-pump (1884) originally was in mining.


sumpter (n.)

c.1300, driver of a pack horse, from Old French sommetier pack-horse driver, from Vulgar Latin
*sagmatarius a pack horse driver, from Late Latin sagmat- a pack, burden, stem of sagma packsaddle,
from Greek sagma, probably related to sattein to pack, press, stuff. Used from mid-15c. of horses
and mules for carrying loads.


sumptuary (adj.)

pertaining to expense, c.1600, from Latin sumptuarius relating to expenses, from sumptus expense,
cost, from sumere to spend, consume (see sumptuous).


sumptuous (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French sumptueux or directly from Latin sumptuosus costly, very expensive;
lavish, wasteful, from sumptus, past participle of sumere to borrow, buy, spend, eat, drink,
consume, employ, take, take up, contraction of *sub-emere, from sub- under (see sub-) + emere to
take, buy (see exempt (adj.)). Related: Sumptuously; sumptuousness.


sun (n.)

Old English sunne sun, from Proto-Germanic *sunnon (cognates: Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old High German
sunna, Middle Dutch sonne, Dutch zon, German Sonne, Gothic sunno the sun), from PIE *s(u)wen-
(cognates: Avestan xueng sun, Old Irish fur-sunnud lighting up), alternative form of root *saewel-
to shine; sun (see Sol).    Old English sunne was feminine (as generally in Germanic), and the fem.
pronoun was used in English until 16c.; since then masc. has prevailed. The empire on which the sun
never sets (1630) originally was the Spanish, later the British. To have one's place in the sun
(1680s) is from Pascal's Pens&eacute;es; the German imperial foreign policy sense (1897) is from a
speech by von B&uuml;low.


sun (v.)

1510s, to set something in the sun, from sun (n.). Intransitive meaning expose oneself to the sun is
recorded from c.1600. Sun-bathing is attested from c.1600.


sun-dance (n.)

Native American ceremony, 1849, from sun (n.) + dance (n.).


sun-dress (n.)

also sundress, 1942, from sun (n.) + dress (n.).


sun-dried (adj.)

1630s in reference to vegetable matter, from sun (n.) + past participle adjective from dry (v.).


sun-up (n.)

also sunup, sunrise, 1712, from sun (n.) + up (adv.). In local use in U.S., and, according to OED,
also in Caribbean English and formerly in South Africa.


sun-wake (n.)

rays of the setting sun reflected on water, 1891, from sun (n.) + wake (n.). Sailors' tradition says
a narrow wake means good weather the following day and bad weather follows a broad wake.


sun-worship (n.)

1670s, from sun (n.) + worship (n.). Related: Sun-worshipper (1670s in the religious sense; 1941 as
devotee of sun-tanning).


sunbeam (n.)

Old English sunnebeam; see sun (n.) + beam (n.). As cheerful person from 1886.


Sunbelt (n.)

1969, with reference to the Southern U.S., from sun (n.) + belt (n.).


sunburn (v.)

1520s, from sun (n.) + burn (v.). Sunburnt (c.1400) is older than sunburned (c.1500, sunne y-brent).
As a noun from 1650s.


sunburst (n.)

1816, from sun (n.) + burst (n.).


sundae (n.)

1897, American English, thought to be an alteration of Sunday, perhaps re-spelled in deference to
religious feelings; but the reason for the name is uncertain; perhaps ice cream left over from
Sunday, on sale later. For a fuller account of the speculations, see H.L. Mencken, The American
Language, Supplement I (1945), pp.376-7.


Sunday (n.)

first day of the week, Old English sunnand&aelig;g (Northumbrian sunnad&aelig;g), literally day of
the sun, from sunnan, oblique case of sunne sun (see sun (n.)) + d&aelig;g day (see day). A Germanic
loan-translation of Latin dies solis day of the sun, which is itself a loan-translation of Greek
hemera heliou. Compare Old Saxon sunnun dag, Old Frisian sunnandei, Old Norse sunnundagr, Dutch
zondag, German Sonntag Sunday.    In European Christian cultures outside Germanic often with a name
meaning the Lord's Day (Latin Dominica). Sunday-school dates from 1783 (originally for secular
instruction); Sunday clothes is from 1640s. Sunday driver is from 1925.


sunder (v.)

Old English sundrian, syndrian to sunder, separate, divide, from sundor separately, apart, from
Proto-Germanic *sunder (cognates: Old Norse sundr, Old Frisian sunder, Old High German suntar aside,
apart; German sondern to separate), from PIE root *sene- apart, separated (cognates: Sanskrit
sanutar far away, Avestan hanare without, Greek ater without, Latin sine without, Old Church
Slavonic svene without, Old Irish sain different). Related: Sundered; sundering.


sundial (n.)

also sun-dial, 1590s, from sun (n.) + dial (n.). Earlier simply dial.


sundog (n.)

mock sun, parhelion, 1650s; the second element is of obscure origin.


sundown (n.)

also sun-down, 1610s, from sun (n.) + down (adv.). OED suggests perhaps a shortening of sun-go-down
(1590s). Compare sunset.


sundries (n.)

various small things, 1755, plural of sundry (adj.) used as a noun. [A] comprehensive term used for
brevity, especially in accounts [Century Dictionary].


sundry (adj.)

Old English syndrig separate, apart, special, various, distinct, characteristic, from sundor
separately, apart, asunder (see sunder) + -y (2). Compare Old High German suntaric, Swedish
s&#246;ndrig broken, tattered. Meaning several is from 1375. As a noun, from mid-13c. with the sense
various ones. Phrase all and sundry is from late 14c.


sunfish (n.)

1620s, from sun (n.) + fish (n.). Used of various species, with reference to round shape or
brilliant appearance. Short form sunny is attested from 1835.


sunflower (n.)

1560s, heliotrope, from sun (n.) + flower (n.). In reference to the Helianthus (introduced to Europe
1510 from America by the Spaniards) it is attested from 1590s, so called from the appearance of the
heads.


sung

a past tense and past participle of sing (v.).


sunglasses (n.)

glasses with darkened lenses to protect one's eyes while observing the sun, also sun-glasses, 1878,
from sun (n.) + glasses. In popular (non-astronomy) use from 1916. Earlier sunglass (1804) meant a
burning glass.


sunk

a past tense and past participle of sink (v.).


sunken (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from sink (v.).


sunless (adj.)

1580s, from sun (n.) + -less.


sunlight (n.)

c.1200, from sun (n.) + light (n.). Compare Dutch zonlicht, German sonnenlicht.


sunlit (adj.)

1822, from sun (n.) + lit (adj.).


Sunni (n.)

1620s, from Arabic, adherent of the Sunnah; Muslim who accepts the orthodox tradition as well as the
Quran, from Sunna traditional teachings of Muhammad (not, like the Quran, committed to writing, but
preserved from his lips by his disciples or founded on his actions), literally way, custom, course,
tradition, usage. Related: Sunnite.


sunny (adj.)

full of sun, early 14c., from sun (n.) + -y (2). Compare Dutch zonnig, German sonnig. Figurative
sense of cheerful is attested from 1540s. Sunny side in reference to optimistic outlook is from
1831. Eggs served sunny side up first attested 1887, in lunch counter slang, in reference to
appearance when served.    Young Man (in Park Row coffee-and-cake saloon)--Waiter, I want a
beefsteak, unpeeled potatoes, and a couple of eggs fried on one side only!    Waiter
(vociferously)--Slaughter in the pan, a Murphy with his coat on, an' two white wings with the sunny
side up! [Puck, April 27, 1887]     Related: Sunnily; sunniness. As a noun meaning sunfish from
1835.


sunrise (n.)

mid-15c., from sun (n.) + rise (v.); perhaps it evolved from a Middle English subjunctive, such as
before the sun rise. Earlier in same sense were sunrist (mid-14c.); sunrising (mid-13c.). Compare
sunset.


sunroof (n.)

of a car, by 1957, from sun (n.) + roof (n.). Originally on European models.


sunscreen (n.)

1738 as an object to block the sun's rays, from sun (n.) + screen (n.). As a type of lotion applied
to the skin, by 1954.


sunset (n.)

late 14c., from sun (n.) + set (v.). Perhaps from a Middle English subjunctive such as before the
sun set. Old English had sunnansetlgong sunset, while sunset meant west. Figurative use from c.1600.
To ride off into the sunset (1963) is from the stereotypical ending of cowboy movies.


sunshade (n.)

1842, from sun (n.) + shade (n.). Old English had sunsceadu veil.


sunshine (n.)

mid-13c., from sun (n.) + shine (n.). Old English had sunnanscima sunshine; while sunscin meant a
mirror, speculum. Meaning happy person who brightens the lives of others is from 1942. Sunshine law
in reference to U.S. open-meeting legislation is recorded from 1972, from the notion of shining the
light of public access on deliberations formerly held behind closed doors. Related: Sunshiny.


sunspot (n.)

also sun-spot, 1849, in astronomy, from sun (n.) + spot (n.). Earlier a spot on the skin caused by
exposure to the sun (1818).


sunstroke (n.)

1807, from sun (n.) + stroke (n.); translating French coup de soleil. Related: Sun-stricken;
sunstruck.


suntan (v.)

also sun-tan, 1821, from sun (n.) + tan (v.). Related: Suntanned; suntanning. As a noun from 1904.


sup (v.1)

eat the evening meal, c.1300, from Old French super, soper dine, sup, dip bread in soup or wine, sop
up (Modern French souper), which probably is from soupe broth (see soup), until recently still the
traditional evening meal of French workers.


sup (v.2)

to sip, to take into the mouth with the lips, Old English supan (West Saxon), suppan, supian
(Northumbrian) to sip, taste, drink, swallow (strong verb, past tense seap, past participle sopen),
from Proto-Germanic *supanan (cognates: Old Norse supa to sip, drink, Middle Low German supen, Dutch
zuipen to drink, tipple, Old High German sufan, German saufen to drink, booze), from PIE *sub-,
possibly an extended form of root *seue- (2) to take liquid (cognates: Sanskrit sunoti presses out
juice, soma; Avestan haoma, Persian hom juice; Greek huetos rain, huein to rain; Latin sugere to
suck, succus juice, sap; Lithuanian sula flowing sap; Old Church Slavonic soku sap, susati suck;
Middle Irish suth sap; Old English seaw sap).


sup-

assimilated form of sub- before -p-.


super (adj.)

first-rate, excellent, 1837, from prefix in superfine (1680s), denoting highest grade of goods, from
Latin super above, over, beyond (see super-). Extended usage as a general term of approval is 1895
slang, revived by 1967. Rhyming reduplication form super-duper first attested 1940. Super Bowl
attested from 1966; Super Glue from 1975; as a verb by 1983.


super-

word-forming element meaning above, over, beyond, from Latin super-, from adverb and preposition
super above, over, on the top (of), beyond, besides, in addition to, from *(s)uper-, variant form of
PIE *uper over (cognates: Sanskrit upari, Avestan upairi over, above, beyond, Greek hyper, Old
English ofer over, Gothic ufaro over, across, Gaulish ver-, Old Irish for), comparative of root *upo
under (see sub-). In English words from Old French, it appears as sur-. The primary sense seems to
have shifted over time from usually meaning beyond to usually meaning very much, which can be
contradictory. E.g. supersexual, which is attested from 1895 as transcending sexuality, from 1968 as
very sexual.


super-ego (n.)

also superego, that part of the psyche which controls the impulses of the id, 1924, as a translation
of German &uuml;ber-Ich; see super- and ego.


superable (adj.)

surmountable, 1620s, from Latin superabilis that may be overcome, from superare to overcome,
surmount, go over, rise above, from super over (see super-) + -abilis (see -able). The negative
formation insuperable is older and more common and superable may be a back-formation from it.


superabundance (n.)

early 15c., superaboundance, from Late Latin superabundantia, from present participle stem of Latin
superabundare, from super (see super-) + abundare (see abound). Related: Superabundant; superabound.


superannuate (v.)

1640s, render obsolete, back-formation from superannuated. Meaning impair or disqualify by old age
is from 1690s. Related: Superannuating.


superannuated (adj.)

1630s, obsolete, out of date; 1740, retired on account of old age, from Modern Latin superannuatus,
alteration (perhaps by influence of annual) of Medieval Latin superannatus (which meant more than a
year old and was used of cattle), from Latin super beyond, over (see super-) + annus year (see
annual (adj.)). Earlier in same sense was superannate (c.1600), from Medieval Latin superannatus.
Compare French suranner.


superannuation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from superannuate.


superb (adj.)

1540s, noble, magnificent (of buildings, etc.), from Latin superbus grand, proud, splendid; haughty,
vain, insolent, from super above, over (see super-). The second element perhaps is from PIE root
*bhe- to be. General sense of very fine developed by 1729. Related: Superbious (c.1500); superbly.


supercalifragilisticexpialidocious

from song in 1964 Disney movie version of Mary Poppins; subject of a lawsuit based on earlier song
title Supercalafajalistickexpialadojus (1949), but other versions of the word also were in
circulation.


supercede (v.)

see supersede. Related: Superceded; superceding.


supercharge (v.)

1919, originally of internal combustion engines, from super- + charge (v.). Related: Supercharged
(1876); supercharger; supercharging.


superciliary (adj.)

1732, from Modern Latin superciliaris, from supercilium (see supercilious).


supercilious (adj.)

1520s, lofty with pride, haughtily contemptuous, from Latin superciliosus haughty, arrogant, from
supercilium haughty demeanor, pride, literally eyebrow (via notion of raising the eyebrow to express
haughtiness), from super above (see super-) + second element akin to cilium eyelid, related to
celare to cover, hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to conceal (see cell).    Since cilium is more recent
than supercilium, the former can be interpreted as a back-formation to the latter .... If indeed
derived from the root *kel- 'to hide', we must still assume that a noun *kilium 'eyelid' existed,
since the eyelid can 'hide' the eye, whereas the eyebrow does not have such a function. Thus,
supercilium may originally have meant 'what is above the cilium'. [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological
Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages, Leiden, 2008]    Related: Superciliously;
superciliousness.


supercilium (n.)

the eyebrow, 1670s, from Latin supercilium an eyebrow; a ridge, summit; figuratively haughtiness,
arrogance, pride (see supercilious).


supercomputer (n.)

1966, from super- + computer.


superconductor (n.)

1913, translation of Dutch suprageleider, coined by Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes
(1853-1926). See super- + conductor.


supercontinent (n.)

1963, from super- + continent (n.).


supererogation (n.)

1520s, performance of more than duty requires, in Catholic theology, from Late Latin
supererogationem (nominative supererogatio) a payment in addition, noun of action from past
participle stem of supererogare pay or do additionally, from Latin super above, over (see super-) +
erogare pay out, from ex- out (see ex-) + rogare ask, request (see rogation).


supererogatory (adj.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin supererogatorius, from supererogat-, stem of supererogare pay or do
additionally (see supererogation).


superficial (adj.)

late 14c., in anatomical and mathematical uses, of or relating to a surface, from Late Latin
superficialis of or pertaining to the surface, from superficies surface, upper side, top, from super
above, over (see super-) + facies form, face (see face (n.)). Meaning not deep, without thorough
understanding, cursory, comprehending only what is apparent or obvious (of perceptions, thoughts,
etc.) first recorded early 15c. (implied in superficially not thoroughly).


superficiality (n.)

1520s, from superficial + -ity.


superfluity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French superfluite excess (12c.), from Medieval Latin superfluitatem (nominative
superfluitas), from superfluus (see superfluous).


superfluous (adj.)

early 15c. (earlier superflue, late 14c.), from Latin superfluus unnecessary, literally overflowing,
running over, from superfluere to overflow, from super over (see super-) + fluere to flow (see
fluent). Related: Superfluously; superfluousness.


superfly (adj.)

excellent, superior, 1971, originally U.S. black slang, from super- + slang sense of fly (adj.).


supergiant (n.)

1927, from super- + giant (n.).


superheat (v.)

1827 (implied in superheated) to heat to a very high degree, specifically of steam until it
resembles a perfect gas, from super- + heat (v.). Related: Superheating.


superhero (n.)

1908 (in a translation of  Nietzsche), from super- + hero. Used in 1930 of Tarzan; modern use is
from 1960s.


superhighway (n.)

1921, from super- + highway.


superhuman (adj.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin superhumanus; see super- + human (adj.). In early use often divine, since
19c. typically above the powers or nature of man. Related: Superhumanly.


superimpose (v.)

1787, back-formation from superimposition (1680s), or from super- + impose. Compare Latin
superimponere to put upon, place over, place above. Related: Superimposed; superimposing.


superintend (v.)

to have charge and direction of, 1610s, from Church Latin superintendere to oversee (see
superintendent). Related: Superintended; superintending.


superintendence (n.)

act of superintending, c.1600; from superintendent + -ce, or from Latin superintendens. Related:
Superintendency.


superintendent (n.)

1550s, originally an ecclesiastical word meaning bishop or minister who supervises churches within a
district (ultimately a loan-translation of Greek episkopos overseer), from Medieval Latin
superintendentem (nominative superintendens), present participle of Late Latin superintendere
oversee, from Latin super above (see super-) + intendere turn one's attention to, direct (see
intend). Famously used by 16c. radical Protestants in place of bishop, which to them was tainted by
Papacy.    [Martinists] studie to pull downe Bishopps, and set vp Superintendents, which is nothing
else, but to raze out good Greeke, &amp; enterline bad Latine. [Lyly, Pappe with an Hatchet, 1589]
The general sense of a person who has charge of some business is first recorded 1580s. Meaning
janitor, custodian is from c.1935. Shortened form super first attested 1857, especially at first of
overseers of sheep ranches in Australia. As an adjective meaning superintending, from 1590s.


superior (adj.)

late 14c., higher in position, from Old French superior higher, upper (Modern French superieur),
from Latin superiorem (nominative superior) higher, comparative of superus situated above, upper,
from super above, over (see super-).    Meaning higher in rank or dignity is attested from late
15c.; sense of of a higher nature or character is attested from 1530s. Original sense was preserved
more strongly in French (as in les &eacute;tages sup&eacute;rieur the upper stories), and in Lake
Superior, a loan-translation of French Lac Sup&eacute;rieur, literally upper lake (at 600 feet above
sea-level it has the highest surface elevation of the five Great Lakes and is the furthest north).


superior (n.)

early 15c., from Latin superior (see superior (adj.)), used in Medieval Latin with a noun sense of
one higher, a superior.


superiority (n.)

late 15c., from superior (adj.) + -ity, or directly from Medieval Latin superioritatem (nominative
superioritas), from superior.


superlative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French superlatif absolute, highest; powerful; best (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin superlativus extravagant, exaggerated, hyperbolic, from Latin superlatus exaggerated
(used as past participle of superferre carry over or beyond), from super beyond (see super-) + lat-
carry, from *tlat-, past participle stem of tollere to take away (see extol). Related:
Superlatively; superlativeness.    The noun is attested from 1520s, originally in the grammatical
sense, a word in the superlative; hence exaggerated language (1590s).


superman (n.)

1903, coined by George Bernard Shaw to translate German &Uuml;bermensch, highly evolved human being
that transcends good and evil, from Thus Spake Zarathustra (1883-91), by Friedrich Nietzsche
(1844-1900). First used in German by Hermann Rab (1520s), and also used by Herder and Goethe.
Translated as overman (1895) and beyond-man (1896) before Shaw got it right in his play title Man
and Superman (1903). Application to comic strip hero is from 1938.    So was created ... Superman!
champion of the oppressed, the physical marvel who had sworn to devote his existence to helping
those in need! [Action Comics, June 1, 1938]


supermarket (n.)

1933, American English, from super- + market (n.). The 1933 reference is in an article that says the
stores themselves began to open around 1931.


supermodel (n.)

1978, from super- + model (n.).


supernal (adj.)

mid-15c., heavenly, divine, from Old French supernal supreme (12c.), formed from Latin supernus
situated above, that is above; celestial (from super above, over; see super-) as a contrast to
infernal.


supernatant (adj.)

floating on the surface, 1660s, from Latin supernatantem (nominative supernatans), present
participle of supernatare to swim above, from super (see super-) + natare to swim, frequentative of
nare to swim (see natatorium). Related: Supernatation (1620s).


supernatural (adj.)

early 15c. of or given by God, from Medieval Latin supernaturalis above or beyond nature, divine,
from Latin super above (see super-) + natura nature (see nature (n.)). Originally with more of a
religious sense, of or given by God, divine; heavenly; association with ghosts, etc., has
predominated since 19c. Related: Supernaturalism.    That is supernatural, whatever it be, that is
either not in the chain of natural cause and effect, or which acts on the chain of cause and effect,
in nature, from without the chain. [Horace Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 1858]


supernatural (n.)

1729, a supernatural being, from supernatural (adj.). From 1830 as that which is above or beyond the
established course of nature.


supernaturally (adv.)

c.1500, from God or Heaven, from supernatural (adj.) + -ly (2).


supernova (n.)

1934, from super- + nova.


supernumerary (adj.)

exceeding a stated number, c.1600, from Late Latin supernumarius excess, counted in over (of
soldiers added to a full legion), from Latin super numerum beyond the number, from super beyond,
over (see super-) + numerum, accusative of numerus number (see number (n.)). As a noun from 1630s.


superordinate (adj.)

1610s, on model of subordinate with super-. Related: Superordination.


superpose (v.)

1823, from French superposer, from super- (see super-) + poser (see pose (v.1)). Related:
Superposed; superposing.


superposition (n.)

1650s, from French superposition, from Late Latin superpositionem (nominative superpositio) a
placing over, noun of action from past participle stem of superponere to place over, from super (see
super-) + ponere to put, place (see position (n.)).


superpower (n.)

1944, in geopolitical sense of nation with great interest and ability to exert force in worldwide
theaters of conflict, from super- + power (n.). The word itself is attested in physical (electrical
power) senses from 1922.


supersaturated (adj.)

1778, past participle adjective from verb supersaturate (1756), from super- + saturate (v.).


supersaturation (n.)

1784, from super- + saturation.


superscribe (v.)

write on the surface (especially of an envelope), 1590s, from Latin superscribere write over or
above (see superscript). Related: Superscribed; superscribing.


superscript (n.)

1580s, address or direction on a letter, from Middle French superscript, from Latin superscriptus
written above, past participle of superscribere write over or above something (as a correction),
from super above (see super-) + scribere write (see script (n.)). Meaning number or letter written
above something first recorded 1901.


superscription (n.)

late 14c., from Latin superscriptionem (nominative superscriptio) a writing above, noun of action
from past participle stem of superscribere (see superscript).


supersede (v.)

mid-15c., Scottish, postpone, defer, from Middle French superceder desist, delay, defer, from Latin
supersedere literally sit on top of; also, with ablative, stay clear of, abstain from, forbear,
refrain from, from super above (see super-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Meaning displace,
replace first recorded 1640s. Related: Superseded; superseding.


supersedeas (n.)

writ to stay legal proceedings, Latin, literally you shall desist, second person singular present
subjunctive of supersedere desist, refrain from, forebear (see supersede).


supersession (n.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin supersessionem (nominative supersessio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin supersedere sit on top of (see supersede).


supersonic (adj.)

1919, of or having to do with sound waves beyond the limit of human hearing, from super- + sonic.
Attested from 1934 in sense of exceeding the speed of sound (especially as a measure of aircraft
speed), leaving the original sense to ultrasonic (1923).


superstar (n.)

1920, in the sports and entertainment sense (Babe Ruth was one of the first so-called), from super-
+ star (n.).


superstition (n.)

early 13c., false religious belief; irrational faith in supernatural powers, from Latin
superstitionem (nominative superstitio) prophecy, soothsaying; dread of the supernatural, excessive
fear of the gods, religious belief based on fear or ignorance and considered incompatible with truth
or reason, literally a standing over, noun of action from past participle stem of superstare stand
on or over; survive, from super above (see super-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand
(see stet). There are many theories to explain the Latin sense developmen, but none has yet been
generally accepted.              (see superstitious). Originally especially of religion; sense of
unreasonable notion is from 1794.


superstitious (adj.)

late 14c., involving faith in supernatural powers or magic; characteristic of pagan religion or
false religion, from Anglo-French supersticius, Old French supersticios, or directly from Latin
superstitiosus prophetic; full of dread of the supernatural, from superstitio prophecy, soothsaying,
excessive fear of the gods (see superstition).


superstore (n.)

1960, from super- + store (n.).


superstructure (n.)

1640s, from super- + structure (n.).


supertanker (n.)

1921, from super- + tanker.


supervene (v.)

1640s, come as something additional, from Latin supervenire come on top of, come in addition to,
come after, follow upon, from super over, upon (see super-) + venire come (see venue). Related:
Supervened; supervening.


supervenient (adj.)

1590s, from Latin supervenientem (nominative superveniens), present participle of supervenire come
in addition to (see supervene). Related: Superveniently.


supervention (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin superventionem (nominative superventio), noun of action from past participle
stem of supervenire come in addition to (see supervene).


supervise (v.)

late 15c., to look over (implied in supervising), from Medieval Latin supervisus, past participle of
supervidere oversee, inspect, from Latin super over (see super-) + videre see (see vision). Meaning
to oversee and superintend the work or performance of others is attested from 1640s. Related:
Supervised.


supervision (n.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin supervisionem (nominative supervisio), noun of action from past
participle stem of supervidere oversee, inspect (see supervise).


supervisor (n.)

one who inspects and directs the work of others, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin supervisor, agent
noun from supervidere oversee, inspect (see supervise).


supervisory (adj.)

1828, from supervise + -ory.


superwoman (n.)

1906, as female equivalent of superman in the Nietzschean sense. From 1976 in the sense of one who
successfully combines career and motherhood.


supinate (v.)

1831, to place the hand so that the palm is turned upward, from Latin supinatus, past participle of
supinare to bend back, related to supinus (see supine). Related: Supinated; supinating; supinator.


supination (n.)

1660s, from Late Latin supinationem (nominative supinatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of supinare (see supinate).


supine (adj.)

c.1500, lying on the back, from Latin supinus bent backwards, thrown backwards, lying on the back,
figuratively inactive, indolent, from PIE *(s)up- (see sub-). The grammatical use for Latin verbal
noun formed from the past participle stem (mid-15c.) is from Late Latin supinum verbum supine verb,
perhaps so called because, though furnished with a noun case ending, it falls back on the verb.
Related: Supinely.


supper (n.)

mid-13c., soper, the last meal of the day, from Old French soper evening meal, noun use of
infinitive soper to eat the evening meal, which is of Germanic origin (see sup (v.1)).    Formerly,
the last of the three meals of the day (breakfast, dinner, and supper); now applied to the last
substantial meal of the day when dinner is taken in the middle of the day, or to a late meal
following an early evening dinner. Supper is usually a less formal meal than late dinner. [OED]
Applied since c.1300 to the last meal of Christ.


suppertime (n.)

also supper-time, late 14c., from supper + time (n.).


supplant (v.)

early 14c., to trip up, overthrow, defeat, dispossess, from Old French suplanter, sosplanter to trip
up, overthrow, drive out, usurp, or directly from Latin supplantare trip up, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + planta sole of the foot (see plant (n.)). Meaning replace one thing with another
first recorded 1670s. There is a sense evolution parallel in Hebrew akabh he beguiled, from akebh
heel.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


supplement (n.)

late 14c., from Latin supplementum that which fills up, that with which anything is made full or
whole, something added to supply a deficiency, from supplere to fill up (see supply (v.)).


supplement (v.)

1829, from supplement (n.). Compare Spanish suplementar. Related: Supplemented; supplementing.


supplemental (adj.)

c.1600, from supplement (n.) + -al (1). Related: Supplementally. Generally added to supply what is
wanted, whereas supplementary historically tends toward added as something secondary or
supernumerary.


supplementary (adj.)

1660s, added as something extra, from supplement (n.) + -ary. Suppletory in the same sense is from
1620s.


suppliant (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French suppliant, noun use of present participle of supplier to plead
humbly, entreat, beg, pray, (Old French souploier, 12c.), from Latin supplicare beg, beseech (see
supplication). Originally in English especially at law; sense of humble petitioner is from mid-16c.
As an adjective, supplicating, entreating from 1580s. Related: Suppliance; suppliantly.


supplicant (adj.)

1590s, from Latin supplicantem (nominative supplicans), present participle of supplicare plead
humbly (see supplication). As a noun from 1590s, a humble petitioner.


supplicate (v.)

early 15c., beg for, beseech, back-formation from  supplication or else from Latin supplicatus, past
participle of supplicare plead humbly, beseech, kneel down. Related: Supplicated; supplicating.


supplication (n.)

late 14c., from Old French suplicacion humble request, from Latin supplicationem (nominative
supplicatio) a public prayer, thanksgiving day, noun of action from past participle stem of
supplicare plead humbly (see supple). In ancient Rome, a religious solemnity, especially in
thanksgiving for a victory or in times of public danger.


supply (v.)

late 14c., to help, support, maintain, also fill up, make up for, from Old French soupplier fill up,
make full (Modern French suppl&#233;er) and directly from Latin supplere fill up, make full,
complete, from sub up from below (see sub-) + plere to fill (see pleio-). The meaning furnish,
provide first recorded 1520s. Related: Supplied; supplying.


supply (n.)

early 15c., assistance, relief, act of supplying, from supply (v.). Meaning that which is provided,
quantity or amount of something provided is attested from c.1600. Meaning person who temporarily
takes the place of another (especially a minister or preacher) is from 1580s. In the political
economy sense (corollary of demand (n.)) it dates from 1776; supply-side (adj.) in reference to
economic policy is attested from 1976; as a noun by 1922. Supplies necessary provisions held for
distribution and use is from c.1650.


support (v.)

late 14c., to aid, also to hold up, prop up, put up with, tolerate, from Old French suporter to
bear, endure, sustain, support (14c.), from Latin supportare convey, carry, bring up, bring forward,
from sub up from under (see sub-) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related: Supported;
supporting.


support (n.)

late 14c., act of assistance, backing, help, aid, from support (v.). Meaning that which supports,
one who provides assistance, protection, backing, etc. is early 15c. Sense of bearing of expense is
mid-15c. Physical sense of that which supports is from 1560s. Meaning services which enable
something to fulfil its function and remain in operation (as in tech support) is from 1953.


supporter (n.)

early 15c., adherent, partisan, agent noun from support (v.). Meaning that which supports is from
1590s.


supportive (adj.)

1590s, from support (v.) + -ive. Called rare in OED 1st edition and Century Dictionary. Related:
Supportively; supportiveness.


supposably (adv.)

as may be supposed, 1795, not originally American English, alteration of supposedly, or else from
supposable (1680s), from suppose (v.) + -able.


suppose (v.)

early 14c., to assume as the basis of argument, from Old French suposer to assume (13c.), probably a
replacement (influenced by Old French poser put, place) of *suppondre, from Latin supponere put or
place under; to subordinate, make subject, from sub under (see sub-) + ponere put, place (see
position). Meaning to admit as possible, to believe to be true is from 1520s.


supposed (adj.)

believed or thought to exist, 1580s, past participle adjective from suppose (v.); often with the -e-
pronounced, to distinguish it from the passive past tense supposed, now common in the sense of to
have a duty or obligation (1859).


supposedly (adv.)

as may be supposed, presumably, 1610s, from supposed + -ly (2).


supposition (n.)

early 15c., a term in logic, assumption, hypothesis, from Medieval Latin suppositionem (nominative
suppositio) assumption, hypothesis, a supposition, noun of action from past participle stem of
supponere (see suppose); influenced by Greek hypothesis. In classical Latin, a putting under,
substitution. Earlier in English in the same sense was supposal (late 14c.). Related: Suppositional;
suppositionally.


supposititious (adj.)

put by artifice in place of another, 1610s, from Latin supposititius, from suppositus, past
participle of supponere (see suppose).


suppository (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin suppositorium a suppository, noun use of neuter of Late Latin
adjective suppositorius placed underneath or up, from Latin suppositus, past participle of supponere
put or place under (see suppose).


suppress (v.)

late 14c. (implied in suppressing) be burdensome; 1520s as put down by force or authority, from
Latin suppressus, past participle of supprimere press down, stop, hold back, check, stifle, from sub
down, under (see sub-) + premere push against (see press (v.1)). Sense of prevent or prohibit the
circulation of is from 1550s of publications; medical use from 1620s. Related: Suppressed;
suppressing.


suppressant (n.)

that which suppresses, 1922, from suppress + -ant.


suppression (n.)

early 15c., from Latin suppressionem (nominative suppresio), noun of action from past participle
stem of supprimere (see suppress).


supprise (n.)

mid-15c., injury, wrong, outrage, from supprise (v.) overpower, subdue, put down; grieve, afflict
(c.1400), also take unawares, attack unexpectedly (mid-15c.), from Anglo-French supprise, fem. past
participle of supprendre, variant of sorprendre (see surprise (n.)). The noun later also had sense
oppression; surprise attack, but perhaps originally was an alternate form of surprise used in a
specific sense.


suppurate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin suppuratus, past participle of suppurare form or discharge pus (see
suppuration). Related: Suppurated; suppurating.


suppuration (n.)

early 15c., from French suppuration or directly from Latin suppurationem (nominative suppuratio),
noun of action from past participle stem of suppurare form or discharge pus, from sub under (see
sub-) + stem of pus (see pus).


suppurative (adj.)

1540s, from medical Latin suppurativus, from suppurat-, stem of suppurare (see suppuration). As a
noun from 1560s.


supra-

word-forming element meaning above, over, beyond, before, from Latin supra above, over, before,
beyond, on the upper side, in supera (parte), literally on the upper (side), from old fem. ablative
singular of superus (adj.) above, related to super above, over (see super-). In English
interchangeable with, but somewhat more technical than, super-. Rare as a prefix in Latin, more
common in Medieval Latin, in English chiefly scientific or technical.


supra-national (adj.)

also supranational, 1871 (T.H. Huxley), from supra- + national. Perhaps inspired by German supra-
national (1865).


supra-nationalism (n.)

also supranationalism, 1901, from supra-national + -ism.


supralapsarian (adj.)

1630s, with -ian + supralapsary, from supra- + Latin lapsus (see lapse (n.)). The opposite of
infralapsarian.


supremacist (n.)

by 1948, originally with reference to racial beliefs and in most cases with white, from supremacy +
-ist. Compare supremist. Related: Supremacism.


supremacy (n.)

1540s, from supreme + -acy, or from Latin supremitatem (nominative supremitas). Supremity in same
sense is from 1530s.


supreme (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French supr&ecirc;me (15c.) and directly from Latin supremus highest, superlative
of superus situated above, from super above (see super-). Supreme Being God first attested 1690s;
Supreme Court is from 1689.


supremist (n.)

1640s, one who holds supreme authority, from supreme + -ist.


sur- (1)

word-forming element meaning over, above, beyond, in addition, especially in words from Anglo-French
and Old French, from Old French sour-, sor-, sur-, from Latin super (see super-).


sur- (2)

assimilated form of sub- before -r-.


sura (n.)

chapter of the Quran, 1610s, from Arabic surah, literally step, degree. Compare Hebrew shurah row,
line.


surcease (v.)

early 15c., cease from an action, desist, from Anglo-French surseser, Old French sursis, past
participle of surseoir to refrain, delay, from Latin supersedere forbear, refrain or desist from
(see supersede). The English spelling with -c- was influenced by the unrelated verb cease. As a noun
from 1580s.


surcharge (v.)

early 15c., overcharge, charge too much expense, from Old French surcharger to overload, overburden,
overcharge (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + chargier to load (see charge (v.)). Meaning make
an extra charge on is from 1885. The noun is also first attested early 15c. Related: Surcharged;
surcharging.


surcingle (n.)

girth for a horse or other animal, late 14c., from Old French surcengle, from sur- over (see sur-
(1)) + cengle a girdle, from Latin cingulum girth (see cinch (n.)).


surcoat (n.)

outer coat, early 14c., from Old French surcote outer garment, from sur- on, upon, over, above (see
sur- (1)) + cote (see coat (n.)).


surculation (n.)

act of pruning, 1660s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin surculare chear of shoots
or twigs, from surculus tender young shoot, twig, sprout, sucker.


surd (adj.)

1550s, irrational (of numbers), from Latin surdus deaf, unheard, silent, dull; willfully deaf,
inattentive, possibly related to susurrus a muttering, whispering (see susurration). The
mathematical sense is from the use of Latin surdus to translate Arabic (jadhr) asamm deaf (root),
itself apparently a loan-translation of Greek alogos, literally speechless, without reason (Euclid
book x, Def.). In French, sourd remains the principal word for deaf. As a noun from 1540s. Related:
Surdity.


sure (adj.)

early 13c., safe against attack, secure, later firm, reliable (c.1300); mentally certain, confident
(mid-14c.); firm, strong, resolute (c.1400), from Old French seur, sur safe, secure; undoubted,
dependable, trustworthy (12c.), from Latin securus free from care, untroubled, heedless, safe (see
secure (adj.)). Pronunciation development is that of sugar (n.).    As an affirmative meaning yes,
certainly it dates from 1803, from Middle English meanings firmly established; having no doubt, and
phrases like to be sure (1650s), sure enough (1540s), and for sure (1580s). The use as an adverb
meaning assuredly goes back to early 14c. Sure-footed is from 1630s, literal and figurative; sure
thing dates from 1836. In 16c.-17c., Suresby was an appellation for a person to be depended upon.


surefire (adj.)

also sure-fire, by 1864, American English, from sure + fire (v.). Originally of rifles.


surely (adv.)

14c., from sure (adj.) + -ly (2).


surety (n.)

c.1300, a guarantee, promise, pledge, an assurance, from Old French seurt&eacute; a promise, pledge,
guarantee; assurance, confidence (12c., Modern French s&#251;ret&#233;), from Latin securitatem
(nominative securitas) freedom from care or danger, safety, security, from securus (see secure
(adj.)). From late 14c. as security, safety, stability; state of peace, also certainty, certitude;
confidence. Meaning one who makes himself responsible for another is from early 15c. Until 1966, the
French national criminal police department was the S&#251;ret&eacute; nationale.


surf (n.)

1680s, probably from earlier suffe (1590s), of uncertain origin. Originally used in reference to the
coast of India, hence perhaps of Indic origin. Or perhaps a phonetic respelling of sough, which
meant a rushing sound.


surf (v.)

ride the crest of a wave, 1917, from surf (n.). Related: Surfed; surfing. In the Internet sense,
first recorded 1993.


surface (v.)

come to the surface, 1898, from surface (n.). Earlier it meant bring to the surface (1885), and to
give something a (polished) surface (1778). Related: Surfaced; surfacing.


surface (n.)

1610s, from French surface an outermost boundary, outside part (16c.), from Old French sur- above
(see sur-) + face (see face (n.)). Patterned on Latin superficies surface, upper side, top (see
superficial). As an adjective from 1660s.


surfeit (v.)

late 14c., intransitive, indulge or feed to excess, from surfeit (n.). Related: Surfeited;
surfeiting. Transitive sense from 1590s.


surfeit (n.)

early 14c., excess quantity; late 14c., overindulgence, from Old French sorfet excess; arrogance
(Modern French surfait), noun use of past participle of surfaire overdo, from sur- over (see sur-
(1)) + faire do, from Latin facere to make (see factitious).


surfer (n.)

1955, agent noun from surf (v.).


surfing (n.)

1955, verbal noun from surf (v.). The surfing craze went nationwide in U.S. from California in 1963.
Surf-board is from 1826, originally in a Hawaiian and Polynesian context. Surf music attested from
1963.    It is highly amusing to a stranger to go out into the south part of this town, some day
when the sea is rolling in heavily over the reef, and to observe there the evolutions and rapid
career of a company of surf-players. The sport is so attractive and full of wild excitement to
Hawaiians, and withal so healthful, that I cannot but hope it will be many years before civilization
shall look it out of countenance, or make it disreputable to indulge in this manly, though it be
dangerous, exercise. [the Rev. Henry T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, New York, 1851]   <hr
/>   The basis of surfing music is a rock and roll bass beat figuration, coupled with a raunch-type
weird-sounding lead guitar plus wailing saxes. Surfing music has to sound untrained with a certain
rough flavor to appeal to the teenagers. [music publisher Murray Wilson, quoted in Billboard, June
29, 1963]


surge (n.)

late 15c., fountain, stream, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French sourge-, stem of
sourdre to rise, swell, from Latin surgere to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack,
contraction of surrigere, from assimilated form of sub up from below (see sub-) + regere to keep
straight, guide (see regal). Meaning high, rolling swell of water is from 1520s; figurative sense of
excited rising up (as of feelings) is from 1510s.


surge (v.)

1510s, to rise and fall, from surge (n.), or from Middle French surgir rise, ride (as a ship does a
wave), spring up, arrive. Meaning rise high and roll forcefully is from 1560s. Related: Surged;
surging.


surgent (adj.)

rising in waves, 1590s, from Latin surgentem (nominative surgens) rising, present participle of
surgere to rise (see surge (n.)). In psychology from 1933.


surgeon (n.)

c.1300, sorgien, cirurgian person who heals by manual operation on the patient, from Anglo-French
surgien (13c.), from Old French surgien, cirurgien (13c.), from cirurgie surgery, from Latin
chirurgia surgery, from Greek kheirourgia, from kheirourgos working or done by hand, from kheir hand
(see chiro-) + ergon work (see organ).


surgery (n.)

c.1300, sirgirie, medical treatment of an operative nature, such as cutting-operations, setting of
fractures, etc., from Old French surgerie, surgeure, contraction of serurgerie, from Late Latin
chirurgia (see surgeon).


surgical (adj.)

1770, earlier chirurgical (early 15c.), from surgery + -ical. Related: Surgically.   <b>surgical
strike:</b> There is no such thing. Don't use unless in a quote, then question what that means.
[Isaac Cubillos, Military Reporters Stylebook and Reference Guide, 2010]


surly (adj.)

1570s, haughty, imperious, alteration of Middle English sirly lordly, imperious (14c.), literally
like a sir, from sir + -ly (1). The meaning rude, gruff is first attested 1660s. For sense
development, compare lordly, and German herrisch domineering, imperious, from Herr master, lord.
Related: Surliness.


surmise (v.)

c.1400, in law, to charge, allege, from Old French surmis, past participle of surmettre to accuse,
from sur- upon (see sur- (1)) + mettre put, from Latin mittere to send (see mission). Meaning to
infer conjecturally is recorded from 1700, from the noun. Related: Surmised; surmising.


surmise (n.)

early 15c., legal, a charge, a formal accusation, from Old French surmise accusation, noun use of
past participle of surmettre (see surmise (v.)). Meaning inference, guess is first found in English
1580s.    Then felt I like some watcher of the skies         When a new planet swims into his ken;
Or like stout Cortez, when with eagle eyes         He stared at the Pacificâ&euro;&rdquo;and all
his men     Look'd at each other with a wild surmiseâ&euro;&rdquo;    Silent, upon a peak in
Darien.    [Keats]


surmount (v.)

early 14c., to rise above, go beyond, from Old French surmonter rise above, from sur- beyond  (see
sur- (1)) + monter to go up (see mount (v.)). Meaning to prevail over, overcome is recorded from
late 14c. Related: Surmounted; surmounting.


surmountable (adj.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French sormuntable; see surmount + -able.


surname (n.)

c.1300, name, title, or epithet added to a person's name, from sur above (from Latin super-; see
sur- (1)) + name (n.); modeled on Anglo-French surnoun surname (early 14c.), variant of Old French
sornom, from sur over + nom name. As family name from late 14c.    An Old English word for this was
freonama, literally free name. Meaning family name is first found late 14c. Hereditary surnames
existed among Norman nobility in England in early 12c., among the common people they began to be
used 13c., increasingly frequent until near universal by end of 14c. The process was later in the
north of England than the south. The verb is attested from 1510s. Related: Surnamed.


surpass (v.)

1550s, from Middle French surpasser go beyond, exceed, excel (16c.), from sur- beyond (see sur- (1))
+ passer to go by (see pass (v.)). Related: Surpassed; surpassing.


surplice (n.)

loose white robe, c.1200, from Old French surpeliz (12c.), from Medieval Latin superpellicium
(vestmentum) a surplice, literally an over fur (garment), from Latin super over (see super-) +
Medieval Latin pellicium fur garment, tunic of skins, from Latin pellis skin (see film (n.)). So
called because it was donned over fur garments worn by clergymen for warmth in unheated medieval
churches.


surplus (n.)

late 14c., from Old French sorplus remainder, extra (12c., Modern French surplus), from Medieval
Latin superplus excess, surplus, from Latin super over (see super-) + plus more (see plus). As an
adjective from late 14c.


surplusage (n.)

c.1400, from Medieval Latin surplusagium, from surplus (see surplus).


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


surprise (v.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., overcome, overpower (of emotions), from the noun or from Anglo-
French surprise, fem. past participle of Old French surprendre (see surprise (n.)). Meaning come
upon unexpectedly is from 1590s; that of strike with astonishment is 1650s.


surprised (adj.)

1610s, attacked unexpectedly, past participle adjective from surprise (v.). Meaning excited by
something unexpected is from 1882.


surprising (adv.)

1660s, present participle adjective from surprise (v.). Related: Surprisingly.


surreal (adj.)

1936, back-formation from surrealism or surrealist. Related: Surreally.


surrealism (n.)

1927, from French surr&eacute;alisme (from sur- beyond + r&eacute;alisme realism), according to OED
coined c.1917 by Guillaume Apollinaire, taken over by Andre Breton as the name of the movement he
launched in 1924 with Manifeste de Surr&eacute;alisme. Taken up in English at first in the French
form; the anglicized version is from 1931.  De cette alliance nouvelle, car jusqu'ici les
d&eacute;cors et les costumes d'une part, la chor&eacute;graphie d'autre part, n'avaient entre eux
qu'un lien factice, il este r&eacute;sult&eacute;, dans 'Parade,' une sorte de surr&eacute;alisme.
[Apollinaire, Notes to 'Parade' ]    See sur- (1) + realism.


surrealist (adj.)

1917, from French surr&eacute;aliste (see surrealism). From 1925 as a noun.


surrealistic (adj.)

1930, from surrealist (see surrealism) + -ic.


surreality (n.)

1936, from surreal + -ity.


surrender (v.)

mid-15c., to give (something) up, from Old French surrendre give up, deliver over (13c.), from sur-
over (see sur- (1)) + rendre give back (see render (v.)). Reflexive sense of to give oneself up
(especially as a prisoner) is from 1580s. Related: Surrendered; surrendering.


surrender (n.)

early 15c., in law, a giving up (of an estate, land grant, interest in property, etc.), from Anglo-
French surrendre, Old French surrendre noun use of infinitive, give up, deliver over (see surrender
(v.)).


surreptitious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin surrepticius stolen, furtive, clandestine, from surreptus, past participle of
surripere seize secretly, take away, steal, plagiarize, from assimilated form of sub from under
(hence, secretly; see sub-) + rapere to snatch (see rapid). Related: Surreptitiously.


Surrey

Old English su&thorn;rige (722), literally Southerly District (relative to Middlesex), from
su&eth;er, from su&eth; (see south) + -ge district (see yeoman). Bede and others use it as a folk-
name, as if People from Surrey. Meaning two-seated, four-wheeled pleasure carriage is from 1895,
short for Surrey cart, an English pleasure cart (introduced in U.S. 1872), named for Surrey,
England, where it first was made.


surrogacy (n.)

1811; see surrogate + -cy.


surrogate (n.)

early 15c., from Latin surrogatus, past participle of surrogare/subrogare put in another's place,
substitute, from assimilated form of sub in the place of, under (see sub-) + rogare to ask, propose
(see rogation). Meaning woman pregnant with the fertilized egg of another woman is attested from
1978 (from 1972 of animals; surrogate mother in a psychological sense is from 1971). As an adjective
from 1630s.


surrogation (n.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin surrigationem (nominative surrogatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin surrogare (see subrogate).


surround (v.)

early 15c., to flood, overflow, from Anglo-French surounder, Middle French soronder to overflow,
abound; surpass, dominate, from Late Latin superundare overflow, from Latin super over (see super-)
+ undare to flow in waves, from unda wave (see water (n.1); and compare abound). Sense of to shut in
on all sides first recorded 1610s, influenced by figurative meaning in French of dominate, and by
sound association with round, which also influenced the spelling of the English word from 17c.
Related: Surrounded; surrounding.


surroundings (n.)

environment, 1857, plural verbal noun from surround (v.).


surtax (n.)

extra tax, 1834, from French surtaxe, from Old French sur- over (see sur- (1)) + taxe tax (see tax
(n.)).


surveil (v.)

1904, back-formation from surveillance. Sometimes also surveille. Related: Surveilled; surveilling.


surveillance (n.)

1802, from French surveillance oversight, supervision, a watch, noun of action from surveiller
oversee, watch (17c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + veiller to watch, from Latin vigilare, from
vigil watchful (see vigil). Seemingly a word that came to English from the Terror in France
(surveillance committees were formed in every French municipality in March 1793 by order of the
Convention to monitor the actions and movements of suspect persons, outsiders, and dissidents).


survey (v.)

c.1400, to consider, contemplate, from Anglo-French surveier, Old French sorveoir look (down) at,
look upon, notice; guard, watch, from Medieval Latin supervidere oversee (see supervise). Meaning
examine the condition of is from mid-15c. That of to take linear measurements of a tract of ground
is recorded from 1540s. Related: Surveyed; surveying; surveyance (late 14c.).


survey (n.)

late 15c., survei, oversight, supervision, from survey (v.).  The meaning act of viewing in detail
is from 1540s. Meaning systematic collection of data on opinions, etc. is attested from 1927.


surveyor (n.)

early 15c. (late 14c. as a surname), from Anglo-French surveiour guard, overseer, Old French
sorveor, from Old French verb sorveoir to survey (see survey (v.)).


survivability (n.)

1881, from survivable + -ity.


survivable (adj.)

capable of being survived, 1961, of automobile wrecks, from survive + -able. Earlier capable of
surviving, 1879.


survival (n.)

1590s, act of surviving; continuation after some event, from survive + -al (2). Phrase survival of
the fittest (1864) was used by Spencer in place of Darwin's natural selection.


survivalist (n.)

from 1882 in various senses, from survival + -ist. As one who practices outdoor survival skills
(often in anticipation of apocalypse or in fear of government), attested by 1981.


survive (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in surviving), to outlive, continue in existence after the death of another,
originally in the legal (inheritance) sense, from Anglo-French survivre, Old French souvivre (12c.,
Modern French survivre), from Latin supervivere live beyond, live longer than, from super over,
beyond (see super-) + vivere to live (see vivid). Intransitive sense to live on is from late 15c.
Related: Survived; surviving.


surviver (n.)

c.1600, rare nativized agent noun from survive.


survivor (n.)

early 15c. in the legal sense of one who outlives another, agent noun from survive. Meaning one who
has a knack for pulling through adversity is attested from 1971. Survivor syndrome is first recorded
1968.


sus-

assimilated form of sub- before -s-.


Susan

fem. proper name, from French Susanne, from Late Latin Susanna (see Susanna). A top-10 name for
girls born in the U.S. 1945-1968 (peaking at #2 from 1957-60).


Susanna

also Susannah, fem. proper name, from Latin Susanna, from Greek Sousanna, from Hebrew Shoshannah,
literally a lily. One of the women that attended Jesus in his journeys. Greek also borrowed the
Semitic word in its literal sense as souson lily.


susceptibility (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin susceptibilitatem (nominative susceptibilitas), from Late Latin
susceptibilis, or else a native formation from susceptible + -ity.


susceptible (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin susceptibilis capable, sustainable, susceptible, from Latin suscept-, past
participle stem of suscipere to take, catch, take up, lift up; receive, admit; submit to; sustain,
support, bear; acknowledge, accept, from sub up from under (see sub-) + capere to take (see
capable). Susceptive in the same sense is recorded from early 15c. Related: Susceptibly.


susceptive (adj.)

early 15c., having the quality of taking something in, receptive, capable of admitting, from
Medieval Latin susceptivus, from suscept-, stem of suscipere (see susceptible). Related:
Susceptively; susceptiveness; susceptivity.


suscitate (v.)

stir up, excite, 1520s, from Latin suscitatus, past participle of suscitare (see resuscitate).
Related: Suscitated; suscitating; suscitation.


sushi (n.)

1893, from Japanese, where it is said originally to refer to the vinegared rice, not the raw fish.


suspect (adj.)

early 14c., suspected of wrongdoing, under suspicion; mid-14c., regarded with mistrust, liable to
arouse suspicion, from Old French suspect (14c.), from Latin suspectus suspected, regarded with
suspicion or mistrust, past participle of suspicere look up at, look upward, figuratively look up
to, admire, respect; also look at secretly, look askance at, hence, figuratively, mistrust, regard
with suspicion, from assimilated form of sub up to (see sub-) + specere to look at (see scope
(n.1)). The notion behind the word is look at secretly, hence, look at distrustfully.


suspect (n.)

a suspected person, 1590s, from suspect (adj.). Earlier as a noun it meant a suspicion, mistrust
(late 14c.).


suspect (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in suspected), from suspect (adj.) and in part from Middle French suspecter or
directly from Latin suspectare to mistrust, frequentative of suspicere. Related: Suspecting.


suspend (v.)

c.1300, to bar or exclude temporarily from some function or privilege; also to set aside (a law,
etc.), to cause to cease for a time, from Old French sospendre remove from office; hang up (12c.),
or directly from Latin suspendere to hang up, kill by hanging; make uncertain, render doubtful;
stay, stop, interrupt, set aside temporarily, from assimilated form of sub up from under (see sub-)
+ pendere cause to hang, weigh (see pendant). In English, the literal sense of to cause to hang by a
support from above is recorded from mid-15c. Related: Suspended; suspending.


suspended (adj.)

1530s, temporarily deprived of privilege, past participle adjective from suspend. Meaning delayed is
from 1782, first attested in suspended animation. Meaning hung from something is from 1796. In law,
suspended sentence attested from 1833.


suspenders (n.)

straps for holding up trousers, etc., 1806, American English, plural agent noun from suspend (v.).


suspense (n.)

c.1400, abeyance, temporary cessation; state of not being carried out (of legal matters), from
Anglo-French suspens (in en suspens in abeyance, c.1300), Old French sospense delay, deferment (of
judgement), act of suspending, from Latin suspensus, past participle of suspendere to hang up;
interrupt (see suspend). Meaning state of mental uncertainty with more or less anxiety (mid-15c.) is
from legal meaning, perhaps via notion of awaiting an expected decision, or from state of having the
mind or thoughts suspended. As a genre of novels, stories, etc., attested from 1951.


suspenseful (adj.)

1630s, from suspense + -ful. Related: Suspensefully.


suspension (n.)

early 15c., a temporary halting or deprivation, from Latin suspensionem (nominative suspensio) the
act or state of hanging up, a vaulting, noun of action, from past participle stem of suspendere to
hang up, cause to hang, suspend (see suspend). Suspension of disbelief is from Coleridge:  A
semblance of truth sufficient to procure for these shadows of imagination that willing suspension of
disbelief for the moment, which constitutes poetic faith. [Biographia Literaria, 1817]    Meaning
action of hanging by a support from above is attested from 1540s. Meaning particles suspended in
liquid without dissolving is from 1707. Suspension-bridge first recorded 1819 (earlier suspended
bridge, 1796).


suspicion (n.)

c.1300, act of suspecting; unverified conjecture of wrongdoing; mistrust, distrust, from Anglo-
French suspecioun, corresponding to Old French suspicion, sospe&ccedil;on mistrust, suspicion
(Modern French soup&ccedil;on), from Late Latin suspectionem (nominative suspectio) mistrust,
suspicion, fear, awe, noun of state from past participle stem of Latin suspicere look up at (see
suspect (adj.)). Spelling in English influenced 14c. by learned Old French forms closer to Latin
suspicionem. Used as a verb meaning to suspect, it figures in literary representations of U.S.
Western (Kentucky) slang from 1830s.    Suspicion words in other Indo-European languages also tend
to be words for think or look with prefixes meaning under, behind; such as Greek hypopsia (hypo
under, opsis sight), hyponoia (noein to think); Lettish aizduomas (aiz behind, duomat think);
Russian podozrenie (Slavic podu under, Old Church Slavonic zireti see, look); Dutch achterdocht
(achter behind, denken to think).


suspicious (adj.)

mid-14c., deserving of or exciting suspicion, from Old French sospecious, from Latin suspiciosus,
suspitiosus exciting suspicion, causing mistrust, also full of suspicion, ready to suspect, from
stem of suspicere (see suspicion). Meaning full of suspicion, inclined to suspect in English is
attested from c.1400. Poe (c.1845) proposed suspectful to take one of the two conflicting senses.
Related: suspiciously; suspiciousness.


suspiration (n.)

late 15c., from Latin suspirationem (nominative suspiratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of suspirare (see suspire).


suspire (v.)

mid-15c., to sigh, from Old French souspirer (Modern French soupirer), or directly from Latin
suspirare to draw a deep breath, heave a sigh, from assimilated form of sub under (see sub-) +
spirare to breathe (see spirit). Related: Suspired; suspiring; suspiral; suspirious.


Susquehanna

river through Pennsylvania, named for a native people who lived along the southern reaches of it at
the time of European contact, An Algonquian name for an Iroquoian people; it has been translated as
'people at the falls' or 'roily water people' [Bright].


suss (v.)

to figure out, investigate and discover, 1966, earlier to suspect (1953, police jargon), a slang
shortening of suspect (v.). Related: Sussed.


Sussex

Old English Su&#254; Seaxe (land of the) South Saxons; see south + Saxon.


sustain (v.)

c.1300, give support to, from stem of Old French sostenir hold up, bear; suffer, endure (13c.), from
Latin sustinere hold up, hold upright; furnish with means of support; bear, undergo, endure, from
sub up from below (see sub-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning continue, keep up (an action,
etc.) is from early 14c. Sense of endure without failing or yielding is from c.1400. Related:
Sustained; sustaining.


sustainability (n.)

1907, in reference to a legal objection, from sustainable + -ity. General sense (in economics,
agriculture, ecology) by 1972.    Sustainability is defined as a requirement of our generation to
manage the resource base such that the average quality of life that we ensure ourselves can
potentially be shared by all future generations. ... Development is sustainable if it involves a
non-decreasing average quality of life. [Geir B. Asheim, Sustainability, The World Bank, 1994]


sustainable (adj.)

1610s, bearable, from sustain + -able. Attested from 1845 in the sense defensible; from 1965 with
the meaning capable of being continued at a certain level.  Sustainable growth is recorded from
1965. Related: Sustainably.


sustenance (n.)

c.1300, means of living, subsistence, livelihood, from Old French sostenance support, aid (Modern
French soutenance), from Late Latin sustinentia endurance, from present participle stem of Latin
sustinere (see sustain). Meaning action of sustaining life by food is from late 14c. Sense of
nourishment is recorded from late 15c. Related: Sustenant.


sustentation (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French, Old French sustentacion, sostentacion sustaining of life, from Latin
sustentationem (nominative sustentatio) maintenance, noun of action from past participle stem of
sustentare hold upright, hold up; feed, nourish, support; hold out, endure, suffer, frequentative of
sustinere (see sustain).


susurrant (adj.)

1791, from Latin susurrantem (nominative susurrans), present participle of susurrare to hum, murmur
(see susurration). Susurrous (adj.) is from 1824.


susurration (n.)

a whispering, a murmur, c.1400, from Latin susurrationem (nominative susurratio), from past
participle stem of susurrare to hum, murmur, from susurrus a murmur, whisper, a reduplication of the
PIE imitative base *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (cognates: Sanskrit svarati sounds, resounds, Greek
syrinx flute, Latin surdus dull, mute, Old Church Slavonic svirati to whistle, Lithuanian surmo
pipe, shawm, German schwirren to buzz, Old English swearm a swarm).


susurrus (n.)

1809, earlier as a medical Latin word in English, from Latin susurrus, literally a humming,
muttering, whispering (see susurration).    Among the diseases of the ear, one of the most prevalent
is the Paracusis imaginaria, to which both sexes are equally liable; and another variety of the same
tribe, more frequent among female patients, called the Susurrus criticus, or Scandal-buzz. [The
Lounger, Dec. 23, 1786]


sutile (adj.)

done by stitching, 1680s, from Latin sutilis sewed or bound together, from sut-, past participle
stem of suere to sew (see sew).


sutler (n.)

formerly also suttler, person who follows an army to sell food to soldiers, 1580s, from Middle Dutch
soeteler small tradesman, peddler, victualer, camp cook (Dutch zoetelaar), cognate with Middle Low
German suteler, sudeler person who performs dirty tasks, Middle High German sudelen to cook badly,
Middle Dutch soetelen to cook badly. Probably also related to Dutch zieder, German sieden to seethe,
from Proto-Germanic *suth-, from PIE root *seut- to seethe, boil (see seethe).


sutra (n.)

in Buddhism, series of aphorisms concerning ceremonies, rites, and conduct, 1801, from Sanskrit
sutram rule, literally string, thread (as a measure of straightness), from sivyati sew; cognate with
Latin suere to sew (see sew). Applied also to rules of grammar, law, philosophy, etc., along with
their commentaries.


suttee (n.)

self-cremation of a Hindu widow on her husband's funeral pyre, 1786, from Hindi, from Sanskrit sati
virtuous woman, faithful wife, used also of the burning, fem. of sat good, wise, virtuous, true,
literally existing, present participle of asmi I am (cognate with Latin esse; see essence).
Properly, the word for the woman who does so. The custom was abolished in British India in 1829.


suttle (v.)

carry on the business of a suttler, 1640s, perhaps a back-formation from suttler, variant of sutler.
Related: Suttled; suttling.


suture (n.)

early 15c., surgical stitching of a wound, etc., from Latin sutura a seam, a sewing together, from
sutus, past participle of suere to sew (see sew). Meaning a seam, a line of joining or closure is
from 1570s.


suture (v.)

1777, from suture (n.). Related: Sutured; suturing.


SUV

by 1988, abbreviation of sport/utility vehicle (itself attested from 1982).


suzerain (n.)

sovereign, ruler, 1807, from French suzerain (14c., Old French suserain), noun use of adjective
meaning sovereign but not supreme, from adverb sus up, above, on analogy of soverain (see sovereign
(adj.)). Old French sus is from Vulgar Latin susum, from Latin sursum upward, above, contraction of
subversum, from subvertere (see subvert).


suzerainty (n.)

late 15c., supremacy, from Old French suserenete office or jurisdiction of a suzerain, from suserain
(see suzerain).


Suzie

also Susie, familiar form of fem. proper name Susan, Susanna. Suzie Wong is in reference to The
World of Suzie Wong, 1957 novel by R.L. Mason featuring a Hong Kong prostitute. Susie Q as the name
of a popular dance is from 1936.


svelte (adj.)

slender, lithe, 1817, from French svelte slim, slender (17c.), from Italian svelto slim, slender,
originally pulled out, lengthened, past participle of svellere to pluck or root out, from Vulgar
Latin *exvellere, from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + vellere to pluck, stretch, from PIE *wel-no-,
suffixed form of root *wel- (4) to tear, pull.


Svengali

one who exerts controlling or mesmeric influence on another, 1914, from hypnotist character of that
name in the novel Trilby (1894) by George Du Maurier.


swab (n.)

1650s, mop made of rope or yarn, from swabber (c.1600) mop for cleaning a ship's deck, from Dutch
zwabber, akin to West Frisian swabber mop, from Proto-Germanic *swabb-, perhaps of imitative origin,
denoting back-and-forth motion, especially in liquid.    Non-nautical meaning anything used for
mopping up is from 1787; as cloth or sponge on a handle to cleanse the mouth, etc., from 1854. Slang
meaning a sailor first attested 1798, short for swabber member of a ship's crew assigned to swab
decks (1590s), which by c.1600 was being used in a broader sense of one who behaves like a low-
ranking sailor, one fit only to use a swab.


swab (v.)

1719, possibly a back-formation from swabber (see swab (n.)). Related: Swabbed; swabbing. Related:
Swabification mopping (1833).


Swabia

former duchy in central Germany, from Medieval Latin Suabia (German Schwaben), named for the
Germanic tribe called by the Romans Suebi, said to be from Proto-Germanic *sweba, perhaps ultimately
from PIE root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive (referring back to the subject of a
sentence), also used in forms denoting the speaker's social group, (we our-)selves.


Swabian

1785; see from Swabia + -an. The Swabian emperors (1138-1254) were so called because the founder of
the line was duke of Swabia.


swaddle (v.)

bind with long strips of cloth, late 15c. alteration of Middle English swathlen (c.1200), probably a
frequentative form of Old English swa&thorn;ian (see swathe). Related: Swaddled; swaddling. Phrase
swaddling clothes is from Coverdale (1535) translation of Luke ii:7.    Young children ... are still
bandaged in this manner in many parts of Europe to prevent them from using their limbs freely, owing
to a fancy that those who are left free in infancy become deformed. [Century Dictionary, 1891]
Wyclif uses swathing-clothes (late 14c.).


swag (v.)

to move heavily or unsteadily, 1520s, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse sveggja
to swing, sway, from the same source as Old English swingan to swing (see swing (v.)). Related:
Swagged; swagging.


swag (n.)

1650s, a lurching or swaying, from swag (v.). Meaning ornamental festoon (1794) is said to be
probably a separate development from the verb (but see swage). Swag lamp attested from 1966.
Colloquial sense of promotional material (from recording companies, etc.) was in use by 2001; swag
was English criminal's slang for quantity of stolen property, loot from c.1839. This might be
related to earlier senses of round bag (c.1300) and big, blustering fellow (1580s), which may
represent separate borrowings from the Scandinavian source. The primary meaning was 'a bulging bag'
[Klein].


swage (v.)

to shape or bend by use of a tool, 1831, from swage (n.), also swedge, tool or die for bending cold
metal (1812), from French suage, according to Century Dictionary from suer to sweat. Uncertain
connection to swage ornamental moulding (late 14c.), from Old French souage (Modern French suage),
which, according to Klein, is from soue rope, from Vulgar Latin *soca, probably of Gaulish origin
(compare Breton sug cord).


swager (n.)

1881, agent noun from swage.


swagger (v.)

1580s, to strut in a defiant or insolent manner; earliest recorded usages are in Shakespeare
(Midsummer Night's Dream, 2 Henry IV, King Lear), probably a frequentative form of swag (v.) to
sway. Meaning to boast or brag is from 1590s. Related: Swaggered; swaggering. The noun is attested
from 1725.


swaggerer (n.)

1590s, agent noun from swagger (v.).


Swahili

name of a Bantu people inhabiting the coast of southeastern Africa, 1814, literally coast-dwellers,
from Arabic sawahil, plural of sahil coast + ethnic suffix -i.


swain (n.)

mid-12c., young man attendant upon a knight, from Old Norse sveinn boy, servant, attendant, from
Proto-Germanic *swainaz attendant, servant, properly one's own (man), from PIE *swoi-no-, from root
*s(w)e- oneself, alone, apart (see idiom). Cognate with Old English swan shepherd, swineherd, Old
Saxon swen, Old High German swein. Meaning country or farm laborer is from 1570s; that of lover,
wooer (in pastoral poetry) is from 1580s.


SWAK

acronym for sealed with a kiss, attested from 1911, in a legal publication quoting a letter from
1909:    ... Well Kid I don't know nothing else to say only that I hope to see your sweet face Sat.
Good by from your Dear Husban to his sweet little wife. P. S. excuse bad writing and mispelled words
take all mistakes as kisses. S.W.A.K. * * * This letter was postmarked at Des Moines October 20,
1909, addressed to Carrie Sprague at Jefferson, Iowa, and reached the latter place October 21, 1909.
[State v. Manning (a conspiracy-to-lure-women-to-prostitution case), Supreme Court of Iowa, Nov. 16,
1910, reported in Northwestern Reporter, Volume 128, 1911]    Popularized in soldiers' letters home
in World War I. It probably is meant also to echo the sound of a kiss. Compare Middle English swack
a hard blow (late 14c.).


swale (n.)

low, hollow place, often boggy, 1580s, special use of Scottish swaill low, hollow place, or East
Anglian dialectal swale shady place (mid-15c.); both probably from Old Norse svalr cool, from Proto-
Germanic *swalaz. A local word in England, in U.S. given broad application, especially to the lower
tracts of the prairie and recently to landscaping features in suburban developments.


swallow (v.)

ingest through the throat (transitive), Old English swelgan swallow, imbibe, absorb (class III
strong verb; past tense swealg, past participle swolgen), from Proto-Germanic *swelgan/*swelhan
(cognates: Old Saxon farswelgan, Old Norse svelgja to swallow, Middle Dutch swelghen, Dutch zwelgen
to gulp, swallow, Old High German swelahan to swallow, German schwelgen to revel), probably from PIE
root *swel- (1) to eat, drink (cognates: Iranian *khvara- eating).    Intransitive sense perform the
act of swallowing is from c.1700. Sense of consume, destroy is attested from mid-14c. Meaning to
accept without question is from 1590s. Related: Swallowed; swallowing.


swallow (n.1)

type of migratory bird (family Hirundinidae), Old English swealwe swallow, from Proto-Germanic
*swalwon (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Swedish svala, Danish svale, Middle Dutch
zwalewe, Dutch zwaluw, Old High German swalawa, German Schwalbe), from PIE *swol-wi- (cognates:
Russian solowej, Slovak slavik, Polish s&#322;owik nightingale). The etymological sense is disputed.
Popularly regarded as harbingers of summer; swallows building nests on or near a house is considered
good luck.


swallow (n.2)

an act of swallowing, 1822, from swallow (v.). In late Old English and Middle English it meant gulf,
abyss, hole in the earth, whirlpool, also, in Middle English, throat, gullet. Compare Old Norse
svelgr whirlpool, literally devourer, swallower. Meaning as much as one can swallow at once,
mouthful is from 1861.


swallowtail (n.)

also swallow-tail, 1540s as a type of arrowhead, from swallow (n.1) + tail (n.). Of a type of
butterfly, by 1776; of a type of coat, 1835. As an adjective from 1590s. The bird's tail is long and
deeply forked.


swam

past tense of swim (v.).


swami (n.)

1773, Hindu idol, later, Hindu religious teacher (1901), from Hindi swami master (used as a term of
address to a Brahmin), from Sanskrit svamin lord, prince, master, (one's own) master, from sva-s
one's own (from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e-; see idiom) + amah pressure, vehemence.


swamp (v.)

overwhelm, sink (as if in a swamp), 1772, from swamp (n.). Figurative sense is from 1818. Related:
Swamped; swamping.


swamp (n.)

c.1500 (implied in swampwatyr swamp-water), of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] a dialectal
survival from an Old English cognate of Old Norse sv&ouml;ppr sponge, fungus, from Proto-Germanic
*swampuz; but traditionally connected with Middle English sompe morass, swamp, which probably is
from Middle Dutch somp or Middle Low German sump swamp (see sump). All of these likely are
ultimately related to each other, from PIE *swombho- spongy; mushroom, via the notion of spongy
ground.    [B]y swamps then in general is to be understood any low grounds subject to inundations,
distinguished from marshes, in having a large growth of timber, and much underwood, canes, reeds,
wythes, vines, briers, and such like, so matted together, that they are in a great measure
impenetrable to man or beast .... [Bernard Romans, A Concise History of East and West Florida, 1775]
More popular in U.S. (swamp (n.) by itself is first attested 1624 in Capt. John Smith's description
of Virginia). Swamp-oak is from 1680s, American English. Swamp Yankee rural, rustic New Englander is
attested from 1941. Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has swamp-angel dweller in a swamp, swamp-
law might makes right.


swamp-land (n.)

1660s, from swamp (n.) + land (n.).


swamper (n.)

1735, one who lives in a swampy district, from swamp (n.). Meaning workman who clears a lumber road
through swamp or forest is 1857, American English; meaning all-purpose assistant in a restaurant or
saloon is from 1907.


swampy (adj.)

1690s, from swamp (n.) + -y (2). Related: Swampiness.


swan (n.)

Old English swan swan, from Proto-Germanic *swanaz singer (cognates: Old Saxon swan, Old Norse
svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, Old High German swan, German
Schwan), probably literally the singing bird, from PIE root *swen- to sing, make sound (see sound
(n.1)); thus related to Old English geswin melody, song and swinsian to make melody.    In classical
mythology, sacred to Apollo and to Venus. The singing of swans before death was alluded to by
Chaucer (late 14c.), but swan-song (1831) is a translation of German Schwanengesang. The ancient
Indo-European mythical swan-maiden so called by mythographers from 1829. Swan dive is recorded from
1898. A black swan was proverbial for something extremely rare or non-existent (late 14c.), after
Juvenal [Sat. vi. 164], but later they turned up in Australia (Chenopsis atratus).    Do you say no
worthy wife is to be found among all these crowds? Well, let her be handsome, charming, rich and
fertile; let her have ancient ancestors ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the
dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war--a prodigy as rare upon the earth as a black swan!
yet who could endure a wife that possessed all perfections?  I would rather have a Venusian wench
for my wife than you, O Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, if, with all your virtues, you bring me a
haughty brow, and reckon up Triumphs as part of your marriage portion. [Juvenal]


Swanee

in Stephen Foster's Old Folks at Home, river in Georgia and Florida, usually Suwanee, sometimes said
to be a corruption of Spanish San Juan [Room]; Bright says the river name is from the Cherokee
village of Sawani, for which no etymology is offered.


swang

obsolete past tense of swing (v.).


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


swanky (adj.)

imposing, stylish, 1842, from swank + -y (2). Related: swankiness.


Swansea

a Scandinavian name, probably literally Sveinn's Island.


swap (v.)

c.1200, to strike, strike the hands together, of uncertain origin, possibly imitative of the sound
of hitting or slapping. The sense of to exchange, barter, trade is first recorded 1590s, possibly
from the notion of slapping hands together as a sign of agreement in bargaining (as in strike a
bargain). Related: Swapped; swapping. The noun in this sense is attested from 1620s; earlier a
striking, an act of striking (mid-13c.). Swap-meet attested from 1968, American English.


sward (n.)

grass-covered ground, c.1300, from Old English sweard skin, hide, rind (of bacon, etc.), from Proto-
Germanic *swarthu- (cognates: Old Frisian swarde skin of the head, Middle Dutch swarde rind of
bacon, Dutch zwoord rind of bacon, German Schwarte thick, hard skin, rind, Old Norse sv&ouml;r&eth;r
walrus hide). Meaning sod, turf developed from the notion of the skin of the earth (compare Old
Norse grassv&ouml;r&eth;r, Danish gr&oslash;nsv&aelig;r greensward).


sware

obsolete or archaic past tense of swear (v.), common 15c.-17c. by analogy of past tense of bear
(v.).


swarf (n.)

grit from a grinding tool, 1560s, perhaps ultimately from Old English geswearf filings, from
sweorfan, or from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse svarf file dust, related to sverfa to
file, from PIE *swerbh- to turn, wipe off (see swerve (v.)). Later used of the material cut out to
make grooves of gramophone records (1935).


swarm (n.)

cloud of bees or other insects, Old English swearm swarm, multitude, from Proto-Germanic *swarmaz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Middle Low German swarm, Danish sv&#230;rm a swarm, Swedish sv&auml;rm, Middle
Dutch swerm, Old High German swaram, German Schwarm swarm; Old Norse svarmr tumult), by Watkins,
etc., derived from PIE imitative root *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (see susurration) on notion of
humming sound, and thus probably originally of bees. But OED suggests possible connection with base
of swerve and ground sense of agitated, confused, or deflected motion. General sense large, dense
throng is from early 15c.


swarm (v.1)

to climb (a tree, pole, etc.) by clasping with the arms and legs alternately, to shin, 1540s, of
uncertain origin. Perh. orig. a sailor's word borrowed from the Continent, but no trace of the
meaning has been discovered for phonetically corresponding words [OED]. perhaps originally a
sailors' word, of uncertain origin. Also recorded as swarve (16c.) and in Northern dialects swarble,
swarmle. Related: Swarmed; swarming.


swarm (v.2)

to leave a hive to start another, also to gather in a swarm, crowd, or throng, late 14c., from swarm
(n.). Compare Dutch zwermen, German schw&#228;rmen, Danish sv&#230;rme. Related: Swarmed; swarming.


swart (adj.)

Old English sweart black, dark, of night, clouds, also figurative, wicked, infamous, from Proto-
Germanic *swarta- (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, and Middle Dutch swart, Dutch zwart, Old Norse
svartr, German schwarz, Gothic swarts dark-colored, black), from PIE root *swordo- dirty, dark,
black (source of sordid). The true Germanic word, surviving in the Continental languages, displaced
in English by black. Of skin color of persons from late 14c. Related: Swartest.


swarthy (adj.)

dark-colored, especially of skin, 1580s, unexplained alteration of swarty (1570s), from swart + -y
(2). Related: Swarthiness.


swash (n.)

1530s, the fall of a heavy body or blow, probably imitative. It also meant pig-wash, filth, wet
refuse (1520s) and may have been imitative of the sound of water dashing against solid objects. The
meaning a body of splashing water is first found 1670s; that of a dashing or splashing is from 1847.
Swash-letters (1883) are italic capitals with flourished projections.


swash (v.)

1580s, spill or splash (water) about, 1530s, possibly from wash (v.) with an intensifying s-, or
imitative of the sound of water dashing against solid objects. Related: Swashed; swashing.


swashbuckle (v.)

1897, back-formation from swashbuckling.


swashbuckler (n.)

also swash-buckler, 1550s, blustering, swaggering fighting man (earlier simply swash, 1540s), from
swash fall of a blow (see swash) + buckler shield. The original sense seems to have been one who
makes menacing noises by striking his or an opponent's shield.


swashbuckling (adj.)

1690s, adjective formed to go with swashbuckler (q.v.).


swastika (n.)

Greek cross with arms bent at right angles, 1871 (in English specifically as emblem of the Nazi
party from 1932), from Sanskrit svastika-s, literally being fortunate, from svasti-s well-being,
luck, from su- well (from PIE *(e)su- good) + as-, root of asti (he) is, which is from the same PIE
root as Latin esse to be (see essence).    Also known as gammadion (Byzantine), cross cramponnee
(heraldry), Thor's hammer, and, perhaps, fylfot. Originally an ancient cosmic or religious symbol
thought to bring good luck. Use in reference to the Nazi emblem first recorded in English in 1932.
The German word was Hakenkreuz, literally hook-cross.


swat (v.)

1796, American English and northern England dialect word, possibly an alteration of Middle English
swap to strike, smite (see swap), ultimately of imitative origin. Related: Swatted; swatting. The
noun is recorded from 1800.


swatch (n.)

1510s, the countercheck of a tally (Northumberland dialect), later a tally attached to cloth sent to
be dyed (1610s, in Yorkshire), of unknown origin. Century Dictionary compares swath. Meaning a
sample piece of cloth is from 1640s.


swath (n.)

Old English sw&aelig;&eth;, swa&eth;u track, footstep, trace, scar, vestige, from Proto-Germanic
*swathan, *swatho (cognates: Old Frisian swethe boundary made by a scythe, Middle Dutch swade, Dutch
zwade, German Schwad a row of cut grass); of uncertain origin. Meaning a mown crop lying on the
ground is from early 14c.; that of space covered by the single cut of a scythe emerged late 15c.,
and that of a strip, lengthwise extent is from c.1600.


swathe (v.)

to bind with bandages, swaddle, wrap, Old English swa&thorn;ian to swathe, wrap up, from swa&eth;u
track, trace (see swath). The noun meaning infant's swaddling bands was found in Old English as
swa&thorn;um (dative plural). Related: Swathed; swathing.


swatter (n.)

instrument for swatting flies, 1906, agent noun from swat (v.).


sway (v.)

early 14c., move, go, go quickly; move (something) along, carry, probably from a Scandinavian source
akin to Old Norse sveigja to bend, swing, give way, Old Danish svegja, perhaps merged with an
unrecorded Old English cognate. The whole group might be related to swag (v.) and swing (v.).    The
sense of swing, waver, move in a swaying or sweeping motion is from late 14c. Meaning move from side
to side is from c.1500; transitive sense cause to move from side to side is from 1550s (according to
OED, not common before 19c.). Figurative sense cause to be directed toward one side, prejudice is
from 1590s. Related: Swayed; swaying.


sway (n.)

c.1300, movement from side to side, from sway (v.). The meaning controlling influence (as in to be
under the sway of) is from 1510s, from a transitive sense of the verb in Dutch and other languages.


sway-backed (adj.)

1670s, according to OED of Scandinavian origin, perhaps related to obsolete Danish sveibaget. See
sway (v.) + back (n.).


swear (v.)

Old English swerian take an oath (class VI strong verb; past tense swor, past participle sworen),
from Proto-Germanic *swarjan-, (cognates: Old Saxon swerian, Old Frisian swera, Old Norse sverja,
Danish sverge, Middle Dutch swaren, Old High German swerien, German schw&ouml;ren, Gothic swaren to
swear), from PIE root *swer- (1) to speak, talk, say (cognates: Old Church Slavonic svara quarrel,
Oscan sverrunei to the speaker).    Also related to the second element in answer. The secondary
sense of use bad language (early 15c.) developed from the notion of invoke sacred names. Swear off
desist as with a vow is from 1898. Swear in install in office by administration of an oath is from
1700 in modern use, echoing Old English.


swear-word (n.)

1873, American English colloquial, from swear (v.) + word (n.).


swearing (n.)

utterance of profane language, mid-14c., verbal noun from swear (v.).


sweat (v.)

Old English sw&aelig;tan perspire, also work hard, from Proto-Germanic *swaitjan to sweat, from the
source of sweat (n.). Compare Frisian swette, Dutch zweeten, Danish svede, German schwitzen. Meaning
to be worried, vexed is recorded from c.1400. Transitive sense is from late 14c. Related: Sweated;
sweating. Sweating sickness was a sudden, often-fatal fever, accompanied by intense sweating, that
struck England 1485 and returned periodically through mid-16c., described in the original citation
(a chronicle from 1502) as a grete deth and hasty.


sweat (n.)

Old English swat perspiration, moisture exuded from the skin, also labor, that which causes sweat,
from Proto-Germanic *swaitaz sweat (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian swet, Old Norse sveiti, Danish
sved sweat, Swedish svett, Middle Dutch sweet, Dutch zweet, Old High German sweiz, German
Schwei&szlig;), from PIE *sweid- (2) to sweat (cognates: Sanskrit svedah sweat, Avestan xvaeda-
sweat, Greek hidros sweat, perspiration, Latin sudor, Lettish swiedri, Welsh chwys sweat).    A
widespread set of Slavic words (Polish, Russian pot sweat) is from Old Church Slavonic potu, related
to peku heat, cognate with Latin coquere.    The Old English noun became Middle English swote, but
later altered to the current form under the influence of the verb. Sweat of (one's) brow as a symbol
of toil is from Gen. iii:19. Sweat equity is from 1968. Colloquial no sweat no problem attested from
1963.


sweat-bee (n.)

1870, American English, from sweat (n.) + bee (n.).


sweater (n.)

woolen vest or jersey, originally worn in rowing, 1882, from earlier sweaters clothing worn to
produce sweating and reduce weight (1828), plural agent noun from sweat (v.). As a fashion garment,
attested from 1925. Earlier it meant one who works hard (1520s). Sweater girl is attested from 1940;
Lana Turner (1920-1995) was the first, from her appearance in the film They Won't Forget (1937).


sweatpants (n.)

also sweat-pants, 1946, from sweat (v.) + pants (n.).


sweatshirt (n.)

also sweat-shirt, 1921, from sweat (v.) + shirt. Related: Sweatshirted.


sweatshop (n.)

also sweat-shop, 1892, from sweat (v.) + shop (n.). The verb sweat is attested from 1879 in the
sense employ (someone) in hard work for low wages, and compare sweater one who exacts wages at very
low prices (1846).


sweaty (adj.)

late 14c., causing sweat; 1580s, soaked with sweat, from sweat (n.) + -y (2). Related: Sweatiness.


Swede (n.)

native of Sweden, 1610s, from Low German, from Middle Low German Swede, from a source akin to Old
English Sweo&eth;eod, literally Swede-people, from Sweon (plural) Swedes (Old Norse, Old Swedish
Sviar), called by the Romans Suiones, probably from Proto-Germanic *sweba free, independent, or else
from *geswion kinsman.


Sweden

c.1600, originally in Scottish (Swethin, Swadne, etc.), from Middle Dutch Sweden, probably a dative
plural of Swede (earlier in English Sweden was used of the people and until 17c. Swedeland was the
English name of the country). In Old English, the country was Sweoland or Sweorice (compare Old
Norse sviariki, source of Swedish Sverige). Ultimately named for the original inhabitants (see
Swede).


Swedenborgian

1791, from name of Emanuel Svedberg, Swedish mystic and religious philosopher (1668-1772). His
followers organized 1788 as The New Church.


Swedish (adj.)

c.1600, from Swede + -ish. Similar formation in Dutch Zweedsch, German Schwedisch. Related:
Swedishness. As a language name from c.1600. The candy Swedish fish attested by that name by 1983.


sweep (v.)

early 14c., make clean by sweeping with a broom; mid-14c., perform the act of sweeping, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from a past tense form of Middle English swope sweep, from Old English swapan to
sweep (transitive &amp; intransitive); see swoop (v.), or perhaps from a Scandinavian source.
Related: Swept; sweeping.    From late 14c. as hasten, rush, move swiftly and strongly; also collect
by sweeping. From c.1400 in transitive sense drive quickly, impel, move or carry forward by force;
mid-15c. as clear (something) away. Meaning win all the events is 1960, American English. Sense of
pass systematically over in search of something is from 1966. To sweep (someone) off (his or her)
feet affect with infatuation is from 1913.


sweep (n.)

mid-13c., stroke, force, from sweep (v.).  Meaning act of sweeping is from 1550s. From 1670s as
range, extent of a continued motion. In reference to police or military actions, it is attested from
1837. Sense of a winning of all the tricks in a card game is from 1814 (see sweepstakes); extended
to other sports by 1960. Meaning rapid survey or inspection is from 1966. As a shortened form of
chimney-sweeper, first attested 1796.


sweeper (n.)

1520s, agent noun from sweep (v.). As a position in soccer (association football) by 1964.


sweepstakes (n.)

prize won in a race or contest, 1773, from Middle English swepestake one who sweeps or wins all the
stakes in a game (late 14c. as a surname or nickname; late 15c. as the name of one of the King's
ships), from swepen to sweep (see sweep (v.)) + stake (n.2). Meaning any race for stakes contributed
is from 1862.


sweet (adj.)

Old English swete pleasing to the senses, mind or feelings; having a pleasant disposition, from
Proto-Germanic *swotja- (cognates: Old Saxon swoti, Old Frisian swet, Swedish s&ouml;t, Danish
s&oslash;d, Middle Dutch soete, Dutch zoet, Old High German swuozi, German s&uuml;&szlig;), from PIE
root *swad- sweet, pleasant (Sanskrit svadus sweet; Greek hedys sweet, pleasant, agreeable, hedone
pleasure; Latin suavis pleasant (not especially of taste), suadere to advise, properly to make
something pleasant to). Words for sweet in Indo-European languages typically are used for other
sense as well and in general for pleasing.    Then come kiss me, sweet-and-twenty!   Youth's a stuff
will not endure.  [Twelfth Night]     Also being in a sound or wholesome state (mid-13c.), and, of
water, fresh, not salt (late Old English). As an intensifier from 1958. Sweet in bed (c.1300) was
the equivalent of modern good in bed. To be sweet on someone is first recorded 1690s. Sweet sixteen
first recorded 1767. Sweet dreams as a parting to one going to sleep is attested from 1898, short
for sweet dreams to you, etc. Sweet-and-sour in cookery is from 1723 and not originally of oriental
food. Sweet nothings sentimental trivialities is from 1900. Sweet spot is from 1976, first in
reference to tennis rackets. Sweet corn is from 1640s.


sweet (n.)

c.1300, something sweet to the taste, also beloved one, from sweet (adj.); the specific meaning
candy drop is 1851 (earlier sweetie, 1721). Meaning one who is dear to another is from 14c. Old
English swete (n.) meant sweetness.


Sweet Adeline

female barbershop singing group member, 1947, from the name of a popular close harmony song by
Richard Armstrong &amp; Harry Gerard, You're the Flower of my Heart, Sweet Adeline (1903).


sweet tooth (n.)

fondness for sugary stuff, late 14c., from sweet (adj.) + tooth in the sense of taste, liking (see
toothsome).


sweet-briar (n.)

eglantine, 1530s, from sweet (adj.) + briar (n.).


sweet-grass (n.)

1570s, from sweet (adj.) + grass (n.). Perhaps so called for the fondness of cattle for it.


sweet-pea (n.)

1732, from sweet (adj.) + pea (n.).


sweet-talk (v.)

Sweet-talk, 1935, from noun phrase; see sweet (adj.) + talk (n.). Earliest usages seem to refer to
conversation between black and white in segregated U.S.    I ain' gonna stay heah no longah. Don'
nevah keer, ef I do git cotched--or die. Tha's bettah than to stay heah an' listen to Maw Haney
sweet-talk the white folks, whilst they drives us clean to the grave. ... [The Crisis, July 1935]
Latin had suaviloquens, literally sweet-spoken.


sweetbread (n.)

pancreas of an animal used as food 1560s, from sweet (adj.); the -bread element may be from Old
English br&aelig;d flesh.


sweeten (v.)

1550s (intransitive), from sweet (adj.) + verbal ending -en (1). Transitive sense (become sweet) is
from 1620s. The Middle English form of the verb was simply sweet, from Old English swetan. Related:
Sweetened; sweetening.


sweetener (n.)

1640s, agent noun from sweeten (v.).


sweetheart (n.)

late 13c. as a form of address, 1570s as a synonym for loved one; from sweet (adj.) + heart. As an
adjective, with reference to labor contracts, it is attested from 1959.


sweetie (n.)

1721, lollipop; 1778, lover, sweetheart, from sweet (n.) + -ie.


sweetly (adv.)

Old English swetlice; see sweet (adj.) + -ly (2).


sweetmeat (n.)

a sweet thing to eat, Old English swete mete; see sweet (adj.) + meat (n.).


sweetness (n.)

Old English swetnes; see sweet (adj.) + -ness.


swell (v.)

Old English swellan grow or make bigger (past tense sweall, past participle swollen), from Proto-
Germanic *swelnan (cognates: Old Saxon swellan, Old Norse svella, Old Frisian swella, Middle Dutch
swellen, Dutch zwellen, Old High German swellan, German schwellen), of unknown origin. Of emotions
from late 14c., of music from 1749. Related: swelled; swollen; swelling.


swell (n.)

c.1200, a morbid swelling, from swell (v.). In reference to a rise of the sea, it is attested from
c.1600; of music, by 1803. The meaning wealthy, elegant person is first recorded 1786, connected to
the now-obsolete sense pompousness, arrogance (1724), both from the notion of puffed-up demeanor or
behavior.


swell (adj.)

fashionably dressed or equipped, 1810, from swell (n.) in the stylish person sense. As good,
excellent, by 1897; as a stand-alone expression of satisfaction it is recorded from 1930 in American
English.


swelling (n.)

tumor, morbid enlargement, Old English; verbal noun from swell (v.).


swelter (v.)

c.1400, faint with heat, frequentative of swelten be faint (especially with heat), late 14c., from
Old English sweltan to die, perish, from Proto-Germanic *swiltan- (cognates: Old Saxon sweltan to
die, Old Norse svelta to put to death, starve, Gothic sviltan to die), perhaps originally to burn
slowly, hence to be overcome with heat or fever, from PIE root *swel- (2) to shine, beam (see
Selene). From the same ancient root comes Old English swelan to burn. For specialization of words
meaning to die, compare starve. Related: Sweltered; sweltering.


swelter (n.)

a sweltering condition, 1851, from swelter (v.).


sweltering (adj.)

oppressively hot (of weather, seasons), 1590s, present participle adjective from swelter (v.).
Related: Swelteringly.


sweltry (adj.)

1570s, for *sweltery, from swelter (v.) + -y (2).


swept

past participle of sweep (v.).


swerve (v.)

c.1200, to depart, go make off; turn away or aside; c.1300, to turn aside, deviate from a straight
course; in form from Old English sweorfan to rub, scour, file away, grind away, but sense
development is difficult to trace. The Old English word is from Proto-Germanic *swerb- (cf Old Norse
sverfa to scour, file, Old Saxon swebran to wipe off), from PIE root *swerbh- to turn; wipe off.
Cognate words in other Germanic languages (cognates: Old Frisian swerva to creep, Middle Dutch
swerven to rove, roam, stray) suggests the sense of go off, turn aside might have existed in Old
English, though unrecorded. Related: Swerved; swerving.


swerve (n.)

1741, from swerve (v.).


swift (adj.)

Old English swift moving quickly, perhaps originally turning quickly, from Proto-Germanic swip- (see
swivel (n.)). Related: Swiftly; swiftness.


swift (n.)

type of bird (several species of the family Cypselid&aelig;, resembling swallows), 1660s, from swift
(adj.) in reference to its swift flight. Regarded as a bird of ill-omen, if not downright demonic,
probably for its shrill cry. The name earlier had been given to several small fast lizards (1520s).


swig (v.)

1650s, from swig (n.). Related: Swigged; swigging.


swig (n.)

1540s, a drink, liquor, later big or hearty drink of liquor (1620s), of unknown origin.


swill (n.)

liquid kitchen refuse fed to pigs, 1550s, from swill (v.).


swill (v.)

Old English swilian, swillan to wash out, gargle, probably from Proto-Germanic *swil-, related to
the root of swallow (v.). Meaning drink greedily is from 1530s. Related: Swilled; swilling.


swim (v.)

Old English swimman to move in or on the water, float (class III strong verb; past tense swamm, past
participle swummen), from Proto-Germanic *swimjan (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German swimman,
Old Norse svimma, Dutch zwemmen, German schwimmen), from PIE root *swem- to be in motion.    The
root is sometimes said to be restricted to Germanic, but according to OED possible cognates are
Welsh chwyf motion, Old Irish do-sennaim I hunt, Lithuanian sundyti to chase. For the usual Indo-
European word, see natatorium. Transitive sense of cross by swimming is from 1590s. Sense of reel or
move unsteadily first recorded 1670s; of the head or brain, from 1702. Figurative phrase sink or
swim is attested from mid-15c., in early use often with reference to ordeals of suspected witches.


swim (n.)

1540s, the clear part of any liquid (above the sediment), from swim (v.). Meaning part of a river or
stream frequented by fish (and hence fishermen) is from 1828, and is probably the source of the
figurative meaning the current of the latest affairs or events (as in in the swim on the inside,
involved with current events, 1869). Meaning act of swimming is from 1764.


swimmer (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from swim (v.).


swimmeret (n.)

1840, from swimmer (n.) + diminutive suffix. Related: Swimmerets.


swimming (n.)

late 14c., act of propelling the body through water, verbal noun from swim (v.). Swimming hole is
from 1855, American English; swimming pool is from 1881.


swimmingly (adv.)

with steady, smooth progress; in an easy, gliding manner, 1620s, from swimming + -ly (2).


swimsuit (n.)

also swim-suit, 1920, from swim + suit (n.).


swindle (v.)

1782, back-formation from swindler cheater. Related: Swindled; swindling. As a noun, act of
swindling, from 1833.


swindler (n.)

1774, from German Schwindler giddy person, extravagant speculator, cheat, from schwindeln to be
giddy, act extravagantly, swindle, from Old High German swintilon be giddy, frequentative form of
swintan to languish, disappear; cognate with Old English swindan, and probably with swima dizziness.
Said to have been introduced in London by German Jews c.1762.


swine (n.)

Old English swin pig, hog, wild boar, from Proto-Germanic *swinan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
Middle Low German, Old High German swin, Middle Dutch swijn, Dutch zwijn, German Schwein, Old Norse,
Swedish, Danish svin), neuter adjective (with suffix *-ino-) from PIE *su- pig (see sow (n.)). The
native word, largely ousted by pig. Applied to persons from late 14c. Phrase pearls before swine
(mid-14c.) is from Matt. vii:6; an early English formation of it was:  Ne ge ne wurpen eowre
meregrotu toforan eowrum swynon. [c.1000]    The Latin word in the Gospel verse was confused in
French with marguerite daisy (the pearl of the field), and in Dutch the expression became roses
before swine. Swine-flu attested from 1921.


swineherd (n.)

c.1100, swynhyrde; see swine + herd.


swing (v.)

Old English swingan beat, strike; scourge, flog; to rush, fling oneself (strong verb, past tense
swang, past participle swungen), from Proto-Germanic *swingan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
swingan, Old Frisian swinga, German schwingen to swing, swingle, oscillate), from PIE *sweng(w)- to
swing, turn, toss (perhaps Germanic only).    The meaning move freely back and forth is first
recorded 1540s. Transitive sense cause to oscillate is from 1550s. Sense of bring about, make happen
is from 1934. Sense of engage in promiscuous sex is from 1964; earlier, more generally, enjoy
oneself unconventionally (1957). Related: Swung; swinging. Swing-voter independent who often
determines the outcome of an election is from 1966.


swing (n.)

Old English swinge stroke, blow; chastisement, from swing (v.). Meaning suspended seat on ropes is
from 1680s. Meaning shift of public opinion is from 1899. The meaning variety of big dance-band
music with a swinging rhythm is first recorded 1933, though the sense has been traced back to 1888;
its heyday was from mid-30s to mid-40s. Phrase in full swing in total effect or operation (1560s)
perhaps is from bell-ringing. The backyard or playground swing-set is from 1951.


swing-shift (n.)

1941 (typically 4 p.m. to midnight), from the notion of facing both ways between day and night
shifts; see swing (v.) + shift (n.).


swinger (n.)

1540s, one who or that which swings, agent noun from swing (v.). Also (now obsolete) anything big or
great (1580s). Meaning person who is sexually promiscuous is from 1964. Old English swingere (n.)
meant one who strikes, scourger.


swinging (adj.)

1550s, moving to and fro, present participle adjective from swing (v.). Meaning marked by a free,
sweeping movement is from 1818. Sense of uninhibited is from 1958.


swingle (n.)

instrument for beating flax, early 14c., from Middle Dutch swinghel swingle for flax, cognate with
Old English swingell beating, stick to beat, whip, scourge, rod, from swingan to beat, strike, whip
(see swing (v.)) + instrumental suffix -le. Or perhaps directly from the Old English word, with
narrowing of sense.


swingletree (n.)

mid-15c., from swingle that which swings, from swing (v.) + instrumental suffix -le (compare
handle), + tree (n.) in obsolete Middle English sense pole.


swinish (adj.)

c.1200, originally of persons or behavior, like a swine; gluttonous, sensual, degraded, beastly,
from swine + -ish. Related: Swinishly; swinishness. Similar formation in German schweinisch. Old
English had swinlic in same sense.


swipe (v.)

1825, strike with a sweeping motion, from swipe (n.). The slang sense of steal, pilfer appeared
1885, American English; earliest use in prison jargon:    The blokes in the next cell, little
Charley Ames and the Sheeney Kid, they was hot to try it, and swiped enough shoe-lining out of shop
No. 5, where they worked, to make us all breeches to the stripes. [Lippincott's Magazine, vol. 35,
June 1885]    Meaning run a credit card is 1990s. Related: Swiped; swiper; swiping.


swipe (n.)

1807, a driving stroke made with the arms in full swing, perhaps a dialectal variant of sweep (n.),
or in part from obsolete swip a stroke, blow (c.1200), from Proto-Germanic *swip-, related to Old
English swipu a stick, whip; chastisement. Other possible sources or influences are Middle English
swope to sweep with broad movements (in reference to brooms, swords, etc.), from Old English swapan;
obsolete swaip stroke, blow; or obsolete swape oar, pole.


swirl (v.)

1510s (transitive), with an isolated instance from 14c.; from swirl (n.). Intransitive sense form in
eddies, whirl in eddies is from 1755. Related: Swirled; swirling.


swirl (n.)

early 15c., whirlpool, eddy, originally Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to dialectal
Norwegian svirla or Dutch zwirrelen to whirl. The meaning whirling movement is from 1818.


swirly (adj.)

1785, from swirl (n.) + -y (2).


swish (n.)

1820, sound of something moving through the air, from swish (v.); sense of effeminate homosexual is
1930s in homosexual slang, probably from notion of mincing motion. Related: Swishy (adj.).


swish (v.)

1756 (intransitive); 1799 (transitive), probably imitative of the sound made by something brushing
against or through something. Related: Swished; swishing.


Swiss (n.)

1510s, from Middle French Suisse, from Middle High German Suizer, from Suiz Switzerland (see
Switzerland and compare Switzer (1570s), archaic word for a Swiss, and German Schweiz). As an
adjective from 1520s. Swiss banks were notable for assuring anonymity and security by 1949. Swiss
cheese is attested from 1808; as a type of something full of holes, from 1924.


switch (n.)

1590s, slender riding whip, probably from a Flemish or Low German word akin to Middle Dutch swijch
bough, twig, or swutsche, variant of Low German zwukse long thin stick, switch, from Germanic base
*swih- (cognates: Old High German zwec wooden peg, German Zweck aim, design, originally peg as a
target, Zwick wooden peg), perhaps connected with PIE root *swei- (2) to swing, bend, to turn.
The meaning device for changing the direction of something or making or breaking a connection is
first recorded 1797. The peg sense suits the mech(anical) applications [Weekley], cognates:
switchblade, and these senses in English may be a direct borrowing from those senses in Continental
Germanic languages rather than a continuation of the pliant wand sense. The meaning a change from
one to another, a reversal, an exchange, a substitution is first recorded 1920; extended form
switcheroo is by 1933.


switch (v.)

1610s, to strike with a switch, from switch (n.). Related: Switched; switching. The meaning turn
(off or on) with a switch device is first recorded 1853 of trains on tracks, 1881 of electricity,
1932 of radio or (later) television. Sense of shift, divert is from 1860. Meaning to change one
thing for another is recorded from 1919. Switch-hitter is 1945 in baseball slang; 1956 in the sense
of bisexual person.


switchable (adj.)

1954, from switch (v.) + -able.


switchback (n.)

in reference to zig-zag railways, 1863, from switch (v.) + back (adv.). As an adjective from 1873.


switchblade (n.)

also switch-blade, type of folding pocket knife, 1932, from switch (n.) + blade. So called for the
switch which is pressed to spring the knife open. Earlier a similar tool was known as an Arkansas
toothpick (1837) and a clasp-knife (1755).


switchboard (n.)

also switch-board, device for making interchangeable connections between many circuits, 1867, from
switch (n.) + board (n.1).


Switzerland

named for Schwyz, one of its original cantons. On postage stamps, etc., identified by the Roman name
for the region, Helvetia, to avoid having to print the four different forms of the name in the
countryâ&euro;&trade;s four official languages: Suisse, Schweiz, Svizzera, Svizra.


swivel (n.)

c.1300, coupling device that allows independent rotation, from frequentative form of stem of Old
English verb swifan to move in a course, revolve, sweep (a class I strong verb), from Proto-Germanic
*swif- (cognates: Old Frisian swiva to be uncertain, Old Norse svifa to rove, ramble, drift), from
PIE root *swei- (2) to turn, bend, move in a sweeping manner.    Related Middle English swive was
the principal slang verb for to have sexual intercourse with, a sense that developed c.1300. This
probably explains why, though the root is verbal, the verb swivel is not attested in Modern English
until 1794. Compare Middle English phrase smal-swivinge men men who copulate infrequently.


swivel (v.)

1794 (transitive), from swivel (n.). Intransitive use from 1846. Related: Swiveled; swiveling;
swivelled; swivelling.


swivet (n.)

a fluster, 1867, U.S. dialect, of unknown origin.


swizzle (n.)

1813, name for various kinds of liquor drinks, or for intoxicating drinks generally, possibly a
variant of switchel a drink of molasses and water (often mixed with rum), first attested 1790, of
uncertain origin. As a verb from 1843. Related: Swizzled; swizzling. Swizzle-stick, used for
stirring drinks, attested by 1859.


swollen (adj.)

early 14c., past participle adjective from strong conjugation of swell (v.); from Old English
geswollen, past participle of swellan.


swoon (n.)

c.1300, suowne, suun, state of unconsciousness, probably from Old English geswogen in a faint, past
participle of a lost verb *swogan (see swoon (v.)).


swoon (v.)

c.1200, to become unconscious, probably from a lost Old English verb *swogan (as in Old English
aswogan to choke), of uncertain origin. Compare Low German swogen to sigh. Related: Swooned;
swooning.


swoop (v.)

1560s, to move or walk in a stately manner, apparently from a dialectal survival of Old English
swapan to sweep, brandish, dash, from Proto-Germanic *swaip-, from PIE root *swei- (2) to bend, turn
(see swivel (n.)). Meaning pounce upon with a sweeping movement first recorded 1630s (see swoop
(n.)). Spelling with -oo- may have been influenced by Scottish and northern England dialectal soop
to sweep, from Old Norse sopa to sweep. Related: Swooped; swooping.


swoop (n.)

1540s, a blow, stroke, from swoop (v.). Meaning the sudden pouncing of a rapacious bird on its prey
is 1605, from Shakespeare:    Oh, Hell-Kite! All? What, All my pretty Chickens, and their Damme, At
one fell swoope? [Macbeth, IV.iii.219]


swoosh (n.)

1860, sound made by something (originally a fishing rod during a cast) moving rapidly through the
air; imitative. As a verb from 1867. The Nike corporate logo so called from 1989.


sword (n.)

Old English sweord, swyrd (West Saxon), sword (Northumbrian) sword, from Proto-Germanic *swerdam
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian swerd, Old Norse sver&eth;, Swedish sv&auml;rd, Middle Dutch
swaert, Dutch zwaard, Old High German swert, German Schwert a sword), related to Old High German
sweran to hurt, from *swertha-, literally the cutting weapon, from PIE root *swer- (3) to cut,
pierce.    Contrast with plowshare is from the Old Testament (Isaiah ii:4, Micah iv:3). Phrase put
(originally do) to the sword kill, slaughter is recorded from mid-14c. An older Germanic word for it
is in Old Saxon heoru, Gothic hairus a sword.


sword-belt (n.)

early 14c., from sword + belt (n.). Old English had sweordf&aelig;tels sword-belt.


swordfish (n.)

late 15c., swerdfysche (in a recipe), from sword + fish (n.). So called for its elongated upper jaw.


swordplay (n.)

also sword-play, Old English sweordplege; see sword + play (n.).


swordsman (n.)

1670s, from sword + genitive -s- + man (n.). Earlier was swordman (late 14c.); Old English had
sweordfreca in the same sense. Related: Swordsmanship (1765).


sworn

past participle of swear; sworn enemies, those who have taken a vow of mutual hatred, is from
c.1600.


swum

past participle and sometimes past tense of swim (v.).


swung

past participle of swing (v.).


sy-

form of syn- before -s- or -z-.


sybarite (n.)

person devoted to pleasure, 1590s, literally inhabitant of Sybaris, ancient Greek town in southern
Italy, whose people were noted for their love of luxury. From Latin Sybarita, from Greek Sybarites.


sybaritic (adj.)

1610s, from Latin sybariticus, from Greek sybaritikos, from Sybarites (see sybarite).


sycamore (n.)

mid-14c., sicamour mulberry-leaved fig tree, from Old French sicamor, sagremore, from Latin
sycomorus, from Greek sykomoros African fig-tree, literally fig-mulberry, from sykon fig (see fig) +
moron  (see mulberry). But according to many sources this is more likely a folk-etymology of Hebrew
shiqmah mulberry.    A Biblical word, originally used for a wide-spreading shade tree with fig-like
fruit (Ficus sycomorus) common in Egypt, Palestine, Syria, etc., whose leaves somewhat resemble
those of the mulberry; applied in English from 1580s to a large species of European maple (also
plane-tree), perhaps because both it and the Biblical tree were notable for their shadiness (the
Holy Family took refuge under a sycamore on the flight to Egypt), and from 1814 to the North
American shade tree that also is called a buttonwood, which was introduced to Europe from Virginia
1637 by Filius Tradescant).    Spelling apparently influenced by sycamine black mulberry tree, which
is from Greek sykcaminos, which also is mentioned in the Bible (Luke xvii:6). For the sake of
clarity, some writers have used the more Hellenic sycomore in reference to the Biblical tree.


sycophancy (n.)

1620s, from from sycophant + -cy, or else from Latin sycophantia, from Greek sykophantia false
accusation, slander; conduct of a sycophant, from sykophantes.


sycophant (n.)

1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), informer, talebearer, slanderer, from Middle French sycophante and
directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantes false accuser, slanderer, literally one who
shows the fig, from sykon fig (see fig) + phainein to show (see phantasm). Showing the fig was a
vulgar gesture made by sticking the thumb between two fingers, a display which vaguely resembles a
fig, itself symbolic of a vagina (sykon also meant vulva). The modern accepted explanation is that
prominent politicians in ancient Greece held aloof from such inflammatory gestures, but privately
urged their followers to taunt their opponents. The sense of mean, servile flatterer is first
recorded in English 1570s.    The explanation, long current, that it orig. meant an informer against
the unlawful exportation of figs cannot be substantiated. [OED]


sycophantic (adj.)

1670s, from Greek sykophantikos, from sykophantes (see sycophant). Related: Sycophantical (1560s).


Sydney

Australian city, founded 1788 and named for British Home Secretary Thomas Townshend, 1st Viscount
Sydney (1733-1800). The family name (also Sidney) is literally dweller by the well-watered land,
from Old English sid side + ieg island.


syl-

assimilated form of Greek syn- before -l-.


syllabic (adj.)

1728, from Modern Latin syllabicus, from Greek syllabikos of or pertaining to a syllable, from
syllabe a syllable (see syllable). Related: Syllabical (1520s).


syllable (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French sillable, alteration of Old French silabe syllable (12c., Modern French
syllabe), from Latin syllaba, from Greek syllabe that which is held together; a syllable, several
sounds or letters taken together, i.e. a taking together of letters; from syllambanein take or put
together, collect, gather, from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + stem of lambanein to
take (see analemma). The unetymological -le apparently is by analogy with participle and principle.


syllabus (n.)

1650s, table of contents of a series of lectures, etc., from Late Latin syllabus list, ultimately a
misreading of Greek sittybos parchment label, table of contents, of unknown origin. The misprint
appeared in a 15c. edition of Cicero's Ad Atticum (see OED). Had it been a real word, the proper
plural would be syllabi.


syllepsis (n.)

use of a word at once in both a literal and metaphoric sense, 1570s, from Late Latin syllepsis, from
assimilated form of Greek syn together (see syn-) + lepsis a taking, related to lambanein (see
analemma). Related: Sylleptic.


syllogism (n.)

late 14c., from Old French silogisme a syllogism, scholastic argument based on a formula or proof
(13c., Modern French syllogisme), from Latin syllogismus, from Greek syllogismos a syllogism,
originally inference, conclusion; computation, calculation, from syllogizesthai bring together
before the mind, compute, conclude, literally think together, from assimilated form of syn- together
(see syn-) + logizesthai to reason, count, from logos a reckoning, reason (see logos).


syllogistic (adj.)

1660s, from Latin syllogisticus or directly from Greek syllogistikos, from syllogizesthai (see
syllogism).


sylph (n.)

1650s, air-spirit, from Modern Latin sylphes (plural), coined 16c. by Paracelsus (1493-1541),
originally referring to any race of spirits inhabiting the air, described as being mortal but
lacking a soul. Paracelsus' word seems to be an arbitrary coinage, but perhaps it holds a suggestion
of Latin silva and Greek nymph, or Greek silphe a kind of beetle, but French etymologists propose a
Gaulish origin. The Century Dictionary comments that, to occultists and quacks like Paracelsus words
spelled with -y- look more Greek and convincing. The meaning graceful girl first recorded 1838, on
the notion of slender figure and light, airy movement [OED].


sylphid (n.)

younger or smaller variety of sylph, 1670s, from French sylphide (1670s), from sylphe (see sylph) +
diminutive suffix.


sylvan (adj.)

of the woods, 1570s, from Middle French sylvain (1530s), from Latin silvanus pertaining to wood or
forest (originally only in silvanae goddesses of the woods), from silva wood, woodland, forest,
orchard, grove, of unknown origin. The unetymological -y- is a misspelling in Latin from influence
of Greek hyle forest, from which the Latin word formerly was supposed to derive.


Sylvanus

Roman deity, from Latin Silvanus, used by the Romans as the proper name of a god of woods and
fields, identified with Pan, noun use of adjective, literally pertaining to woods or forest (see
sylvan).


Sylvester

masc. proper name, from Latin silvestris, literally of a wood, of a forest, woody, rural, pastoral,
from silva wood, forest (see sylvan). St. Sylvester's Day is Dec. 31.


Sylvia

fem. proper name, literally inhabiting woods, from Latin silva wood, forest (see sylvan). Also the
genus name of warblers, hence adjective Sylvian.


sym-

assimilated form of syn-, from Greek form of syn- in compounds with words beginning in -b-, -m-,
-p-, -ph-, -ps-.


Symbionese (adj.)

in Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA), name adopted by a socialist revolutionary group active in U.S.
1972-76, coined from simbion an organism living in symbiosis, from symbioun (see symbiosis) +
people-name ending -ese.


symbiosis (n.)

1876, as a biological term, union for life of two different organisms based on mutually benefit,
from Greek symbiosis a living together, from symbioun live together, from symbios (one) living
together (with another), partner, companion, husband or wife, from assimilated form of syn- together
(see syn-) + bios life (see bio-). Given a wider (non-biological) sense by 1921. An earlier sense of
communal or social life is found in 1620s. A back-formed verb symbiose is recorded from 1960.


symbiotic (adj.)

1882, in biology, from stem of symbiosis + -ic. Of human activities from 1951. Related: Symbiotical;
symbiotically.


symbol (n.)

early 15c., creed, summary, religious belief, from Late Latin symbolum creed, token, mark, from
Greek symbolon token, watchword, sign by which one infers; ticket, a permit, license (the word was
applied c.250 by Cyprian of Carthage to the Apostles' Creed, on the notion of the mark that
distinguishes Christians from pagans), literally that which is thrown or cast together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile,
bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics).    The sense evolution
in Greek is from throwing things together to contrasting to comparing to token used in comparisons
to determine if something is genuine. Hence, outward sign of something. The meaning something which
stands for something else first recorded 1590 (in Faerie Queene). As a written character, 1610s.


symbolic (adj.)

1650s, from symbol + -ic, or from Greek symbolikos. Related: Symbolical (c.1600); symbolically.


symbolise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of symbolize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Symbolised;
symbolising; symbolisation.


symbolism (n.)

1650s, practice of representing things with symbols, from symbol + -ism. Applied to the arts by
1866; attested from 1892 as a movement in French literature, from French symbolisme (see symbolist).


symbolist (n.)

1580s, from symbol + -ist. From 1888 in reference to a literary movement that aimed at representing
ideas and emotions by indirect suggestion rather than direct expression, from French symboliste,
coined 1885 by poet Paul Verlaine (1844-1896). Rejecting realism and naturalism, they attached
symbolic meaning to certain objects, words, etc.


symbolization (n.)

c.1600, from French symbolisation, from symboliser (see symbolize).


symbolize (v.)

c.1600, represent by a symbol, also be a symbol of, from French symboliser, from symbole (see
symbol). Related: Symbolized; symbolizes; symbolizing.


symbology (n.)

1840, contracted from symbolology, from comb. form of Greek symbolon token (see symbol) + -ology.


symbololatry (n.)

worship of symbols, 1828, from symbolo-, comb. form of symbol, + -latry.


symmetric (adj.)

1796, from symmetry + -ic. Earlier in the same sense was symmetral (1650s).


symmetrical (adj.)

1751, from symmetry + -ical. Related: Symmetrically (1570s).


symmetrize (v.)

1749, from French symm&#233;triser, from symm&#233;trie (see symmetry). Related: Symmetrize;
symmetrizing.


symmetrophobia (n.)

1809, from comb. form of symmetry + -phobia. Supposed to be evident in Egyptian temples and Japanese
art.


symmetry (n.)

1560s, relation of parts, proportion, from Middle French symm&#233;trie (16c.) and directly from
Latin symmetria, from Greek symmetria agreement in dimensions, due proportion, arrangement, from
symmetros having a common measure, even, proportionate, from assimilated form of syn- together (see
syn-) + metron meter (see meter (n.2)). Meaning harmonic arrangement of parts first recorded 1590s.


sympathetic (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to sympathy, from Modern Latin sympatheticus, from late Greek sympathetikos having
sympathy, from sympathein, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings (see
sympathy). In English, the meaning having fellow feeling, susceptible to altruistic feelings is
recorded from 1718.    In the anatomical sense, subject to a common nervous influence, the word is
attested from 1769, from Modern Latin (nervus) sympathicus, coined by Jacques-Benigne Winslow
(1669-1760), Danish anatomist living in Paris. Related: Sympathetical (1630s); Sympathetically
(1620s).


sympathise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of sympathize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related: Sympathised;
sympathising.


sympathize (v.)

have fellow-feeling, c.1600, from Middle French sympathiser, from sympathie (see sympathy). Earlier
in a physiological sense (1590s). As express sympathy, from 1748. Related: Sympathized;
sympathizing.


sympathizer (n.)

1815, agent noun from sympathize.


sympathy (n.)

1570s, affinity between certain things, from Middle French sympathie (16c.) and directly from Late
Latin sympathia community of feeling, sympathy, from Greek sympatheia fellow-feeling, community of
feeling, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings, from assimilated form of
syn- together (see syn-) + pathos feeling (see pathos).    In English, almost a magical notion at
first; used in reference to medicines that heal wounds when applied to a cloth stained with blood
from the wound. Meaning conformity of feelings is from 1590s; sense of fellow feeling, compassion is
first attested c.1600. An Old English loan-translation of sympathy was efensargung.


sympatric (adj.)

1904, from assimilated form of syn- + Greek patra fatherland, from pater father (see father (n.)) +
-ic. Opposite of allopatric.


symphonic (adj.)

1854 involving similarity of sounds or harmony (implied in symphonically); see symphony + -ic.
Meaning pertaining to a symphony is from 1864. Earlier was symphonious (1650s).


symphony (n.)

c.1300, a name given to various types of musical instruments, from Old French simphonie, sifonie,
simfone musical harmony; stringed instrument (12c., Modern French symphonie) and directly from Latin
symphonia a unison of sounds, harmony, from Greek symphonia harmony, concord of sounds, from
symphonos harmonious, agreeing in sound, from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + phone
voice, sound (see fame (n.)).    Meaning harmony of sounds in English is attested from late 14c.;
sense of music in parts is from 1590s. It was only after the advent of Haydn that this word began to
mean a sonata for full orchestra. Before that time it meant a prelude, postlude, or interlude, or
any short instrumental work. [Elson's Music Dictionary] Meaning elaborate orchestral composition
first attested 1789. Elliptical for symphony orchestra from 1926. Diminutive symphonette is recorded
from 1947.


symphysis (n.)

union of bones, 1570s, medical Latin, from Greek symphysis a growing together, union, from
assimilated form of assimilated form of syn together (see syn-) + physis growth (see physics).
Related: Symphytic.


symposium (n.)

1580s, account of a gathering or party, from Latin symposium drinking party, symposium, from Greek
symposion drinking party, convivial gathering of the educated (related to sympotes drinking
companion), from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + posis a drinking, from a stem of
Aeolic ponen to drink, cognate with Latin potare to drink (see potion).    The symposium usually
followed a dinner, for the Greeks did not drink at meals. Its enjoyment was heightened by
intellectual or agreeable conversation, by the introduction of music or dancers, and by other
amusements. [Century Dictionary]  The sense of a meeting on some subject is from 1784. Reflecting
the Greek fondness for mixing wine and intellectual discussion, the modern sense is especially from
the word being used as a title for one of Plato's dialogues. Greek plural is symposia, and the
leader of one is a symposiarch (c.1600 in English). Related: Symposiac (adj.); symposial.


symptom (n.)

1540s, re-Latinized from sinthoma (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin sinthoma symptom of a disease,
altered from Late Latin symptoma, from Greek symptoma a happening, accident, disease, from stem of
sympiptein to befall, happen; coincide, fall together, from assimilated form of syn- together (see
syn-) + piptein to fall, from PIE *pi-pt-, reduplicated form of root *pet- to rush; to fly (see
petition (n.)).    Spelling restored in early Modern English in part by influence of Middle French
symptome (16c.). General (non-medical) use is from 1610s.


symptomatic (adj.)

1690s, from French symptomatique or directly from Late Latin symptomaticus, from symptomat-, stem of
symptoma (see symptom). General sense of indicative (of) is from 1751. Related: Symptomatical
(1580s).


symptomatology (n.)

study of symptoms, 1737, from medical Latin symptomatologia, from symptomat-, stem of symptoma (see
symptom) + -logia (see -logy). Related: Symptomatological.


symptomology (n.)

1830, shortening of symptomatology.


syn-

word-forming element meaning together with, jointly; alike; at the same time, also sometimes
completive or intensive, from Greek syn (prep.) with, together with, along with, in the company of,
from PIE *ksun- with (cognates: Russian so- with, together, from Old Russian su(n)-). Assimilated to
-l-, reduced to sy- before -s- and -z-, and altered to sym- before -b-, -m- and -p-. Since 1970s
also with a sense of synthetic.


synaesthesia (n.)

also synesthesia, sensation in one part of the body produced by stimulus in another, 1881, in some
cases via French, from Modern Latin, from Greek syn- together (see syn-) + stem aisthe to feel,
perceive, related to aisthesis feeling, from PIE root *au- to perceive (see audience). Also
psychologically, of the senses (colors that seem to the perceiver to having odor, etc.), from 1891.
Related: Synaesthetic (adj.).


synagogue (n.)

late 12c., the regular public worship of the Jews, also the building in which this is done, from Old
French sinagoge synagogue, mosque, pagan temple (11c., Modern French synagogue), from Late Latin
synagoga congregation of Jews, from Greek synagoge place of assembly, synagogue; meeting, assembly,
literally a bringing together, from synagein to gather, bring together, assemble, from syn- together
(see syn-) + agein bring, lead (see act (v.)).    Used by Greek translators of the Old Testament as
a loan-translation of late Hebrew keneseth assembly (as in beth keneseth synagogue, literally house
of assembly; compare Knesset). Related: Synagogical; synagogal.


synallagmatic (adj.)

expressing reciprocal obligations, from Greek synallagmatikos, from synallagma a covenant, contract,
from syn- together with (see syn-) + allagma thing taken in exchange, from stem of allassein to
exchange, barter, from allos another (see alias (adv.)).


synapse (n.)

junction between two nerve cells, 1899, medical Latin, from Greek synapsis conjunction, from or
related to synaptein to clasp, join together, tie or bind together, be connected with, from syn-
together (see syn-) + haptein to fasten (see apse). Introduced by English physiologist Sir Michael
Foster (1836-1907) at the suggestion of English classical scholar Arthur Woollgar Verral
(1851-1912).


synapsis (n.)

plural synapses, 1895 in cellular biology, Modern Latin, from Greek synapsis connection, junction
(see synapse).


synaptic (adj.)

1895, used as an adjective corresponding to synapsis, from Greek synaptikos, literally connective,
copulative.


sync (n.)

also synch, 1929, shortened form of synchronization (see synchronize). Originally in reference to
soundtracks and pictures in the movies. Sense of synchronization, harmony, agreement first recorded
1961 in in sync. As a verb, short for synchronize, by 1945.


synchronic (adj.)

occurring at the same time, 1775, shortening of synchronical (1650s), from Late Latin synchronus
simultaneous (see synchronous). Linguistic sense is first recorded 1922, probably a borrowing from
French synchronique (de Saussure, 1913). Synchronal simultaneous is from 1650s. Related:
synchronically.


synchronicity (n.)

1953; from synchronic + -ity. Originally in Jung. Synchroneity is from 1889, but equally malformed,
and see synchronism.


synchronism (n.)

1580s, quality of being synchronous, from Modern Latin synchronismus, from Greek synkhronismos, from
synkhronos (see synchronous). Meaning recurring at the same successive instants of time is from
1854.


synchronization (n.)

1828, noun of action or state from synchronize.


synchronize (v.)

1620s, to occur at the same time, from Greek synkhronizein be of the same time, from synkhronos
happening at the same time (see synchronous). The transitive sense of make synchronous is first
recorded 1806. Of timepieces by 1879. Related: Synchronized; synchronizing. Synchronized swimming is
recorded from 1950.


synchronous (adj.)

1660s, existing or happening at the same time, from Late Latin synchronus simultaneous, from Greek
synkhronos happening at the same time, from syn- together (see syn-) + khronos time (see chrono-).
Meaning recurring at the same successive instants of time is attested from 1670s. Related:
Synchronously.


synchrony (n.)

occurrence or existence at the same time, 1848, from Greek synkhronos (see synchronous) + -y (2).


synclinal (adj.)

sloping downward on both sides, 1833 (in Lyell), from -al (1) + Latinized form of stem of Greek
synklinein to incline, lean, from syn- together (see syn-) + klinein to slope (see lean (v.)).


syncline (n.)

1855, back-formation from synclinal.


syncopate (v.)

c.1600, shorten words by omitting syllables or letters in the middle, back-formation from
syncopation, or else from Late Latin syncopatus, past participle of syncopare to shorten, also to
faint away, to swoon, from Late Latin syncope (see syncope). Musical sense is from 1660s. Related:
Syncopated; syncopating.


syncopation (n.)

1530s, contraction of a word by omission of middle sounds, from Medieval Latin syncopationem
(nominative syncopatio) a shortening or contraction, from past participle stem of syncopare to
shorten, also to faint away, to swoon, from Late Latin syncope (see syncope). Musical sense is
attested from 1590s.


syncope (n.)

1520s, contraction of a word by omission of middle sounds or letters, from Latin syncope contraction
of a word by elision, from Greek synkope contraction of a word, originally a cutting off, cutting
up, cutting short, from synkoptein to cut up, from syn- together, thoroughly (see syn-) + koptein to
cut, from PIE root *kop- to beat, strike (see hatchet (n.)).    An earlier use of the word in
pathology is represented by Middle English syncopis, sincopin loss of consciousness accompanied by
weak pulse (c.1400, from Late Latin accusative syncopen); compare Old French syncope illness,
fainting fit (failure of the heart's action, hence unconsciousness). The spelling of this was re-
Latinized 16c. Related: Syncopic; syncoptic.


syncretism (n.)

reconciliation of different beliefs, 1610s, from French syncr&#233;tisme (17c.) and directly from
Modern Latin syncretismus (used by German Protestant theologian David Pareus, 1615), from Greek
synkretismos union of communities, from synkretizein to combine against a common enemy, from syn-
together (see syn-) + second element of uncertain origin. One theory connects it with kretismos
lying, from kretizein to lie like a Cretan; another connects it with the stem of kerannynai to mix,
blend; krasis mixture. Related: Syncretist; syncretistic.


syncretize (v.)

1670s, from Latinized form of Greek synkretizein (see syncretism). Related: Syncretized;
syncretizing.


syncytial (adj.)

1895, pertaining to a syncytium (1877), Modern Latin, from Greek syn together (see syn-) + kytos
receptacle, vessel, used in biology for cell (see cyto-).


syndetic (adj.)

connecting, 1874, from -ic + Greek syndetos bound together, adjective of syndein (see asyndeton).


syndic (n.)

c.1600, a civil magistrate, especially in Geneva, from French syndic chief representative (14c.),
from Late Latin syndicus representative of a group or town, from Greek syndikos public advocate, as
an adjective, belonging jointly to, from syn- together (see syn-) + dike judgment, justice, usage,
custom (cognate with Latin dicere to show, tell; see diction). Meaning accredited representative of
a university or other corporation first found c.1600. Related: Syndical.


syndicalism (n.)

1907, from French syndicalisme movement to transfer ownership of means of production and
distribution to industrial workers, from syndical of a labor union, from syndic chief representative
(see syndic).    Syndicalism is in France the new, all-absorbing form of Labor's conflict with
Capital. Its growth has been so rapid that its gravity is not appreciated abroad. This year, even
more than last, the strikes and other direct action, which it has combined, have upset the
industrial life of the country, and forced the attention of Parliament and Government. [The Nation,
June 20, 1907]


syndicate (n.)

1620s, council or body of representatives, from French syndicat (15c.), from syndic representative
of a corporation (see syndic) + -at (see -ate (1)). Meaning combination of capitalists or companies
to carry out some commercial undertaking first occurs 1865. Publishing sense of association of
publishers for purchasing articles, etc., for simultaneous publication in a number of newspapers is
from 1889. As a synonym for organized crime, the Mob it is recorded from 1929.


syndicate (v.)

1889, form into a syndicate, from syndicate (n.). Meaning sell for simultaneous publication is from
1889. Earlier it meant to judge, censure (1610s), from Medieval Latin syndicatus, past participle of
syndicare. Related: Syndicated; syndicating.


syndication (n.)

1887, act of forming a syndicate, from syndicate (n.) + -ion. Sense of publication, broadcast, or
ownership by a syndicate is attested from 1925.


syndrome (n.)

a number of symptoms occurring together, 1540s, from medical Latin, from Greek syndrome concurrence
of symptoms, concourse of people, from syndromos place where several roads meet, literally a running
together, from syn- with (see syn-) + dromos a running, course (see dromedary). Psychological sense
is from 1955.


syne (adv.)

in Burns' poem Auld Lang Syne (1788), Scottish form of since (q.v.), without the adverbial genitive
inflection, recorded from c.1300.


synecdoche (n.)

figure of speech in which a part is taken for the whole or vice versa, late 15c. correction of
synodoches (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin synodoche, alteration of Late Latin synecdoche, from
Greek synekdokhe the putting of a whole for a part; an understanding one with another, literally a
receiving together or jointly, from synekdekhesthai supply a thought or word; take with something
else, join in receiving, from syn- with (see syn-) + ek out (see ex-) + dekhesthai to receive,
related to dokein seem good (see decent). Typically an attribute or adjunct substituted for the
thing meant (head for cattle, hands for workmen, wheels for automobile, etc.). Compare metonymy.
Related: Synecdochical.


synechia (n.)

plural synechiae, morbid union of parts, especially of the eye, 1842, medical Latin, from Greek
synekheia continuity, from synekhes continuous, from syn together (see syn-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)).


synergetic (adj.)

working together, cooperating, 1680s, from Greek synergetikos cooperative, from synergein to work
together, cooperate (see synergy). Synergic (1849) is from synergy + -ic.


synergism (n.)

1650s, theological doctrine that human will cooperates with divine grace in regeneration (implying
that the fall did not cost the soul all inclination toward holiness), from Modern Latin synergismus,
from Greek synergos working together (see synergy). Used in non-theological sense a working
together, cooperation by 1910 (first of medicines).


synergist (n.)

1650s, in theology, one who holds the doctrine of synergism (q.v.); from 1876 in medicine. For
ending, see -ist.


synergistic (adj.)

1818 in theology; 1876 in medicine, from synergist + -ic. General sense of cooperative is from 1965.
Related: Synergistical (1650s); synergistically.


synergize (v.)

1881; see synergy + -ize. Related: Synergized; synergizing.


synergy (n.)

1650s, cooperation, from Modern Latin synergia, from Greek synergia joint work, a working together,
cooperation; assistance, help, from synergos working together, related to synergein work together,
help another in work, from syn- together (see syn-) + ergon work (see organ). Meaning combined
activities of a group is from 1847; sense of advanced effectiveness as a result of cooperation is
from 1957.


synod (n.)

late 14c., ecclesiastical council, from Late Latin synodus, from Greek synodos assembly, meeting; a
coming together, conjunction of planets, from syn- together (see syn-) + hodos a going, a way (see
cede). Earlier in English as sinoth (early 12c.). Used by Presbyterians for assembly of ministers
and other elders from 1593 to c.1920, when replaced by General Council.


synodal (adj.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin synodalis, from synodus  (see synod).


synodic (adj.)

1630s, from Late Latin synodicus, from Greek synodikos, from synodos (see synod). Related: Synodical
(1560s).


synonym (n.)

word having the same sense as another, early 15c. (but usually in plural form before 18c., or, if
singular, as synonyma), from Old French synonyme (12c.) and directly from Late Latin synonymum, from
Greek synonymon word having the same sense as another, noun use of neuter of synonymos having the
same name as, synonymous, from syn- together, same (see syn-) + onyma, Aeolic dialectal form of
onoma name (see name (n.)).


synonymity (n.)

1790, from synonym + -ity.


synonymous (adj.)

c.1600, of words, denoting the same idea, from Medieval Latin synonymus, from Greek synonymos, from
synonymon (see synonym). Related: Synonymously.


synonymy (n.)

1650s, use of synonyms; 1794, quality of being synonymous, from French synonymie and directly from
Late Latin synonymia, from Greek synonymos (see synonymous).


synopsis (n.)

1610s, a general view, an outline, from Late Latin synopsis a synopsis, from Greek synopsis a
general view, literally a seeing altogether, a seeing all at once, from syn- together (see syn-) +
opsis sight, appearance, from PIE *okw- to see (see eye (n.)).


synoptic (adj.)

1763, pertaining to synopsis, from Modern Latin synopticus, from Late Latin synopsis (see synopsis).
Greek synoptikos meant taking a general or comprehensive view, and the sense affording a general
view in English emerged by mid-19c. Specifically of the first three Gospels from 1841, on notion of
giving an account of events from the same point of view. Related Synoptical (1660s).


synovial (adj.)

1756, pertaining to the synovia, albuminous fluid secreted by certain glands, from Modern Latin
sinovia (16c.), probably coined by Paracelsus and apparently an invented word. With -al (1).


syntactic (adj.)

1771, from Modern Latin syntacticus, from Greek syntaktikos a joining together, a joining in order,
from syntassein put in order (see syntax).


syntactical (adj.)

1570s; from Latin stem of syntax + -ical. Related: Syntactically.


syntagmatic (adj.)

1937, from French syntagmatique (de Saussure), from Greek syntagma that which is put together in
order, from syntassein (see syntax).


syntax (n.)

c.1600, from French syntaxe (16c.) and directly from Late Latin syntaxis, from Greek syntaxis a
putting together or in order, arrangement, a grammatical construction, from stem of syntassein put
in order, from syn- together (see syn-) + tassein arrange (see tactics).


synthesis (n.)

1610s, deductive reasoning, from Latin synthesis collection, set, suit of clothes, composition (of a
medication), from Greek synthesis composition, a putting together, from syntithenai put together,
combine, from syn- together (see syn-) + tithenai put, place (see theme). From 1733 as a combination
of parts into a whole. Earlier borrowed in Middle English as sintecis (mid-15c.). Plural syntheses.


synthesise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of synthesize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Synthesised;
synthesising.


synthesize (v.)

combine or bring together (two or more things), 1825, from synthesis + -ize. A correct formation
would be *synthetize. Related: Synthesized; synthesizing.


synthesizer (v.)

1869, agent noun from synthesize. As a type of instrument for generating musical or vocal sounds
from 1909; the electronic version is from 1950s.


synthetic (adj.)

1690s, as a term in logic, deductive, from French synth&eacute;tique (17c.) and directly from Modern
Latin syntheticus, from Greek synthetikos skilled in putting together, constructive, from synthetos
put together, constructed, compounded, past participle of syntithenai to put together (see
synthesis). From 1874 in reference to products or materials made artificially by chemical synthesis;
hence artificial (1930). As a noun, synthetic material, from 1934. Related: Synthetical (1620s in
logic).


syphilis (n.)

infectious venereal disease, 1718, Modern Latin, originally from the title of a poem, Syphilis, sive
Morbus Gallicus Syphilis, or the French Disease, published 1530, by Veronese doctor Girolamo
Fracastoro (1483-1553), which tells the tale of the shepherd Syphilus, supposed to be the first
sufferer from the disease. Fracastoro first used the word as a generic term for the disease in his
1546 treatise De Contagione. Why he chose the name is unknown; it may be intended as Latin for Pig-
lover, though there was also a Sipylus, a son of Niobe, in Ovid.


syphilitic (adj.)

1786, from Modern Latin syphiliticus, from syphilis (see syphilis). As a noun from 1881.


Syracuse

city in Sicily, founded as a Corinthian colony, and with a name traceable to 8c. B.C.E., from a pre-
Hellenic word, perhaps Phoenician serah to feel ill, in reference to its location near a swamp. The
city in New York, U.S., was named 1825 for the classical city.


Syria

from Latin Syria, from Greek Syria, from Syrioi the Syrians, a name given originally to the
Assyrians (Herodotus vii.63), a shortened form of Assyrioi Assyrians (see Assyria). Related: Syrian.


Syriac (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin syraicus, from Greek syraikos Syrian, of or pertaining to Syria, (see Syria). As
the name of an ancient Semitic language, from 1610s.


syringe (n.)

narrow tube for injecting a stream of liquid, early 15c. (earlier suringa, late 14c.), from Late
Latin syringa, from Greek syringa, accusative of syrinx tube, hole, channel, shepherd's pipe,
related to syrizein to pipe, whistle, hiss, from PIE root *swer- (see susurration). Originally a
catheter for irrigating wounds; the application to hypodermic needles is from 1884. Related:
Syringeal.


syrinx (n.)

tubular instrument, c.1600, the thing itself known from 14c. in English, from Late Latin syrinx,
from Greek syrinx shepherd's pipe (see syringe). Used of vocal organs of birds from 1872.


syrup (n.)

late 14c., thick, sweet liquid, from Old French sirop sugared drink (13c.), and perhaps from Italian
siroppo, both from Arabic sharab beverage, wine, literally something drunk, from verb shariba he
drank (compare sherbet). Spanish jarabe, jarope, Old Proven&ccedil;al eissarop are from Arabic;
Italian sciroppo is via Medieval Latin sirupus. In English, formerly also sirup, sirop.


syrupy (adj.)

1707, from syrup + -y. Related: Syrupiness.


systaltic (adj.)

alternately contracting and dilating, 1670s, from Late Latin systalticus, from Greek systaltikos
drawing together, from stem of systellein, related to systole (see systole).


system (n.)

1610s, the whole creation, the universe, from Late Latin systema an arrangement, system, from Greek
systema organized whole, a whole compounded of parts, from stem of synistanai to place together,
organize, form in order, from syn- together (see syn-) + root of histanai cause to stand from PIE
root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Meaning set of correlated principles, facts, ideas, etc. first
recorded 1630s. Meaning animal body as an organized whole, sum of the vital processes in an organism
is recorded from 1680s; hence figurative phrase to get (something) out of one's system (1900).
Computer sense of group of related programs is recorded from 1963. All systems go (1962) is from
U.S. space program. The system prevailing social order is from 1806.


systematic (adj.)

1670s, pertaining to a system, from French syst&#233;matique or directly from Late Latin
systematicus, from Greek systematikos combined in a whole, from systema (genitive systematos); see
system. From 1789 as methodical, often in a bad sense, ruthlessly methodical. Related: Systematical
(1660s); systematically.


systematise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of systematize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Systematised;
systematising; systematisation.


systematization (n.)

1811, noun of action from systematize.


systematize (v.)

make into a system, 1764, from French syst&#233;matiser or a native formation from system (Greek
stem systemat-) + -ize. Related: Systematized; systematizing.


systemic (adj.)

1803, irregularly formed from system + -ic; used in medicine and biology for differentiation of
meaning from systematic. Related: Systemically.


systole (n.)

periodic contraction of the heart and arteries, 1570s, from Greek systole a drawing together,
contraction, from syn- together (see syn-) + stem related to stellein to bring together, draw in; to
put, set, place (see diastole).


systolic (adj.)

1690s, from Modern Latin systolicus, from Greek systole a drawing together, contraction (see
systole).


syzygy (n.)

conjunction or opposition of a heavenly body with the sun, 1650s, from Late Latin syzygia, from
Greek syzygia yoke of animals, pair, union of two, conjunction, from syzygein to yoke together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + zygon yoke (see jugular). Related: Syzygial;
Syzygiacal; Syzygetic.


Szechwan

also Szechuan, place name, said to mean four rivers, from Chinese si four + chuan river.


