&#039;tis

mid-15c., contraction of it is.


&#039;twas

contraction of it was.


&#039;twere

contraction of it were.


&#039;twixt (prep.)

also twixt, c.1300, short for betwixt.


-teen

word-forming element making cardinal numbers from 13 to 19, meaning ten more than, from Old English
-tene, -tiene, from Proto-Germanic *tekhuniz (cognates: Old Saxon -tein, Dutch -tien, Old High
German -zehan, German -zehn, Gothic -taihun), an inflected form of the root of ten; cognate with
Latin -decim (source of Italian -dici, Spanish -ce, French -ze).


-teenth

word-forming element making ordinal numbers from 13 to 19, from -teen + -th (1), displacing Old
English -teo&eth;a, -teo&eth;e (West Saxon), related to teogo&eth;a (Anglian) tenth.


-th (2)

suffix forming nouns of action, state, or quality from verbs or adjectives (such as depth, strength,
truth), from Old English -&eth;u, -&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *-itho (cognates: Old Norse -&#254;,
Old High German -ida, Gothic -i&#254;a), abstract noun suffix, from PIE *-ita (cognates: Sanskrit
-tati-; Greek -tet-; Latin -tati-, as in libertatem liberty from liber free). Sometimes in English
reduced to -t, especially after -h- (as in height).


-th (1)

word-forming element making ordinal numbers (fourth, tenth, etc.), Old English -&eth;a, from Proto-
Germanic *-tha- (cognates: Gothic -da, -ta, Old High German -do, -to, Old Norse -di, -ti), from PIE
*-to-, also *-eto-, *-oto-, suffix forming adjectives marking the accomplishment of the notion of
the base [Watkins]. Cognate with Sanskrit thah, Greek -tos, Latin -tus; Sanskrit ta-, Lithuanian and
Old Church Slavonic to, Greek to the, Latin talis such; Greek telikos so old, Old Church Slavonic
toli so, toliku so much, Russian toliko only; also see -ed.


-tion

syllable formed when the word-forming element -ion (from Latin -io) is fixed to a base or to another
suffix ending in -t or -te.


-tomy

word-forming element meaning a cutting (especially a surgical incision or removal), from Greek
-tomia a cutting of, from tome a cutting, section (see tome).


-trix

fem. agential suffix, from Latin, corresponding to masc. -tor (see -or).


-tron

word-forming element in compounds coined in physics, having to do with electrons or subatomic
particles, 1939, abstracted unetymologically from electron (Greek -tron was an instrumentive
suffix).


-trope

word-forming element meaning that which turns, from Greek tropos (see trope).


-trophy

word-forming element meaning food, nourishment, from Greek -trophia, from trophe food, nourishment,
related to trephein make thrive, nourish, rear; to make solid, congeal, thicken.


-tude

syllable formed when the word-forming element -ude, making abstract nouns from adjectives and
participles, is fixed to a base or to another suffix ending in -t or -te; from French -ude, from
Latin -udo (stem -udin-). The equivalent of native -ness.


-tuple

1863, word-forming element abstracted from quintuple, etc.


-ty (1)

suffix representing ten in cardinal numbers that are multiples of 10 (sixty, seventy, etc.), from
Old English -tig, from a Germanic root (cognates: Old Saxon, Dutch -tig, Old Frisian -tich, Old
Norse -tigr, Old High German -zug, German -zig) that existed as a distinct word in Gothic (tigjus)
and Old Norse (tigir) meaning tens, decades. Compare tithe (n.).    English, like many other
Germanic languages, retains traces of a base-12 number system. The most obvious instance is eleven
and twelve which ought to be the first two numbers of the teens series. Their Old English forms,
enleofan and twel(eo)f(an), are more transparent: leave one and leave two.    Old English also had
hund endleofantig for 110 and hund twelftig for 120. One hundred was hund teantig. The -tig
formation ran through 12 cycles, and could have bequeathed us numbers *eleventy (110) and *twelfty
(120) had it endured, but already during the Anglo-Saxon period it was being obscured.    Old Norse
used hundra&eth; for 120 and &thorn;usend for 1,200. Tvauhundra&eth; was 240 and
&thorn;riuhundra&eth; was 360. Older Germanic legal texts distinguished a common hundred (100) from
a great hundred (120). This duodecimal system is perhaps due to contact with Babylonia [Lass, Old
English].


-ty (2)

suffix used in forming abstract nouns from adjectives (such as safety, surety), Middle English -tie,
-te, from Old French -te (Modern French -t&#233;), from Latin -tatem (nominative -tas, genitive
-tatis), cognate with Greek -tes, Sanskrit -tati-. Also see -ity.


T

to cross one's t's (and dot one's i's) to be exact is attested from 1849. Phrase to a T exactly is
recorded from 1690s, though the exact signification remains uncertain despite much speculation. The
measuring tool called a T-square (sometimes suggested as the source of this) is recorded by that
name only from 1785. The T-cell (1970) so called because they are derived from the thymus. As a
medieval numeral, T represented 160.


T and A (n.)

1972, short for tits and ass (a phrase attributed to Lenny Bruce), in reference to salacious U.S.
mass media; earlier it was medical shorthand for tonsils and adenoids (1942).


T-bone (n.)

type of steak, 1916, so called from the T-shaped bone that runs through it. The verb meaning to
strike (another car, bus, etc.) from the side is by 1970, from adjectival use in reference to
crashes, attested from 1952, from the position of the two vehicles at impact.


T-shirt (n.)

1920, in reference to the shape it makes when laid out flat (t-shirt is thus incorrect).


ta

1772, natural infantile sound of gratitude [Weekley].


ta&#039;en

contraction of taken.


ta-ta

also tata, good-bye, familiar salutation in parting, 1823, a word first recorded as infant's speech.
Abbreviation T.T.F.N., ta-ta for now, popularized 1941 by BBC radio program ITMA, where it was the
characteristic parting of the cockney cleaning woman character Mrs. Mopp, voiced by Dorothy Summers.


tab (n.1)

small flap or strip of material, c.1600, possibly from a dialectal word, of uncertain origin. Often
interchangeable with tag (n.1). Compare also Middle English tab strap or string (mid-15c.),
Norwegian dialectal tave piece of cloth, rag.


tab (n.2)

account, bill, check, 1888, American English colloquial, probably a shortened form of tabulation or
of tablet in the sense a sheet for writing on. Figurative phrase keep a tab on is recorded from
1890.


tab (n.3)

1961, shortened form of tablet (especially one of sugar containing LSD). As an abbreviation of
tabloid (newspaper) it is 1990s slang. As a short form of tabulator key of a typewriter (later
computer) it is recorded from 1916.


tab (v.)

designate, label, name, 1924, earlier affix a tab to 1872 (implied in tabbed), perhaps an alteration
of tag (v.2). Related: Tabbing. Also see tab (n.1).


tabacco (n.)

obsolete form of tobacco.


tabagie (n.)

1819, from French tabagie (17c.), from tabac tobacco (see tobacco) + -age. A group of smokers who
meet in club fashion; a tobacco-parliament.


tabard (n.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French tabart simple sleeveless overtunic, also heavy
overmantel (12c.), of unknown origin; Diez suggests Latin tapete figured cloth. Compare Medieval
Latin tabardum, early Spanish tabardo, Italian tabarro. Originally a coarse, sleeveless upper
garment worn by peasants and others who worked out-of-doors; later a knight's surcoat (hence the
name of the tavern in Canterbury Tales).


Tabasco

proprietary name of a type of hot sauce, 1876, (the sauce so called from 1650s, originally Tavasco),
named for the state in Mexico, perhaps because the pepper sauce was first encountered there by U.S.
and European travelers. The trademark (by Edward Avery McIlhenny) claims use from c.1870. The place
name is from an unidentified Mexican Indian language and of unknown etymology.


tabbouli (n.)

also tabouli, tabbouleh, Middle Eastern vegetable salad, 1955, from Arabic tabbula.


tabby (n.)

1630s, striped silk taffeta, from French tabis a rich, watered silk (originally striped), from
Middle French atabis (14c.), from Arabic 'attabi, from 'Attabiyah, a neighborhood of Baghdad where
such cloth was made, said to be named for prince 'Attab of the Omayyad dynasty. As an adjective from
1630s.   Tabby cat, one with a striped coat, is attested from 1690s; shortened form tabby first
attested 1774. The wild original of the domestic cat is always of such coloration [Century
Dictionary]. Sense of female cat (1826) may be influenced by the fem. proper name Tabby, a pet form
of Tabitha, which was used in late 18c. as slang for spiteful spinster, difficult old woman.


tabernacle (n.)

mid-13c., portable sanctuary carried by the Israelites in the wilderness, from Old French tabernacle
the Jewish Tabernacle; tent, canopy; tomb, monument (12c.), from Latin tabernaculum tent, especially
a tent of an augur (for taking observations), diminutive of taberna hut, cabin, booth (see tavern).
Use of the word in English transferred late 14c. to the Temple in Jerusalem (which continued its
function). Sense of house of worship first recorded 1690s. Also in Biblical language, the body as
the temporary abode of the soul (late 14c.). The Jewish Feast of Tabernacles (mid-October) was
observed as a thanksgiving for harvest. Related: Tabernacular.


tabes (n.)

emaciation, 1650s, medical Latin, from Latin tabes a melting, wasting away, putrefaction, from
tabere to melt, waste away, be consumed, from PIE *ta- to melt, dissolve (see thaw (v.)).


Tabitha

fem. proper name, from Late Latin, from Greek Tabitha, from Aramaic tabhyetha, emphatic of tabhya
gazelle, which is related to Hebrew tzebhi (fem. tzebhiyyah), Arabic zaby.


tabla (n.)

pair of drums used in northern Indian music, 1865, from Hindi, from Arabic tabl a drum played with
the hand.


tablature (n.)

type of musical notation for lute or stringed instrument, 1570s, from French tablature (1550s), from
Italian tavolatura (also Medieval Latin tabulatura), from Late Latin tabulare, from Latin tabula
table, list, schedule (see table (n.)). It differed from the more general staff-notation in that it
aimed to express not so much the pitch of the notes intended as the mechanical process by which on
the particular instrument those tones were to be produced [Century Dictionary].


table (n.)

late 12c., board, slab, plate, from Old French table board, square panel, plank; writing table;
picture; food, fare (11c.), and late Old English tabele writing tablet, gaming table, from Germanic
*tabal (cognates: Dutch tafel, Danish tavle, Old High German zabel board, plank, German Tafel). Both
the French and Germanic words are from Latin tabula a board, plank; writing table; list, schedule;
picture, painted panel, originally small flat slab or piece usually for inscriptions or for games
(source also of Spanish tabla, Italian tavola), of uncertain origin, related to Umbrian tafle on the
board.    The sense of piece of furniture with the flat top and legs first recorded c.1300 (the
usual Latin word for this was mensa (see mensa); Old English writers used bord (see board (n.1)).
Especially the table at which people eat, hence food placed upon a table (c.1400 in English). The
meaning arrangement of numbers or other figures on a tabular surface for convenience is recorded
from late 14c. (as in table of contents, mid-15c.).    Figurative phrase turn the tables (1630s) is
from backgammon (in Old and Middle English the game was called tables). Table talk familiar
conversation around a table is attested from 1560s, translating Latin colloquia mensalis. Table-
manners is from 1824. Table-hopping is first recorded 1943. The adjectival phrase under-the-table
hidden from view is recorded from 1949; to be under the table passed out from excess drinking is
recorded from 1913. Table tennis ping-pong is recorded from 1887. Table-rapping in spiritualism,
supposedly an effect of supernatural powers, is from 1853.


table (v.)

mid-15c., enter into a list, form into a list or catalogue, also provide with food, from table (n.).
In parliamentary sense, 1718, originally to lay on the (speaker's) table for discussion; but in U.S.
political jargon it has chiefly the sense of to postpone indefinitely (1866) via notion of lay aside
for future consideration. Related: Tabled; tabling.


table-d&#039;hote (n.)

common table for guests at a hotel, French, table-d'h&ocirc;te, literally table of the host; see
table (n.) + host (n.).


table-land (n.)

1690s, from table (n.) + land (n.).


tableau (n.)

1690s, a picturesque or graphic description or picture, from French tableau picture, painting
(12c.), from Old French table slab, writing tablet (see table (n.)) + diminutive suffix -eau, from
Latin -ellus. Hence tableau-vivant (1817) person or persons silent and motionless, enacting a well-
known scene, incident, painting, etc., 19c. parlor game, literally living picture.


tablecloth (n.)

also table-cloth, cloth for covering the top of a table,  mid-15c., from table (n.) + cloth.


tablespoon (n.)

spoon used in table-service, 1763, from table (n.) + spoon (n.).


tablet (n.)

c.1300, slab or flat surface for an inscription (especially the two Mosaic tables of stone), from
Old French tablete small table, merchant's display counter (13c., Modern French tablette),
diminutive of table slab, or from Medieval Latin tabuleta (source also of Spanish tableta, Italian
tavoletta), diminutive of Latin tabula (see table (n.)). The meaning lozenge, pill is first recorded
1580s; that of pad of writing paper in 1880.


tableware (n.)

also table-ware, 1799, from table (n.) + ware.


tabloid (n.)

1884, Tabloid, small tablet of medicine, trademark name (by Burroughs, Wellcome and Co.) for
compressed or concentrated chemicals and drugs, a hybrid formed from tablet + Greek-derived suffix
-oid. By 1898, it was being used figuratively to mean a compressed form or dose of anything, hence
tabloid journalism (1901), and newspapers that typified it (1917), so called for having short,
condensed news articles and/or for being small in size. Associated originally with Alfred C.
Harmsworth, editor and proprietor of the London Daily Mail.    Mr. Harmsworth entered a printing
office twenty years ago as office-boy, and today owns thirty periodicals besides The Mail. Upon a
friendly challenge from Mr. Pulitzer of The New York World, the English journalist issued the first
number of The World for the new century in the ideal form. The size of the page was reduced to four
columns and the general make-up was similar in appearance to that of one of the weekly magazines.
Current news was presented in condensed and tabulated form, of which the editor says: The world
enters today upon the twentieth or time-saving century. I claim that by my system of condensed or
tabloid journalism hundreds of working hours can be saved each year. [The Twentieth Century
Newspaper, in The Social Gospel, February 1901]


taboo (adj.)

also tabu, 1777 (in Cook's A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean), consecrated, inviolable, forbidden,
unclean or cursed, explained in some English sources as being from Tongan (Polynesian language of
the island of Tonga) ta-bu sacred, from ta mark + bu especially. But this may be folk etymology, as
linguists in the Pacific have reconstructed an irreducable Proto-Polynesian *tapu, from Proto-
Oceanic *tabu sacred, forbidden (compare Hawaiian kapu taboo, prohibition, sacred, holy,
consecrated; Tahitian tapu restriction, sacred; Maori tapu be under ritual restriction, prohibited).
The noun and verb are English innovations first recorded in Cook's book.


tabor (n.)

also tabour, small drum resembling a tamborine, c.1300, from Old French tabour, tabur drum; din,
noise, commotion (11c.), probably from Persian tabir drum, but evolution of sense and form are
uncertain; compare tambourine.


tabula rasa (n.)

the mind in its primary state, 1530s, from Latin tabula rasa, literally scraped tablet, from which
writing has been erased, thus ready to be written on again, from tabula (see table (n.)) + rasa,
fem. past participle of radere to scrape away, erase (see raze). A loan-translation of Aristotle's
pinakis agraphos, literally unwritten tablet (De anima, 7.22).


tabular (adj.)

table-shaped, 1650s, from French tabulaire  or directly from Latin tabularis of a slab or tablet, of
boards or planks, from tabula slab (see table (n.)). Meaning arranged in a list or columns;
ascertained or computed by means of tables is from 1710.


tabulate (v.)

to put into form of a table, collect or arrange in columns, 1734, from Latin tabula (see table (n.))
+ -ate (2). Earlier in the more literal Latin sense lay a floor (1650s). Related: Tabulated;
tabulating.


tabulation (n.)

act or process of making tabular arrangements, 1803, noun of action from tabulate (v.). Latin
tabulatio meant a flooring over.


tabulator (n.)

1848, agent noun from tabulate.


tace

be silent! Latin imperative of tacere to be silent (see tacit).


tacet

musical instruction, 1724, from Latin tacet is silent, third person singular present indicative of
tacere (see tacit).


tacho-

word-forming element meaning speed, from Latinized form of Greek takho-, comb. form of takhos speed,
swiftness, fleetness, velocity, related to takhys swift, of unknown origin.


tachometer (n.)

speed-measuring instrument, 1810, coined by inventor, Bryan Donkin, from tacho- speed + -meter.
Related: Tachometry.


tachy-

word-forming element meaning rapid, swift, fast, from Latinized comb. form of Greek takhys swift,
rapid, hasty, related to takhos speed, swiftness, of uncertain origin.


tachycardia (n.)

rapid heartbeat, 1868, Modern Latin, coined 1867 by German-born physician Hermann Lebert (1813-1878)
from tachy- swift + Latinized form of Greek kardia heart (see heart).


tachygraphy (n.)

shorthand, stenography, 1640s, from Latinized form of Greek takhygraphia, from takhys swift (see
tachy-) + -graphia (see -graphy). Related: Tachygraphic; tachygrapher stenographer (especially among
the ancients; see Tironian).


tachymeter (n.)

surveying instrument, 1836, from tachy- swift + -meter. Related: Tachymetry.    M. GAETANO
CA&#207;RO has invented an instrument, to which he has given the name of Tachymeter (rapid
measurer). Its object is to give the area of plane surfaces bounded by any outline whatever, without
the necessity of any arithmetical operation. [Magazine of Popular Science and Journal of the Useful
Arts, Volume 2, 1836]


tachyon (n.)

1967, hypothetical faster-than-light particle, from tachy- swift + -on.


tachypnea (n.)

hysterical rapid breathing, 1896, from tachy- swift + -pnea, from pnein to breathe (see pneuma).
Related: Tachypneic.


tacit (adj.)

c.1600, silent, unspoken, from French tacite and directly from Latin tacitus that is passed over in
silence, done without words, assumed as a matter of course, silent, past participle of tacere be
silent, not speak, from suffixed form of PIE root *tak- to be silent (cognates: Gothic &thorn;ahan,
Old Norse &thorn;egja to be silent, Old Norse &thorn;agna to grow dumb, Old Saxon thagian, Old High
German dagen to be silent). The musical instruction tacet is the 3rd person present singular of the
Latin verb. Related: Tacitly.


taciturn (adj.)

habitually silent, 1771, back-formation from taciturnity, or from French taciturne (15c.), from
Latin taciturnus not talkative, noiseless.


taciturnity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French taciturnit&eacute;, from Latin taciturnitatem (nominative taciturnitas)
a being or keeping silent, from taciturnus disposed to be silent, from tacitus silent (see tacit).


tack (n.1)

clasp, hook, fastener, also a nail of some kind, c.1400, from Old North French taque nail, pin, peg
(Old French tache, 12c., nail, spike, tack; pin brooch), probably from a Germanic source (compare
Middle Dutch tacke twig, spike, Frisian tak a tine, prong, twig, branch, Low German takk tine,
pointed thing, German Zacken sharp point, tooth, prong), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. Meaning small,
sharp nail with a flat head is attested from mid-15c. The meaning rope to hold the corner of a sail
in place is first recorded late 15c.


tack (v.1)

late 14c., to attach with a nail, etc., from tack (n.1). Meaning to attach as a supplement (with
suggestion of hasty or arbitrary proceeding) is from 1680s. Related: Tacked; tacking.


tack (n.2)

horse's harness, etc., 1924, shortening of tackle (n.) in sense of equipment. Tack in a non-
equestrian sense as a shortening of tackle is recorded in dialect from 1777.


tack (n.3)

food in general, but in dialect especially bad food, and especially among sailors food of a bread
kind, 1833, perhaps a shortening and special use of tackle (n.) in the sense of gear. But compare
tack taste (c.1600), perhaps a variant of tact.


tack (v.2)

turn a ship's course toward the wind at an angle, 1550s, from tack (n.1) in the ship-rigging sense
(the ropes were used to move the vessel temporarily to one side or another of its general line of
course, to take advantage of a side-wind); hence tack (n.) course of conduct or mode of action
suited to some purpose (1670s), from figurative use of the verb (1630s). Related: Tacked; tacking.


tack-hammer (n.)

1848, from tack (n.1) + hammer (n.).


tackle (n.)

mid-13c., apparatus, gear, especially the rigging of a ship, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German
takel the rigging of a ship, perhaps related to Middle Dutch taken grasp, seize (see take (v.)), or
perhaps from root of tack (n.1), which, if not the origin, has influenced the sense. Meaning
apparatus for fishing is recorded from late 14c. Meaning device for grasping and shifting or moving
is from 1530s. Meaning act of tackling in the sporting sense is recorded from 1876 (see tackle
(v.)); as the name of a position in North American football, it is recorded from 1884. Welsh tacl is
fro English.


tackle (v.)

mid-14c., entangle, involve, from tackle (n.). Sense of to furnish (a ship) with tackles is from
c.1400; meaning to harness a horse is recorded from 1714. The meaning lay hold of, come to grips
with, attack is attested from 1828, described by Webster that year as a common popular use of the
word in New England, though not elegant; figurative sense of try to deal with (a task or problem) is
from 1840. The verb in the sporting sense first recorded 1867, to seize and stop. Related: Tackled;
tackling.


tacky (adj.1)

sticky, 1788, from tack (n.1) in the sense of an act of attaching temporarily + -y (2). Related:
Tackiness stickiness.


tacky (adj.2)

in poor taste, 1888, from earlier sense of shabby, seedy (1862), adjectival use of tackey (n.) ill-
fed or neglected horse (1800), later extended to persons in like condition, hillbilly, cracker
(1888), of uncertain origin. Related: Tackiness.    The word tacky is a Southern colloquialism. It
was coined by a wealthier or more refined and educated class for general application to those who
were not sheltered by the branches of a family tree, who were tainted. Those who were wealthy and
yet had no great-grandfathers were tackies. The word was used both in contempt and in derision. It
is now nearly obsolete in both senses. There are no aristocrats in the South now, and therefore no
tackies. No man who has the instincts of a gentleman is spoken of as a tacky, whether he can
remember the name of his grandfather's uncle or not. But it has its uses. It is employed in
describing persons of low ideas and vulgar manners, whether rich or poor. It may mean an absence of
style. In dress, anything that is tawdry is tacky. A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain
in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be tacky, because it is
cheap and yet pretentious. In Louisiana the inferior grade of Creole ponies are known as tackies.
[Horace Ingraham, Charleston, S.C., in American Notes and Queries, Feb. 15, 1890]


taco (n.)

tortilla filled with spiced meat, etc., 1949, from Mexican Spanish, light lunch, literally plug,
wadding.


Tacoma

city in Washington State, U.S., from Lushootseed (Salishan) /tequbed/ snow-covered mountain, in
reference to nearby Mount Rainier.


Taconic

mountain range in New England, perhaps from Mahican (Algonquian) */ta:hkenek/ in the woods; compare
Unami Delaware (Algonquian) /tekenink/ in the woods.


tact (n.)

1650s, sense of touch or feeling (with an isolated instance, tac&#254;e from c.1200), from Latin
tactus a touch, handling, sense of touch, from root of tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)).
Meaning sense of discernment in action or conduct, diplomacy, fine intuitive mental perception first
recorded 1804, from development in French cognate tact. The Latin figurative sense was influence,
effect.


tactful (adj.)

1844, from tact + -ful. Related: Tactfully; tactfulness.


tactic (n.)

1766, from Modern Latin tactica, from Greek taktike (tekhne) (art of) arrangement, from fem. of
taktikos pertaining to arrangement (see tactics). Earlier it meant a tactician (1630s), and was in
use as an adjective meaning tactical (c.1600).


tactical (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to tactics, from Modern Latin tactica (see tactics) + -al (1). Meaning
characterized by adroit management is from 1883. In reference to nuclear weapons (for limited use in
military operations, opposed to strategic) it is recorded from 1957. Related: Tactically.


tactician (n.)

expert in tactics, 1761, from tactic + -ian.


tactics (n.)

1620s, science of arranging military forces for combat, from Modern Latin tactica (17c.), from Greek
taktike techne art of arrangement, noun use of fem. of taktikos of or pertaining to arrangement,
especially tactics in war, adjective to taxis arrangement, an arranging, the order or disposition of
an army, battle array; order, regularity, verbal noun of tassein arrange, from PIE root *tag- to set
aright, set in order (see tangent).


tactile (adj.)

1610s, perceptible to touch, from French tactile (16c.) and directly from Latin tactilis tangible,
that may be touched, from tactus, past participle of tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Meaning
of or pertaining to the sense of touch is attested from 1650s. Related: Tactility.


tactless (adj.)

characterized by want of tact, 1830, from tact + -less. Related: Tactlessly; tactlessness.


tactual (adj.)

pertaining to the sense of touch, 1640s, from Latin tactus a touch (see tact) + -al (1).


tad (n.)

1877, young or small child, probably a shortened form of tadpole, which is said to be the source of
Tad as the nickname of U.S. President Lincoln's son Thomas (1853â&euro;&ldquo;1871). The extended
meaning small amount is first recorded 1915.


tadpole (n.)

mid-15c., from tadde toad (see toad) + pol head (see poll (n.)).


tae

a Scottish form of to.


tae kwon do

1967, from Korean, said to represent tae kick + kwon fist + do art, way, method.


taedium vitae

Latin, weariness of life; a deep disgust with life tempting one to suicide.


taffeta (n.)

mid-14c., fine, smooth, lustrous silk cloth, also taffata, from Old French taffetas (early 14c.),
from Italian taffeta or Medieval Latin taffata, ultimately from Persian taftah silk or linen cloth,
noun use of past participle of taftan to twist, spin, weave, interlace, from Iranian *tap-. Applied
to different fabrics in different eras (and see tapestry).


taffrail (n.)

1814, alteration of tafferel (1704) upper panel on the stern of a ship (often ornamented), earlier,
a carved panel (1620s), from Dutch tafereel panel for painting or carving, dissimulation from
*tafeleel, diminutive of tafel table, from the general West Germanic borrowing of Latin tabula slab,
board (see table (n.)). The word developed in Dutch from the custom of ornamenting (by painting or
carving) the high, flat stern of old sailing ships; spelling and sense altered in English by
influence of rail (n.).


taffy (n.)

coarse candy made from sugar or molasses boiled down and cooled, 1817, related to toffee, but of
uncertain origin; perhaps associated with tafia (1763), a rum-like alcoholic liquor distilled from
molasses, presumably of West Indian or Malay origin (perhaps a Creole shortening of ratafia). On
this theory, the candy would have been made from the syrup skimmed off the liquor during
distillation.


Taffy

characteristic name of a Welshman, c.1700, from Teifi, Welsh form of Davy (see David).


Taft

surname, from a variant of Old English toft homestead, site of a house.


tag (n.1)

small, hanging piece from a garment, c.1400, of uncertain origin but probably from a Scandinavian
source (compare Norwegian tagg point, prong, barb, Swedish tagg prickle, thorn) and related to
Middle Low German tagge branch, twig, spike), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. The sense development might
be point of metal at the end of a cord, string, etc., hence part hanging loose. Or perhaps
ultimately from PIE *dek-, a root forming words referring to fringe, horsetail, locks of hair (see
with tail (n.1)).    Meaning a label is first recorded 1835; sense of automobile license plate is
recorded from 1935, originally underworld slang. Meaning an epithet, popular designation is recorded
from 1961, hence slang verb meaning write graffiti in public places (1990).


tag (n.2)

children's game, 1738 (in reference to Queen Mary's reign), perhaps a variation of Scottish tig
touch, tap (1721), probably an alteration of Middle English tek touch, tap (see tick (n.2)).
Baseball sense is from 1912.


tag (v.1)

to furnish with a tag, late 14c. (implied in tagged), from tag (n.1). Meaning go along as a follower
is from 1670s; sense of follow closely and persistently is from 1884. Related: Tagging. Verbal
phrase tag along is first recorded 1900.


tag (v.2)

a touch in the game of tag, 1878; in baseball, 1904, from tag (n.2); the adjective in the pro-
wrestling sense is recorded from 1955. Related: Tagged; tagging.


Tagalog (n.)

people living near Manila in the Philippines, also their language, 1704, from Tagalog taga native to
+ ilog river.


tagliatelle (n.)

1876, from Italian tagliatelle, plural noun from tagliare to cut (see entail).


tagline (n.)

punchline of a joke, 1926, originally last line in an actor's speech (1916), from tag (n.1) + line
(n.).


tahini (n.)

from Arabic tahina, from tahana to grind or crush.


Tahiti

from native Polynesian Otahiti, of uncertain meaning. It was called in turn Sagittaria (1606, by the
Portuguese), King George III Island (1767, by the British), Nouvelle-Cyth&#232;re (1768, by the
French). Related: Tahitian.


Tahoe

Lake on the Nevada-California border, from Washo /da'aw/ lake.


Tai (n.)

group of people of related ethnicity and language in Southeast Asia, including the Thai, Lao, and
Shan, from tai, literally free.


tai chi (n.)

1736, the supreme ultimate in Taoism and Neo-Confucianism, from Chinese tai extreme + ji limit. As
the name of a form of martial arts training (said to have been developed by a priest in the Sung
dynasty, 960-1279) it is first attested 1962, in full, tai chi ch'uan, with Chinese quan fist.


taiga (n.)

belt of coniferous forests in Siberia, 1869, from Russian taiga, which is of Mongolian origin.


tail (n.1)

hindmost part of an animal, Old English t&aelig;gl, t&aelig;gel a tail, from Proto-Germanic *tagla-
(cognates: Old High German zagal, German Zagel tail, dialectal German Zagel penis, Old Norse tagl
horse's tail, Gothic tagl hair), from PIE *doklos, from suffixed form of root *dek- (2) something
long and thin (referring to such things as fringe, lock of hair, horsetail; cognates: Old Irish dual
lock of hair, Sanskrit dasah fringe, wick). According to OED, the primary sense, at least in
Germanic, seems to have been hairy tail, or just tuft of hair, but already in Old English the word
was applied to the hairless tails of worms, bees, etc. But Buck writes that the common notion is of
long, slender shape. As an adjective from 1670s.    Meaning reverse side of a coin (opposite the
side with the head) is from 1680s; that of backside of a person, buttocks is recorded from c.1300;
slang sense of pudenda is from mid-14c.; that of woman as sex object is from 1933, earlier act of
copulation with a prostitute (1846). Of descending strokes of letters, from 1590s.   Tails coat with
tails is from 1857. The tail-race (1776) is the part of a mill race below the wheel. To turn tail
take flight (1580s) originally was a term in falconry. The image of the tail wagging the dog is
attested from 1907. Another Old English word for tail was steort (see stark).


tail (n.2)

limitation of ownership, a legal term, early 14c. in Anglo-French; late 13c. in Anglo-Latin, in most
cases a shortened form of entail.


tail (v.)

1520s, attach to the tail, from tail (n.1). Meaning move or extend in a way suggestive of a tail is
from 1781. Meaning follow secretly is U.S. colloquial, 1907, from earlier sense of follow or drive
cattle. Related: Tailed; tailing. Tail off diminish is attested from 1854.


tail-bone (n.)

also tailbone, 1540s, from tail (n.) + bone (n.).


tail-end (n.)

late 14c., from tail (n.) + end (n.).


tail-gate (n.)

1868, back panel on a wagon, hinged to swing down and open, from tail (n.) + gate (n.). Extended by
1950 to hatchback door on an automobile. The verb (also tailgate) meaning to drive too close behind
another vehicle is from 1951 (Truck drivers know the practice of following too close as tail-gating
- Popular Science, Jan. 1952); as an adjective, in reference to the open tail-gate of a parked car
as a setting for a party or picnic, from 1958. Related: Tail-gating.


tail-hook (n.)

1861, in angling, from tail (n.) + hook (n.).


tail-pipe (n.)

also tailpipe, 1757, small pipe fixed at the swell of a musket to receive the ramrod, from tail (n.)
+ pipe (n.). From 1832 as suction pipe of a pump; 1907 as exhaust pipe of an automobile.


tailor (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French tailour, Old French tailleor tailor, also stone-mason (13c., Modern French
tailleur), literally a cutter, from tailler to cut, from Late Latin or old Medieval Latin taliare to
split (compare Medieval Latin taliator vestium a cutter of clothes), from Latin talea a slender
stick, rod, staff; a cutting, twig.    Although historically the tailor is the cutter, in the trade
the 'tailor' is the man who sews or makes up what the 'cutter' has shaped. [OED]    The post-Latin
sense development would be piece of a plant cut for grafting, hence a verb, cut a shoot, then,
generally, to cut. Possible cognates include Sanskrit talah wine palm, Old Lithuanian talokas a
young girl, Greek talis a marriageable girl (for sense, compare slip of a girl, twiggy), Etruscan
Tholna, name of the goddess of youth.   Kent. ... You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a
tailor made thee.  Corn. Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?  Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir: a
stone cutter, or a painter, could not have made him so ill, though they had been but two hours at
the trade.  [King Lear]    One who makes outer garments to order, as opposed to a clothier, who
makes them for sale ready-made. Tailor-made first recorded 1832 (in a figurative sense); literal
sense was heavy and plain, with attention to exact fit and with little ornamentation, as of women's
garments made by a tailor rather than a dress-maker.


tailor (v.)

1660s, from tailor (n.). Figurative sense of to design (something) to suit needs is attested from
1942. Related: Tailored; tailoring.


tailspin (n.)

downward spiraling dive of an aircraft, 1916, from tail (n.1) + spin (n.). Figurative sense of state
of loss of control is from 1928.


tain (n.)

thin tin plate for mirrors, etc., 1858, from French tain tinfoil (17c.), an alteration of
&eacute;tain tin, from Latin stagnum, stannum alloy of silver and lead, in Late Latin tin (see
stannic).


Taino

from Taino nitayno the first, the good.


taint (v.)

1570s, to corrupt, contaminate, also to touch, tinge, imbue slightly (1590s), from Middle English
teynten to convict, prove guilty (late 14c.), partly from Old French ataint, past participle of
ataindre to touch upon, seize (see attainder). Also from Anglo-French teinter to color, dye (early
15c.), from Old French teint (12c.), past participle of teindre to dye, color, from Latin tingere
(see tincture). Related: Tainted; tainting.


taint (n.)

c.1600, stain, spot, from Old French teint color, hue, dye, stain, from Latin tinctus a dyeing, from
tingere to dye (see tincture). Meaning a moral stain, corruption, contaminating influence is from
1610s.


Taiwan

literally terrace bay, from Chinese tai terrace + wan bay. Related: Taiwanese.


Taj Mahal (n.)

mausoleum at Agra, India, built by Shah Jahan for his favorite wife, from Persian, perhaps the best
of buildings, with second element related to Arabic halla to lodge. But some authorities hold that
the name of the mausoleum is a corruption of the name of the woman interred in it, Mumtaz (in
Persian, literally chosen one) Mahal, who died in 1631. Persian taj is literally crown, diadem,
ornamental headdress, but here denoting an object of distinguished excellence. Figurative use of Taj
Mahal in English as a name denoting anything surpassing or excellent is attested from 1895.


take (v.)

late Old English tacan to take, seize, from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka take,
grasp, lay hold, past tense tok, past participle tekinn; Swedish ta, past participle tagit), from
Proto-Germanic *takan- (cognates: Middle Low German tacken, Middle Dutch taken, Gothic tekan to
touch), from Germanic root *tak- to take, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally meaning to touch.
As the principal verb for to take, it gradually replaced Middle English nimen, from Old English
niman, from the usual West Germanic *nem- root (source of German nehmen, Dutch nemen; see nimble).
OED calls take one of the elemental words of the language; take up alone has 55 varieties of meaning
in that dictionary's 2nd print edition. Basic sense is to lay hold of, which evolved to accept,
receive (as in take my advice) c.1200; absorb (take a punch) c.1200; choose, select (take the high
road) late 13c.; to make, obtain (take a shower) late 14c.; to become affected by (take sick)
c.1300.   Take five is 1929, from the approximate time it takes to smoke a cigarette. Take it easy
first recorded 1880; take the plunge act decisively is from 1876; take the rap accept (undeserved)
punishment is from 1930. Phrase take it or leave it is recorded from 1897. To take it out on
(someone or something) vent one's anger on other than what caused it is by 1840.


take (n.)

1650s, that which is taken, from take (v.). Sense of money taken in by a single performance, etc.,
is from 1931. Movie-making sense is recorded from 1927. Criminal sense of money acquired by theft is
from 1888. The verb sense of to cheat, defraud is from 1920. On the take amenable to bribery is from
1930.


takeaway (adj.)

also take-away, 1964 in reference to food-shops, from take (v.) + away. From 1970 as a noun.


taken

past participle of take (v.).


takeoff (n.)

also take-off, caricature, colloquial, 1846, from earlier sense of thing that detracts from
something, drawback (1826), from take (v.) + off (adv.). Meaning act of becoming airborne is from
1904 in reference to aircraft; in reference to jumping, it is attested from 1869. Verbal phrase take
off become airborne is from 1918, in reference to aircraft; figurative use rise suddenly and
dramatically by 1963.


takeout (adj.)

also take-out, in reference to food prepared at a restaurant but not eaten there, 1941, from take
(v.) + out. British equivalent is takeaway.


takeover (n.)

1917, an act of taking over, from verbal phrase take over (1884), from take (v.) + over (adv.).
Attested from 1958 in the corporate sense.


taker (n.)

one who takes in any sense, late 14c., agent noun from take (v.). Specifically one who accepts a bet
from 1810.


talaria (n.)

winged sandals of Hermes (Mercury) and often other gods (Iris, Eros, the Fates and the Furies),
1590s, from Latin talaria, noun use of neuter plural of talaris of the ankle, from talus ankle (see
talus (n.1)).


talbearer (n.)

also tale-bearer, late 15c., from tale (n.) + agent noun from bear (v.).


talc (n.)

1580s, talke, from Middle French talc (16c.), probably from Spanish talco and Medieval Latin talcus,
also talcum talc (ealy 14c.), both from Arabic talq, from Persian talk talc. It was applied by the
Arab and medieval writers to various transparent, translucent and shining minerals such as talc
proper, mica, selenite, etc. [Flood]. Related: Talcoid; talcose; talcous.


talcum (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin talcum, used for any of various shiny minerals. See talc. Talcum powder
attested from 1871.


tale (n.)

Old English talu series, calculation, also story, tale, statement, deposition, narrative, fable,
accusation, action of telling, from Proto-Germanic *talo (cognates: Dutch taal speech, language,
Danish tale speech, talk, discourse, German Erz&#228;hlung story, Gothic talzjan to teach), from PIE
root *del- (2) to recount, count. The secondary Modern English sense of number, numerical reckoning
(c.1200) probably was the primary one in Germanic; see tell (v.), teller and Old Frisian tale,
Middle Dutch tal, Old Saxon tala, Danish tal, Old High German zala, German Zahl number.    The
ground sense of the Modern English word in its main meaning, then, might have been an account of
things in their due order. Related to talk (v.) and tell (v.). Meaning things divulged that were
given secretly, gossip is from mid-14c.; first record of talebearer tattletale is late 15c.


talent (n.)

late 13c., inclination, disposition, will, desire, from Old French talent (12c.), from Medieval
Latin talenta, plural of talentum inclination, leaning, will, desire (11c.), in classical Latin
balance, weight; sum of money, from Greek talanton a balance, pair of scales, hence weight, definite
weight, anything weighed, and in later times sum of money, from PIE *tele- to lift, support, weigh,
with derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins]; see extol.
An ancient denomination of weight, originally Babylonian (though the name is Greek), and varying
widely in value among different peoples and at different times. [Century Dictionary]    According to
Liddell &amp; Scott, as a monetary sum, considered to consist of 6,000 drachmae, or, in Attica,
57.75 lbs. of silver. Also borrowed in other Germanic languages and Celtic. Attested in Old English
as talente). The Medieval Latin and common Romanic sense developed from figurative use of the word
in the sense of money. Meaning special natural ability, aptitude, gift committed to one for use and
improvement developed by mid-15c., in part perhaps from figurative sense wealth, but mostly from the
parable of the talents in Matt. xxv:14-30. Meaning persons of ability collectively is from 1856.


talented (adj.)

1630s, having skills or abilities, from talent (n.). There was a verb talent in 15c., but it meant
predispose.


talesman (n.)

reserve member of a jury, 1670s, from tales writ ordering bystanders to serve in place of jurors not
in attendance (late 15c.), via Anglo-French (mid-13c.), from Latin tales (in tales de
circumstantibus such persons from those standing about, a clause featured in such a writ), noun use
of plural of talis such, of such kind (see that).


Taliban (n.)

Sunni fundamentalist movement begun in Afghanistan, Pashto plural of Arabic t&#257;lib student; so
called because it originated among students in Pakistani religious schools. Group formed c.1993.
Often incorrectly treated as singular in English.


talipes (n.)

club-foot, deformed foot, from Latin talus ankle (see talus (n.1)) + pes foot (see foot (n.)). The
notion seems to be walking on the ankles.


talisman (n.)

1630s, magical figure cut or engraved under certain observances, from French talisman, in part via
Arabic tilsam (plural tilsaman), from Byzantine Greek telesma talisman, religious rite, payment,
earlier consecration, ceremony, originally in ancient Greek completion, from telein perform
(religious rites), pay (tax), fulfill, from telos end, fulfillment, completion (see tele-). The
Arabic word also was borrowed into Turkish, Persian, Hindi. Related: Talismanic; talismanical.


talk (v.)

c.1200, talken, probably a diminutive or frequentative form related to Middle English tale story,
and ultimately from the same source as tale, with rare English formative -k (compare hark from hear,
stalk from steal, smirk from smile) and replacing that word as a verb. East Frisian has talken to
talk, chatter, whisper. Related: Talked; talking.    To talk (something) up discuss in order to
promote is from 1722. To talk shop is from 1854. To talk turkey is from 1824, supposedly from an
elaborate joke about a swindled Indian. To talk back answer impudently or rudely is from 1869.
Phrase talking head is by 1966 in the jargon of television production, an in-tight closeup of a
human head talking on television. In reference to a person who habitually appears on television in
talking-head shots (usually a news anchor), by 1970. The phrase is used earlier, in reference to the
well-known magic trick (such as Se&#241;or Wences's talking head-in-the-box Pedro on the Ed Sullivan
Show), and to actual talking heads in mythology around the world (Orpheus, Bran).


talk (n.)

late 15c., speech, discourse, conversation, from talk (v.). Meaning informal lecture or address is
from 1859. Meaning a subject of gossip is from 1620s (in talk of the town). Talk show first recorded
1965; talk radio is from 1985.


talkative (adj.)

early 15c.; see talk (v.) + -ative. An early hybrid word in English. Originally especially boastful,
but now considered less pejorative than loquacious, garrulous. Related: Talkatively; talkativeness.


talkie (n.)

motion picture with sound, 1913, from earlier talking picture (1908), from talk (v.).


talking-to (n.)

a reprimand, 1871, from euphemistic use of verbal phrase talk to (see talk (v.)).


talky (adj.)

loquacious, 1815, from talk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Talkiness.


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


Talladega

city in Alabama, U.S., from Muskogee /talati:ki/, a tribal town name, from /(i)talwa/ tribal town +
/-atiiki/ at the edge, border.


Tallahassee

place in Florida, U.S.A., 1799, originally Seminole Tallahassee, from Muskogee /talaha:ssi/, name of
a tribal town, perhaps from /(i)talwa/ tribal town + /ahassi/ old, rancid.


tallboy (n.)

also tall-boy, high-stemmed glass or goblet, 1670s, from tall + boy, though the exact signification
is unclear. In reference to a high chest of drawers it is recorded from 1769, here perhaps a partial
loan-translation of French haut bois, literally high wood.


Tallinn

Estonian capital, from Old Estonian (Finnic) tan-linn Danish fort, from tan Danish + linn fort,
castle. Founded 1219 by Danish king Valdemar II.


tallow (n.)

hard animal fat, used to make soap, candles, etc., mid-14c., talwgh, from a source (perhaps an
unrecorded Old English word) cognate with Middle Low German talg tallow, Middle Dutch talch, from
Proto-Germanic *talga-, meaning perhaps originally firm, compact material (compare Gothic tulgus
firm, solid). OED says related Scandinavian words probably are from continental Germanic.


tally (n.)

mid-15c., stick marked with notches to indicate amount owed or paid, from Anglo-French tallie (early
14c., Old French taille notch in a piece of wood signifying a debt), Anglo-Latin talea (late 12c.),
from Medieval Latin tallia, from Latin talea a cutting, rod, stick (see tailor (n.), and compare
sense history of score). Meaning a thing that matches another first recorded 1650s, from practice of
splitting a tally lengthwise across the notches, debtor and creditor each retaining one of the
halves; the usual method of keeping accounts before writing became general (the size of the notches
varied with the amount). Sports sense of a total score is from 1856. Also in 19c. British provincial
verbal expression live tally, make a tally bargain live as husband and wife without marrying.


tally (v.)

mid-15c., keep an account by tally, from Medieval Latin talliare to tax, from tallia (see tally
(n.)). Meaning correspond, agree is from 1705; sports sense of to score is from 1867. Related:
Tallied; tallying. Hence tally-sheet (1889); tallyman one who keeps account (of anything) (1857).


tally-ho

also tallyho, huntsman's cry to alert others that the game has been spotted, 1772, earlier in the
name of a roistering character in English theater, Sir Toby Tallyho (Foote, 1756), from French
taiaut, cry used in deer hunting (1660s), from Old French taho, tielau. Meaning fast coach is from
1823, originally in reference to the one that made the run from London to Birmingham.


Talmud (n.)

body of Jewish traditional ceremonial and civil law, 1530s, from late Hebrew talmud instruction
(c.130 C.E.), from lamadh he learned. Related: Talmudic; Talmudist.


talon (n.)

c.1400, talounz claws of a bird or beast, probably originally from Old French talon heel or hinder
part of the foot of a beast, or of a man, or of a shoe; foot-step (12c.), from Medieval Latin
talonem heel, from Latin talus ankle (see talus (n.1)). The extension to birds of prey, and
subsequent stages, are peculiar to English [OED].


talus (n.1)

anklebone, 1690s, from Latin talus ankle, anklebone, knucklebone (plural tali), related to Latin
taxillus a small die, cube (they originally were made from the knucklebones of animals).


talus (n.2)

slope, 1640s, from French talus (16c.), from Old French talu slope, mound, small hill (12c.),
probably from Gallo-Roman *talutum, from Latin talutium a slope or outcrop of rock debris, perhaps
of Celtic origin (compare Welsh, Breton tal forehead, brow).    OED, however, suggests derivation
from root of talus (n.1) in the sense of heel which developed in its Romanic descendants. Mainly
used of military earthwork at first; meaning sloping mass of rocky fragments that has fallen from a
cliff is first recorded 1830.


tam-o&#039;-shanter (n.)

c.1840, type of bonnet formerly worn by Scottish plowmen, from Tam O'Shanter Tom of Shanter, name of
hero in a poem of the same name by Robert Burns, written 1790. The woolen cap became fashionable for
ladies c.1887.


tamale (n.)

1856, false singular from tamales (1690s), from American Spanish tamales, plural of tamal, from
Nahuatl tamal, tamalli, a food made of Indian corn and meat.


tamarack (n.)

also tamarac, North American black larch, 1805, probably of Algonquian origin (compare synonymous
hackmatack, 1792, from a source akin to Abenaki akemantak a kind of supple wood used for making
snowshoes), but the etymology is unclear.


tamarind (n.)

c.1400, fruit of the tamarind tree, used medicinally, ultimately from Arabic tamr hindi, literally
date of India, from hind India. First element cognate with Hebrew tamar palm tree, date palm. Of the
tree itself, from 1610s.


tamarisk (n.)

southern European evergreen shrub, c.1400, from Late Latin tamariscus, variant of tamarix, of
unknown origin, probably a borrowing from a non-Indo-European language; perhaps Semitic and related
to Hebrew tamar palm tree, date palm (see tamarind).


tambourine (n.)

1782, in the modern sense of parchment-covered hoop with pieces of metal attached; earlier a small
drum (1570s), from French tambourin long narrow drum used in Provence, diminutive of tambour drum,
altered by influence of Arabic tunbur lute, from Old French tabour (see tabor).    The sense
evolutions present some difficulties, and in some 17c. and early 18c. references it is difficult to
say what sort of instrument is intended. Earlier names for this type of instrument were tambour de
basque (1680s), also timbre and timbrel. Tambour itself is attested in English from late 15c., and
Shakespeare has tabourine.


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


tame (v.)

mid-14c., from tame (adj.), or altered by the form of the adjective from Old English temian subdue,
make tame, from Proto-Germanic *tamjan- (cognates: Old Norse temja, Old Frisian tema, Middle Dutch
temmen, Old High German zemmen, German z&#228;hmen, Gothic tamjan). Related: Tamed; taming.


Tamil

Dravidian people and language of southern India, 1734, from Pali Damila, from Sanskrit Dramila,
variant of Dravida (see Dravidian).


Tammany

in 19c. American English political jargon synonymous with Democratic Party in New York City, hence,
late 19c., proverbial for political and municipal corruption, from Tammany Hall, on 14th Street,
headquarters of a social club incorporated 1789, named for Delaware Indian chief Tamanen, who sold
land to William Penn in 1683 and '97. Around the time of the American Revolution he was popularly
canonized as St. Tammany and taken as the patron saint of Pennsylvania and neighboring colonies,
sometimes of the whole of America. He was assigned a feast day (May 1 Old Style, May 12 New Style)
which was celebrated with festivities that raised money for charity, hence the easy transfer of the
name to what was, at first, a benevolent association. The club's symbol was a tiger.


Tammuz (n.)

Babylonian and Assyrian god (identified with Adon), according to Klein's sources probably from
Babylonian Du'uzu, contraction of Dumu-zi the son who rises, also interpeted as the faithful son.


tamp (v.)

1819, to fill (a hole containing an explosive) with dirt or clay before blasting, a workmen's word,
perhaps a back-formation from tampion, that word being mistaken as a present participle (*tamping).


Tampa

city in Florida, U.S.A., probably from the name of a Calusa village, of unknown origin.


tamper (v.)

meddle, interfere, 1560s, figurative use of tamper to work in clay, etc., so as to mix it
thoroughly, probably originally a variant of temper (v.), which is how it often was spelled at
first. Perhaps it is a dialectal workmen's pronunciation. Related: Tampered; tampering.


tamper (n.)

one who or that which tamps, 1864, agent noun from tamp (v.).


tamperproof (adj.)

also tamper-proof, 1886, from tamper (v.) + proof.


tampion (n.)

early 15c., plug, bung, from Middle French tampon (15c.), nasalized variant of Old French tapon
piece of cloth to stop a hole (14c.), a suffixed form of Frankish *tappo stopper, plug, related to
Old High German zapfo and Old English t&aelig;ppa stopper (see tap (n.1)). Meaning wooden plug for
the muzzle of a gun (to keep out rain or seawater) is recorded from 1620s.


tampon (n.)

plug of cotton to stanch a flow of blood (especially from the vagina), 1848, from French tampon,
from Middle French tampon plug (see tampion). Tampax, proprietary name registered in U.S. 1932, is
based on tampon.


tan (v.)

late Old English tannian to convert hide into leather (by steeping it in tannin), from Medieval
Latin tannare tan, dye a tawny color (c.900), from tannum crushed oak bark, used in tanning leather,
probably from a Celtic source (such as Breton tann oak tree). The meaning make brown by exposure to
the sun (as tanning does to hides) first recorded 1520s; intransitive sense also from 1520s. Of
persons, not considered an attractive feature until 20c.; in Shakespeare, to deprive of the
freshness and beauty of youth (Sonnet CXV). As an adjective from 1620s. To tan (someone's) hide in
the figurative sense is from 1660s. Related: Tanned; tanning. German Tanne fir tree (as in
Tannenbaum) might be a transferred meaning from the same Celtic source.


tan (n.)

bronze color imparted to skin by exposure to sun, 1749, see tan (v.). Earlier as substance made of
crushed bark used in making leather (c.1600). As a simple name for a brownish color, in any context,
it is recorded from 1888. The adjective meaning of the color of tanned leather is recorded from
1660s. Tan-line attested from 1979.


tanager (n.)

small American oscine bird, 1844, earlier tanagra (1610s), from Modern Latin tanagra, alteration of
Portuguese tangara, from Tupi (Brazil) tangara, a bird name of uncertain meaning.


tandem (n.)

1785, carriage pulled by horses harnessed one behind the other (instead of side-by-side), jocular
use of Latin tandem at length (of time), at last, so much, from tam so (from PIE *tam-, adverbial
form of demonstrative pronoun root *-to-; see -th (1)) + demonstrative suffix -dem. Probably first
in university use [Century Dictionary]. Transferred by 1884 to bicycles with two seats. In English
as an adverb from 1795; as an adjective from 1801.


tandoor (n.)

1660s, from Turkish pronunciation of Persian and Arabic tannur oven, portable furnace (see
tandoori).


tandoori (adj.)

in reference to a type of Indian cooking, 1958, from adjectival form of Urdu or Punjabi tandur
cooking stove, from Turkish tandur, from Turkish pronunciation of Arabic and Persian tannur oven,
portable furnace, of Semitic origin. As a noun by 1969.


tang (n.)

mid-14c., serpent's tongue (thought to be a stinging organ), later sharp extension of a metal blade
(1680s), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tangi spit of land; pointed end by which a
blade is driven into a handle, from Proto-Germanic *tang-, from PIE *denk- to bite (see tongs).
Influenced in some senses by tongue (n.). Figurative sense of a sharp taste is first recorded mid-
15c.; that of suggestion, trace is from 1590s. The fish (1734) so called for their spines.


tangelo (n.)

hybrid of a tangerine and a pomelo, 1904, the word formed like the fruit.


tangent (adj.)

1590s, meeting at a point without intersecting, from Latin tangentem (nominative tangens), present
participle of tangere to touch, from PIE root *tag- to touch, to handle; border on; taste, partake
of; strike, hit; figuratively affect, impress; trick, cheat; mention, speak of (cognates: Latin
tactus touch; Greek tassein to arrange, tetagon having seized; Old English &thorn;accian stroke,
strike gently). First used by Danish mathematician Thomas Fincke in Geomietria Rotundi (1583).
Extended sense of slightly connected with a subject is first recorded 1825. Related: Tangence;
tangency.


tangent (n.)

1590s as a geometric function, from tangent (adj.). From 1650s as a tangent line. Figurative use of
off on a tangent is from 1771.


tangental (adj.)

1742, from tangent (adj.) + -al (1). Related: Tangentally.


tangential (adj.)

1620s, see tangent (adj.) + -ial. Figurative sense of divergent, erratic is from 1787; that of
slightly connected is from 1825. Related: Tangentially.


tangerine (n.)

1842, from tangerine orange (1820) an orange from Tangier, seaport in northern Morocco, from which
it was imported to Britain originally. As an adjective meaning from Tangier, attested from 1710,
probably from Spanish tangerino. As a color name, attested from 1899.


tangible (adj.)

1580s, capable of being touched, from Middle French tangible and directly from Late Latin tangibilis
that may be touched, from Latin tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Sense of material (as in
tangible reward) is first recorded 1610s; that of able to be realized or dealt with is from 1709.
Related: Tangibly.


Tangier

port city of Morocco, Latin Tinge, said to be named for Tingis, daughter of Atlas, but probably from
Semitic tigisis harbor. In English often Tangiers, by influence of Algiers.


tangle (n.)

1610s, a tangled condition, a snarl of threads, from tangle (v.).


tangle (v.)

mid-14c., nasalized variant of tagilen to involve in a difficult situation, entangle, from a
Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Swedish taggla to disorder, Old Norse &thorn;ongull seaweed),
from Proto-Germanic *thangul- (cognates: Frisian tung, Dutch tang, German Tang seaweed); thus the
original sense of the root evidently was seaweed as something that entangles (itself, or oars, or
fishes, or nets). The development of such a verb from a noun of limited use like tangle 1 is
somewhat remarkable, and needs confirmation [Century Dictionary]. In reference to material things,
from c.1500. Meaning to fight with is American English, first recorded 1928. Related: Tangled;
tangling. Tanglefoot (1859) was Western American English slang for strong whiskey.


tango (n.)

syncopated ballroom dance, 1913 (the year it became a rage in Britain and America), from Argentine
Spanish tango, originally the name of an African-American drum dance, probably from a Niger-Congo
language (compare Ibibio tamgu to dance). Phrase it takes two to tango was a song title from 1952.
As a verb from 1913. Related: Tangoed.    It is hardly a year ago since the Tango reached this
country from South America by way of Paris. It was at first no more than a music-hall freak. But
some of those mysterious people who inspire new social fashions were attracted by its sinuous
movements and the strange backward kick, and this year it made its way into private houses as well
as public ball rooms. [The Living Age, Dec. 13, 1913]    <hr />   I need not describe the various
horrors of American and South American negroid origin. I would only ask hostesses to let one know
what houses to avoid by indicating in some way on their invitation cards whether the 'turkey-trot,'
the 'Boston' (the beginner of the evil), and the 'tango' will be permitted. [quoted in Current
Opinion, October 1913, as from a letter to the London Times]


tangram (n.)

Chinese geometric puzzle, 1864, said to be an arbitrary formation based on anagram, etc. First
element perhaps Chinese t'an to extend, or t'ang, commonly used in Cantonese for Chinese. Some
suggest it is the name of the inventor, but no such person is known to Chinese scholars [OED].
Another theory involves the Tanka, an outcast aboriginal people of southern China, and Western
sailors who discovered the puzzle from their Tanka girlfriends. Perhaps from an obscure sense of
tram. The Chinese name is Ch'i ch'iao t'u seven ingenious plan.


tangy (adj.)

1875, from tang + -y (2). Figurative use by 1948. Related: Tanginess.


tanist (n.)

elected heir of a Celtic chief, 1530s, from Gaelic tanaiste presumptive or apparent heir to a lord,
literally parallel, second, from Old Irish tanaise designated successor, from Celtic *tani-hessio-
one who is waited for.


tank (n.)

1610s, pool or lake for irrigation or drinking water, a word originally brought by the Portuguese
from India, from a Hindi source, such as Gujarati tankh cistern, underground reservoir for water,
Marathi tanken, or tanka reservoir of water, tank. Perhaps ultimately from Sanskrit tadaga-m pond,
lake pool, and reinforced in later sense of large artificial container for liquid (1680s) by
Portuguese tanque reservoir, from estancar hold back a current of water, from Vulgar Latin
*stanticare (see stanch). But other sources say the Portuguese word is the source of the Indian
ones. Meaning fuel container is recorded from 1902. Slang meaning detention cell is from 1912.
Railroad tank-car is from 1874.    In military use, armored, gun-mounted vehicle moving on
continuous articulated tracks, the word originated late 1915. In Tanks in the Great War [1920],
Brevet Col. J.F.C. Fuller quotes a memorandum of the Committee of Imperial Defence dated Dec. 24,
1915, recommending the proposed caterpillar machine-gun destroyer machines be entrusted to an
organization which, for secrecy, shall be called the 'Tank Supply Committee,' ... In a footnote,
Fuller writes, This is the first appearance of the word 'tank' in the history of the machine. He
writes that cistern and reservoir also were put forth as possible cover names, all of which were
applicable to the steel-like structure of the machines in the early stages of manufacture. Because
it was less clumsy and monosyllabic, the name 'tank' was decided on. They were first used in action
at Pozieres ridge, on the Western Front, Sept. 15, 1916, and the name was quickly picked up by the
soldiers. Tank-trap attested from 1920.


tank (v.)

1900, to put into a tank, from tank (n.). Meaning to lose or fail attested from 1976, originally in
tennis jargon, specifically in an interview with Billie Jean King in Life magazine, Sept. 22, 1967:
When our men don't feel like trying, she says, They 'tank' [give up]. I never tanked a match in my
life and I never saw a girl do it. The men do it all the time in minor tournaments when they don't
feel like hustling. You have to be horribly competitive to win in big-time tennis.    Sometimes said
to be from boxing, in some sense, perhaps from the notion of taking a dive, but evidence for this is
wanting. Related: Tanked; tanking. Adjective tanked drunk is from 1893.


tank top (n.)

1968, from tank suit one-piece bathing costume (1920s), so called because it was worn in a swimming
tank (n.), i.e. pool.


tanka (n.)

type of Japanese poem, 1877, from Japanese tanka, from tan short + ka song.


tankard (n.)

late 14c., large tub-like vessel, corresponding to Middle Dutch tanckaert, meaning the same thing,
but both of unknown origin. A guess hazarded in OED is that it is a transposition of *kantard, from
Latin cantharus. Klein suggests French tant quart as much as a quarter. The notion that the word is
from tank 1 + -ard is wholly untenable [Century Dictionary]. Meaning drinking vessel is first
recorded late 15c.


tanker (n.)

ship for carrying oil or other liquid cargo, 1900, from tank (n.).


tanner (n.2)

sixpence, slang word first recorded 1811, of unknown origin. J.C. Hotten, lexicographer of Victorian
slang, thinks it may be from tanner and skin, rhyming slang for thin, presumably in reference to the
smallness of the coin. Not to be confused with tenner, slang for ten-pound note, which dates from
1861.


tanner (n.1)

one who tans leather, Old English tannere, agent noun from tannian (see tan (v.)).


tannery (n.)

c.1400, process of tanning, from Old French tannerie (13c.) or a native formation from tan (v.) +
-ery. Meaning place where tanning is done is from 1736, perhaps from tanner (n.1) + -y (2).


tannin (n.)

tannic acid, vegetable substance capable of converting animal hide to leather, 1802, from French
tannin (1798), from tan crushed oak bark containing tannin (see tan (v.)). Tannic acid first
recorded 1836, from French acide tannique, inroduced 1834 by French chemist Th&#233;ophile-Jules
Pelouze (1807-1867).


tanning (n.)

late 15c., process of tanning leather, verbal noun from tan (v.). Intransitive sense process of
getting  suntan is from 1944.


tansy (n.)

perennial herb native to northern Eurasia, mid-13c., from Old French tanesie (13c., Modern French
tanaisie), from Vulgar Latin *tanaceta (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Late Latin
tanacetum wormwood, from shortened form of Greek athanasia immortality, from athanatos immortal,
from a- not, privative prefix, + thanatos death (see thanatology). So called probably for its
persistence. English folklore associates it with pregnancy, either as an aid to contraception or to
provoke miscarriage.


tantalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of tantalize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Tantalised;
tantalising.


tantalize (v.)

1590s, with -ize + Latin Tantalus, from Greek Tantalos, king of Phrygia, son of Zeus, father of
Pelops and Niobe, punished in the afterlife (for an offense variously given) by being made to stand
in a river up to his chin, under branches laden with fruit, all of which withdrew from his reach
whenever he tried to eat or drink. His story was known to Chaucer (c.1369). Related: Tantalized;
tantalizing; tantalizingly; tantalization.


tantalizing (adj.)

mid-17c., present participle adjective from tantalize. Related: Tantalizingly.


tantalum (n.)

metallic element, 1809, Modern Latin, named 1802 by its discoverer, Swedish chemist Anders Ekberg
(1767-1813), for Tantalus, according to Ekberg partly because of its inability to absorb acid
recalled Tantalus' punishment in the afterlife (see tantalize). Sometimes it is said to be so called
from the difficulty scientists faced in obtaining a pure specimen.


Tantalus

Greek Tantalos, king of Phrygia, perhaps literally the Bearer or the Sufferer, by dissimilation from
*tal-talos, a reduplication of PIE root *tele- to bear, carry, support (see extol), in reference to
his long endurance, but Watkins finds this unlikely. Compare tantalize.


tantamount (adj.)

1640s, from verbal phrase tant amount be equivalent (1620s), from Anglo-French tant amunter amount
to as much (late 13c.), from Old French tant as much (11c., from Latin tantus, from tam so; see
tandem) + amonter amount to, go up (see amount (v.)).


tantra (n.)

type of Hindu religious book, 1799, from Sanskrit tantram, literally loom, warp, hence,
figuratively, groundwork, system, doctrine, from tan to stretch, extend, from PIE root *ten- to
stretch, extend (see tenet).


tantric (adj.)

1905, from tantra + -ic; used loosely in the West to denote erotic spiritualism.


tantrum (n.)

1714, tanterum, originally colloquial, of unknown origin.


Tanzania

east African nation, formed 1964 by union of Tanganyika (named for the lake, the name of which is of
unknown origin) and Zanzibar. With country-name word-forming element -ia. Related: Tanzanian.


tanzanite (n.)

violet-blue gemstone, 1968, named by Henry B. Platt, vice president of Tiffany &amp; Co., because
the stone was discovered in the African nation of Tanzania.


tao (n.)

1736, from Chinese tao way, path, right way (of life), reason.


Taoism (n.)

religious system founded by Lao Tzu (b. 604 B.C.E.), 1838, from Chinese tao way, path, right way (of
life), reason + -ism.


tap (v.1)

strike lightly, c.1200, from Old French taper tap, rap, strike (12c.), from a Gallo-Roman or
Germanic source ultimately imitative of the sound of rapping. Meaning to designate for some duty or
for membership is recorded from 1952, from notion of a tap on the shoulder. Related: Tapped;
tapping.


tap (n.2)

light blow or stroke, mid-14c., from tap (v.1). Tap dancer first recorded 1927, from tap (n.) in the
sense of metal plate over the heel of a shoe (1680s).


tap (n.1)

stopper, faucet through which liquid can be drawn, Old English t&aelig;ppa tap, spigot, from Proto-
Germanic *tappon (cognates: Middle Dutch tappe, Dutch tap, Old High German zapfo, German Zapfe).
Originally a tapering cylindrical peg for a cask, then a hollowed one to draw from it (compare sense
evolution of spigot). Phrase on tap ready for use, ready to be drawn and served is recorded from
late 15c. Tap-wrench, used in turning one, attested from 1815.


tap (v.2)

to supply with a tap, late Old English t&aelig;ppian, from source of tap (n.1); compare German
zapfen to tap. Meaning to draw liquor with a tap is from mid-15c. Extended sense make use of is
first recorded 1570s. Meaning listen in secretly (1869), originally was with reference to telegraph
wires. Tapped out broke is 1940s slang, perhaps from the notion of having tapped all one's
acquaintances for loans already (compare British slang on the tap begging, making requests for
loans, 1932).


tap (n.3)

device to listen in secretly on telephone calls, 1923, from tap (v.2) in the listen secretly sense.


tape (n.)

Old English t&aelig;ppe narrow strip of cloth used for tying, measuring, etc., of uncertain origin;
perhaps [Klein] a back-formation from Latin tapete cloth, carpet, compare also Old Frisian tapia,
Middle Low German tapen to pull, pluck, tear. The original short vowel became long in Middle
English.   Adhesive tape is from 1885; also in early use sometimes friction tape. Tape recorder
device for recording sound on magnetic tape first attested 1932; from earlier meaning device for
recording data on ticker tape (1892), from tape in the sense of paper strip of a printer (1884).
Tape-record (v.) is from 1950. Tape-measure is attested from 1873; tape-delay is from 1968.


tape (v.)

c.1600, furnish with tape, from tape (n.). Meaning attach with adhesive tape is from 1932; meaning
to make a tape recording is from 1950. Related: Taped; taping.


tapenade (n.)

Proven&ccedil;al dish made of black olives, etc., 1952, from French tap&eacute;nade, from
Proven&ccedil;al tap&eacute;no capers.


taper (n.)

Old English tapur, taper candle, lamp-wick, not found outside English, possibly a dissimilated
borrowing from Latin papyrus (see papyrus), which was used in Medieval Latin and some Romance
languages for wick of a candle (such as Italian papijo wick), because these often were made from the
pith of papyrus. Compare also German kerze candle, from Old High German charza, from Latin charta,
from Greek khartes papyrus, roll made from papyrus, wick made from pith of papyrus.


taper (v.)

1580s, shoot up like a flame or spire, via an obsolete adjective taper, from taper (n.), on the
notion of the converging form of the flame of a candle. Sense of become slender, gradually grow less
in size, force, etc. first recorded c.1600. Transitive sense from 1670s. Related: Tapered; tapering.


tapestry (n.)

late 14c., tapiestre, with unetymological -t-, from Old French tapisserie tapestry (14c.), from
tapisser to cover with heavy fabric, from tapis heavy fabric, carpet, from tapiz carpet, floor
covering (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *tappetium, from Byzantine Greek tapetion, from classical Greek,
diminutive of tapes (genitive tapetos) heavy fabric, carpet, rug, from an Iranian source (compare
Persian taftan to turn, twist), from PIE *temp- to stretch. The figurative use is first recorded
1580s.


tapetum (n.)

of the eye, 1713, from Medieval Latin tapetum, from Latin tapete, collateral form of tapes carpet,
heavy cloth with inwrought figures (see tapestry).


tapeworm (n.)

1705, from tape (n.) + worm (n.); so called for its ribbon-like shape.


taphouse (n.)

also tap-house, c.1500, from tap (n.1) + house (n.).


tapioca (n.)

1640s, tipiaca, from Portuguese or Spanish tapioca, from Tupi (Brazil) tipioca juice of a pressed
cassava, from tipi residue, dregs + og, ok to squeeze out (from roots of the cassava plant).


tapir (n.)

1774, perhaps via French tapir (16c.), ultimately from Tupi (Brazil) tapira.


tappet (n.)

machine part, 1745, apparently from tap (v.1) + -et, but the use of the suffix is abnormal [OED].


taproom (n.)

also tap-room, 1807, from tap (n.1) + room (n.).


taproot (n.)

c.1600, from tap (n.) + root (n.).


taps (n.)

U.S. military signal for lights out in soldiers' quarters (played 15 minutes after tattoo), 1824,
from tap (v.), on the notion of drum taps (it originally was played on a drum, later on a bugle). As
a soldier's last farewell, played over his grave, it may date to the American Civil War. The tune
was revised several times in mid-19c.


tapster (n.)

person employed to tap liquors, Old English t&aelig;ppestre female tavern-keeper, hostess at an inn,
woman employed to tap liquors, fem of t&aelig;ppere, from t&aelig;ppa tap (see tap (n.1)) + fem.
ending -ster. The distinction of gender in the word was lost by 15c., and by 1630s re-feminized
tapstress is attested.


tar (n.1)

a viscous liquid, Old English teoru, teru tar, bitumen, resin, gum, literally the pitch of (certain
kinds of) trees, from Proto-Germanic *terwo- (cognates: Old Norse tjara, Old Frisian tera, Middle
Dutch tar, Dutch teer, German Teer), probably a derivation of *trewo-, from PIE *derw-, variant of
root *deru-, *dreu- in its sense wood, tree (see tree (n.)).   Tar baby a sticky problem, also a
derogatory term for black person, is from an 1881 Uncle Remus story by Joel Chandler Harris. Tarheel
for North Carolina resident first recorded 1864, probably from the gummy resin of pine woods. Tar
water, an infusion of tar in cold water, was popular as a remedy from c.1740 through late 18c.


tar (n.2)

also Jack Tar, sailor, 1670s, probably a special use of tar (n.1), which stuff was a staple for
waterproofing aboard old ships (sailors also being jocularly called knights of the tarbrush); or
possibly a shortened form of tarpaulin, which was recorded as a nickname for a sailor in 1640s, from
the tarpaulin garments they wore.


tar (v.)

late Old English, to smear with tar, from tar (n.1). To tar and feather (1769) was famously a mob
action in America in Revolutionary times (used by both sides) and several decades thereafter. The
punishment itself first is found in an ordinance of Richard I (1189) as the penalty in the Crusader
navy for theft. Among other applications over the years was its use in 1623 by a bishop on a party
of incontinent friars and nuns [OED], but the verbal phrase is not attested until 18c. Related:
Tarred; tarring.


tarantella (n.)

1782, peasant dance popular in Italy, originally hysterical malady characterized by extreme impulse
to dance (1630s), epidemic in Apulia and adjacent parts of southern Italy 15c.-17c., popularly
attributed to (or believed to be a cure for) the bite of the tarantula. This is likely folk-
etymology, however, and the names of the dance and the spider more probably share an origin in
Taranto, the name of a city in southern Italy (see tarantula). Used from 1833 to mean the style of
music that accompanies this dance, usually in 6/8 time, with whirling triplets and abrupt major-
minor modulations. Related: Tarantism.


tarantula (n.)

1560s, wolf spider, (Lycos tarantula), from Medieval Latin tarantula, from Italian tarantola, from
Taranto Taranto, seaport city in southern Italy in the region where the spiders are frequently
found, from Latin Tarentum, from Greek Taras (genitive Tarantos; perhaps from Illyrian darandos
oak). Its bite is only slightly poisonous. Popularly applied to other great hairy spiders,
especially the genus Mygale, native to the warmer regions of the Americas (first so called in 1794).


tarbrush (n.)

1711, from tar (n.1) + brush (n.1). To have a touch of the tarbrush have a dash of African ancestry
visible in the skin tone (1796) was a term of contempt from the West Indies [Century Dictionary].


tardation (n.)

slowness, c.1500, from Late Latin tardationem (nominative tardatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of tardare to slow, related to tardus slow, sluggish (see tardy).


tardigrade (adj.)

1620s, slow-going, slow-moving, from French tardigrade (17c.), from Latin tardigradus slow-paced,
from tardus slow (see tardy) + gradi to walk, go, step (see grade (n.)).


tardy (adj.)

1520s, slow, from Old French tardif slow, late (12c.), also the name of the snail character in the
Roman de Renart, from Vulgar Latin *tardivus, from Latin tardus slow, sluggish; late; dull, stupid,
of unknown origin. Meaning late in English is from 1660s.    This word, not much used in English
prose, is constantly employed in the U.S. and in Canada with reference to lateness in school-
attendance. [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]    Related: Tardily; tardiness. Earlier form of the
word in English was tardif, tardyve (late 15c.). Tardity slowness of movement or action is recorded
in English from early 15c., from Old French tardete, from Latin tarditas.


tare (n.1)

kind of fodder plant, vetch, c.1300, perhaps cognate with or from Middle Dutch tarwe wheat, from a
Germanic source perhaps related to Breton draok, Welsh drewg darnel, Sanskrit durva a kind of millet
grass, Greek darata, daratos bread, Lithuanian dirva a wheat-field. Used in 2nd Wyclif version
(1388) of Matt. xxiii:25 to render Greek zizania as a weed among corn (earlier darnel and cockle had
been used in this place); hence figurative use for something noxious sown among something good
(1711).


tare (n.2)

allowable difference between gross and net weight, deduction made from gross weight of goods to
account for approximate weight of packaging or container holding them, late 15c., from Middle French
tare wastage in goods, deficiency, imperfection (15c.), from Italian tara, Medieval Latin tara, from
Arabic tarah, literally thing deducted or rejected, that which is thrown away, from taraha to
reject.


targe (n.)

shield, buckler, late Old English, from Old French targe, from Frankish *targa, from Germanic (see
target (n.)). Old English had a native form targe, but the soft -g- in the later word indicates it
came from French.


target (n.)

c.1300, shield, diminutive of late Old English targe, from Old French targe light shield (12c.),
from Frankish *targa shield, from Proto-Germanic *targ- (cognates: Old High German zarga edging,
border, German zarge border, edge, frame, Old English targe, Old Norse targa shield, buckler),
perhaps originally edge of a shield. Meaning round object to be aimed at in shooting first recorded
1757, originally in archery, perhaps suggested by the concentric circles in both. Target-practice is
from 1801. Target audience is by 1951; early reference is to Cold War psychological warfare.


target (v.)

to use as a target, 1837, from target (n.). Earlier it meant to shield (1610s). Related: Targeted;
targeting.


tariff (n.)

1590s, arithmetical table, also official list of customs duties on imports or exports; law
regulating import duties, from Italian tariffa tariff, price, assessment, Medieval Latin tarifa list
of prices, book of rates, from Arabic ta'rif information, notification, a making known; inventory of
fees to be paid, verbal noun from arafa he made known, he taught. Sense of classified list of
charges made in a business is recorded from 1757. The U.S. Tariff of Abominations was passed in
1828.


tarmac (n.)

1903, Tarmac, a trademark name, short for tarmacadam (1882) pavement created by spraying tar over
crushed stone, from tar (n.1) + John Latin McAdam (see macadam). By 1919, tarmac was being used
generally in Great Britain for runway.


tarn (n.)

late 14c., mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin, from Old Norse tj&#246;rn small mountain lake without visible
tributaries, from Proto-Germanic *terno, perhaps originally water hole [Barnhart]. A dialectal word
popularized by the Lake poets.


tarnation (n.)

1784, American English alteration of darnation (itself a euphemism for damnation), influenced by
tarnal (1790), a mild profanity, clipped from phrase by the Eternal (God).


tarnish (v.)

mid-15c. (transitive), from present participle stem of Middle French ternir dull the luster or
brightness of, make dim (15c.), probably from Old French terne (adj.) dull, dark, which according to
Diez is from a Germanic source cognate with Old High German tarnjan to conceal, hide, Old English
dyrnan to hide, darken, from Proto-Germanic *darnjaz (see dern), but there are difficulties of form,
sense, and date. Intransitive sense from 1670s. Figurative sense is from 1690s. Related: Tarnished;
tarnishing.


tarnish (n.)

1713, from tarnish (v.).


taro (n.)

tropical food plant, 1769, from Polynesian (Tahitian or Maori) taro. Compare Hawaiian kalo.


taroc (n.)

1610s, name of an old card game of Italy, Austria, etc., played originally with a 78-card deck that
includes four suits, four face-cards each, plus the tarot cards as trumps; from Old Italian tarocchi
(plural); see tarot.


tarot (n.)

1590s, from French tarot (16c.), from Old Italian tarocchi (plural), of unknown origin, perhaps from
Arabic taraha he rejected, put aside. The deck first was used in Italy 14c., as playing cards as
well as for fortune-telling. The tarots, strictly speaking, are the 22 figured cards added to the
56-card suits pack.


tarp (n.)

1906, American English, informal shortening of tarpaulin.


tarpaulin (n.)

c.1600, evidently a hybrid from tar (n.1) + palling, from pall heavy cloth covering (see pall (n.));
probably so called because the canvas sometimes is coated in tar to make it waterproof. Originally
tarpawlin, tarpawling, etc., the spelling settled down early 18c.


Tarpeian rock (n.)

rock face on the Capitoline Hill in Rome, from which persons convicted of treason were thrown
headlong, from Latin (mons) Tarpeius (rock) of Tarpeia, said to have been a Vestal virgin who
betrayed the capitol to the Sabines and was buried at the foot of the rock. Her name probably is of
Etruscan-Tyrrhenian origin.


tarpon (n.)

large fish (Megalops atlanticus) of the herring family, 1680s, of uncertain origin, probably from a
Native American word. Also formerly called jew-fish.


tarragon (n.)

Artemisia Dracunculus, Eastern European plant of the wormwood genus, 1530s, from Medieval Latin
tragonia, from Byzantine Greek tarchon, from Arabic tarkhon, from a non-Arabic source, perhaps Greek
drakon serpent, dragon (via drakontion dragonwort); see dragon. From the same source come Spanish
taragona, Italian targone, French estragon (with unetymological prefix). Its aromatic leaves long
have been used for flavoring (especially vinegar).


tarry (v.)

early 14c., to delay, retard (transitive), of uncertain origin. Some suggest a connection to Latin
tardare to delay, or Old English tergan, tirgan to vex, irritate, exasperate, provoke, which yielded
a Middle English verb identical in form to this one. Intransitive meaning to linger is attested from
late 14c. Related: Tarried; tarrying; tarrysome.


tarry (adj.)

1550s, from tar (n.1) + -y (2). Tarry-fingered dishonest, thieving is from 1825.


tarsal (adj.)

of or pertaining to the ankle or instep, 1817, from tarsus (n.1) + -al (1), or from medical Latin
tarsalis.


tarsus (n.)

the ankle bones collectively, 1670s, Modern Latin, from Greek tarsos ankle, sole of the foot, rim of
the eyelid, originally flat surface, especially for drying, from PIE root *ters- to dry (cognates:
Greek teresesthai to be or become dry, tersainein to make dry; Latin terra land, ground, soil,
torrere dry up, parch; see terrain). The connecting notion is the bones of the flat of the foot
(Greek tarsos podos).


tart (adj.)

having a sharp taste, 1520s, also attested once, obscurely, from late 14c., perhaps from Old English
teart painful, sharp, severe, rough (in reference to punishment, pain, suffering), from Germanic
*ter-t-, from PIE *der- (2) to split, flay, peel (see tear (v.1)), but the gap in the record is
unexplained. Figurative use, with reference to words, speech, etc., is attested from c.1600.
Related: Tartly; tartness, both also absent in Middle English.


tart (n.1)

small pie, late 14c., from Old French tarte flat, open-topped pastry (13c.), possibly an alteration
of torte, from Late Latin torta round loaf of bread (in Medieval Latin a cake, tart), perhaps from
past participle of torquere to twist.


tart (n.2)

1887, prostitute, immoral woman, from earlier use as a term of endearment to a girl or woman (1864),
sometimes said to be a shortening of sweetheart. But another theory traces it to jam-tart (see tart
(n.1)), which was British slang early 19c. for attractive woman. Diminutive tartlet attested from
1890. To tart (something) up is from 1938. Related: Tarted.


tartan (n.)

kind of woolen fabric, mid-15c., perhaps from Middle French tiretaine strong, coarse fabric (mid-
13c.), from Old French tiret kind of cloth, from tire silk cloth, from Medieval Latin tyrius cloth
from Tyre (see Tyrian).    If this is the source, spelling likely influenced in Middle English by
tartaryn rich silk cloth (mid-14c.), from Old French tartarin Tartar cloth, from Tartare Tartar, the
Central Asian people (see Tartar). Specific meaning woolen or worsted cloth woven with crossing
stripes of colors is from c.1500, formerly a part of the distinctive dress of Scottish Highlanders,
each clan having its particular pattern.


tartar (n.)

bitartrate of potash (a deposit left during fermentation), late 14c., from Old French tartre, from
Medieval Latin tartarum, from late Greek tartaron tartar encrusting the sides of wine casks, perhaps
of Semitic origin, but if so the exact source has not been identified. The purified substance is
cream of tartar. Used generally in 17c. of encrustations from liquid contact; specific meaning
encrustation on teeth (calcium phosphate) is first recorded 1806.


Tartar

mid-14c. (implied in Tartary, the land of the Tartars), from Medieval Latin Tartarus, from Persian
Tatar, first used 13c. in reference to the hordes of Ghengis Khan (1202-1227), said to be ultimately
from Tata, a name of the Mongols for themselves. Form in European languages probably influenced by
Latin Tartarus hell (e.g. letter of St. Louis of France, 1270: In the present danger of the Tartars
either we shall push them back into the Tartarus whence they are come, or they will bring us all
into heaven).    The historical word for what now are called in ethnological works Tatars. A Turkic
people, their native region was east of the Caspian Sea. Ghengis' horde was a mix of Tatars,
Mongols, Turks, etc. Used figuratively for savage, rough, irascible person (1660s). To catch a
Tartar get hold of what cannot be controlled is recorded from 1660s; original sense not preserved,
but probably from some military story similar to the old battlefield joke:    Irish soldier
(shouting from within the brush): I've captured one of the enemy.  Captain: Excellent! Bring him
here.  Soldier: He won't come.  Captain: Well, then, you come here.  Soldier: I would, but he won't
let me.    Among the adjectival forms that have been used are Tartarian (16c.), Tartarous (Ben
Jonson), Tartarean (17c.); Byron's Tartarly (1821) is a nonce-word (but a good one). Tartar sauce is
first recorded 1855, from French sauce tartare.


tartaric (adj.)

1790, from tartar + -ic.


Tartarus (n.)

in Homer and older Greek mythology, the sunless abyss below Hades, from Greek Tartaros, of uncertain
origin; prob. a word of imitative origin, suggestive of something frightful [Klein]. Later in Greek
almost synonymous with Hades.


Tartuffe (n.)

pretender to piety, 1670s, from name of the principal character in the comedy by Moli&egrave;re
(1664), apparently from Old French tartuffe truffle (see truffle), perhaps chosen for suggestion of
concealment (Tartuffe is a religious hypocrite), or in allusion to the fancy that truffles were a
diseased product of the earth. Italian Tartufo is said to have been the name of a hypocritical
character in Italian comedy.


Tarzan

name of character in a series of novels by U.S. fiction writer Edgar Rice Burroughs (1875-1950),
introduced 1914.


Taser (n.)

1972, formed (probably on model of laser, etc.) from the initials of Tom Swift's electric rifle, a
fictitious weapon. A word that threatens to escape the cage of its copyright, despite the strenuous
efforts of the owners, who are within their rights to fight to hold it. They also insist, via their
attorneys, that it be written all in capitals. Tom Swift was the hero of a series of early 20c.
American sci-fi/adventure novels, one of which was titled Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle. It seems
to have spawned a verb, taze or tase. Related: Tased; tasing.


task (n.)

early 14c., a quantity of labor imposed as a duty, from Old North French tasque (12c., Old French
tasche, Modern French t&acirc;che) duty, tax, from Vulgar Latin *tasca a duty, assessment,
metathesis of Medieval Latin taxa, a back-formation of Latin taxare to evaluate, estimate, assess
(see tax (v.)). General sense of any piece of work that has to be done is first recorded 1590s.
Phrase take one to task (1680s) preserves the sense that is closer to tax.    German tasche pocket
is from the same Vulgar Latin source (via Old High German tasca), with presumable sense evolution
from amount of work imposed by some authority, to payment for that work, to wages, to pocket into
which money is put, to any pocket.


task (v.)

1520s, impose a task upon; 1590s, to burden, put a strain upon, from task (n.). Related: Tasked;
tasking.


task-force (n.)

1941, originally military; see task (n.) + force (n.).


taskmaster (n.)

overseer, one who imposes a task, 1520s, from task (n.) + master (n.).


Tasmania (n.)

1853, named for Dutch navigator Abel Tasman (1603-1659), who discovered it in 1642. It was called by
him Van Diemen's Land for the Dutch governor-general of the East Indies. The Tasmanian devil so
called since at least 1829, from its propensity for killing young lambs (other voracious fish or
animals also have been named devil).


Tass (n.)

official news agency of the former U.S.S.R., an acronym of Russian Telegrafnoje Agenstvo Sovjetskeho
Sojuza Telegraphic Agency of the Soviet Union.


tassel (n.)

c.1300, mantle fastener, from Old French tassel tassel, fringe, hem; a fastening, clasp (12c.,
Modern French tasseau), from Vulgar Latin *tassellus, said to be from Latin taxillus small die or
cube, a diminutive of talus knucklebone (used as a die in gaming), ankle (see talus (n.1)). But OED
finds this doubtful and calls attention to the variant form tossel and suggests association with
toss (v.). Meaning hanging bunch of small cords is first recorded late 14c.


taste (v.)

c.1300, to touch, to handle, from Old French taster to taste, sample by mouth; enjoy (13c.), earlier
to feel, touch, pat, stroke (12c., Modern French t&#226;ter), from Vulgar Latin *tastare, apparently
an alteration (perhaps by influence of gustare) of taxtare, a frequentative form of Latin taxare
evaluate, handle (see tax (v.)). Meaning to take a little food or drink is from c.1300; that of to
perceive by sense of taste is recorded from mid-14c. Of substances, to have a certain taste or
flavor, it is attested from 1550s (replaced native smack (v.3) in this sense). For another PIE root
in this sense, see gusto.    The Hindus recognized six principal varieties of taste with sixty-three
possible mixtures ... the Greeks eight .... These included the four that are now regarded as
fundamental, namely 'sweet,' 'bitter,' 'acid,' 'salt.' ... The others were 'pungent' (Gk. drimys,
Skt. katuka-), 'astringent' (Gk. stryphnos, Skt. kasaya-), and, for the Greeks, 'rough, harsh'
(austeros), 'oily, greasy' (liparos), with the occasional addition of 'winy' (oinodes). [Buck]
Sense of to know by experience is from 1520s. Related: Tasted; tasting. Taste buds is from 1879;
also taste goblets.


taste (n.)

early 14c., act of tasting, from Old French tast sense of touch (Modern French t&acirc;t), from
taster (see taste (v.)). From late 14c. as a small portion given; also faculty or sense by which the
flavor of a thing is discerned; also savor, sapidity, flavor.    Meaning aesthetic judgment, faculty
of discerning and appreciating what is excellent is first attested 1670s (compare French go&#251;t,
German geschmack, Russian vkus, etc.).    Of all the five senses, 'taste' is the one most closely
associated with fine discrimination, hence the familiar secondary uses of words for 'taste, good
taste' with reference to aesthetic appreciation. [Buck]   <hr />  Taste is active, deciding,
choosing, changing, arranging, etc.; sensibility is passive, the power to feel, susceptibility of
impression, as from the beautiful. [Century Dictionary]


tasteful (adj.)

1610s, having an agreeable taste; from taste + -ful. From 1756 as having or showing good taste.
Related: Tastefully; tastefulness.


tasteless (adj.)

1590s, unable to taste; c.1600, uninteresting, insipid (figurative); 1610s, having no taste; 1670s,
tactless; from taste (n.) + -less. Related: Tastelessly; tastelessness.


tasty (adj.)

1610s, having agreeable flavor, palatable, from taste (n.) + -y (2); in late 18c. it also could mean
tasteful, elegant (from the secondary sense of taste (n.)). Related: Tastiness.


tat (v.)

1882, to do tatting, back-formation from tatting.


tatami (n.)

Japanese floor-mat, 1610s, from Japanese tatami.


Tatar (n.)

see Tartar.


tater (n.)

1759, representing colloquial pronunciation of potato.


tatter (n.)

c.1400, tatrys (plural) slashed garments, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse t&#246;turr
rags, tatters, tattered garment, cognate with Old English t&aelig;ttec, t&aelig;tteca rag, tatter.
Related: Tatters.


tatterdemalion (n.)

ragged child, person dressed in old clothes, c.1600, probably from tatter (n.), with fantastic
second element, but perhaps also suggested by Tartar, with a contemporary sense of vagabond, gypsy.


tattered (adj.)

mid-14c., tatrid, clad in slashed garments, from tatter (n.) or its Scandinavian source.


tattersall (n.)

fabric with small and even check pattern, 1891, so called because it was similar to the traditional
design of horse blankets, in reference to Tattersall's, a famous London horse market and gambler's
rendezvous, founded 1766 by Richard Tattersall (1724-1795). The surname is from the place in
Lincolnshire, which is said to represent Tathere's nook, probably in the sense 'nook of dry ground
in marsh'. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]


tatting (n.)

making of knotted lace; kind of homemade lace, 1832, of uncertain origin. In French,
frivolit&eacute;.


tattle (v.)

late 15c., to stammer, prattle, in Caxton's translation of Reynard the Fox, probably from Middle
Flemish tatelen to stutter, parallel to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German, East Frisian tateren to
chatter, babble, possibly of imitative origin. The meaning tell tales or secrets is first recorded
1580s. Sense influenced by tittle. Related: Tattled; tattling. As a noun from 1520s. Tattler, the
name of the famous periodical by Addison and Steele (1709-1711), means idle talker, a gossip.


tattletale (n.)

1880, from tattle + tale. Probably patterned on telltale (1540s). A 16c. word for tattle-tale was
pickthank.


tattoo (v.)

mark the skin with pigment, 1769, tattow, from tattoo (n.2). Related: Tattooed; tattooing. Thackeray
has tattooage.


tattoo (n.1)

signal calling soldiers or sailors to quarters at night, 1680s, earlier tap-to (1640s), from Dutch
taptoe, from tap faucet of a cask (see tap (n.1)) + toe shut, to, from Proto-Germanic *to (see to
(prep.)). So called because police formerly visited taverns in the evening to shut off the taps of
casks [Barnhart]. In 17c. Dutch the phrase apparently was used with a transferred or figurative
sense say no more. In English, transferred sense of drumbeat is recorded from 1755. Hence, Devil's
tattoo action of idly drumming fingers in irritation or impatience (1803).


tattoo (n.2)

pigment design in skin, 1769 (noun and verb, both first attested in writing of Capt. Cook), from a
Polynesian noun (such as Tahitian and Samoan tatau, Marquesan tatu puncture, mark made on skin).
Century Dictionary (1902) describes them as found on sailors and uncivilized people or as a sentence
of punishment.


tatty (adj.)

1510s, tangled or matted (of hair), Scottish, probably related to Old English t&aelig;ttec a rag
(see tatter (n.)). Sense of tattered, ragged, shabby first recorded 1933.


tau

nineteenth letter of the Greek alphabet, from Hebrew taw, last letter of the Hebrew alphabet,
literally sign, mark.


taught

past tense of teach (v.), from Old English tahte, past tense of t&aelig;can. For the unrelated
adjective meaning stretched or pulled tight, see taut.


taunt (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in tauntingly), possibly [Skeat] from Middle French tanter, tenter to tempt, try,
provoke, variant of tempter to try (see tempt). Or from Middle French tant pour tant so much for so
much, tit for tat, on notion of sarcastic rejoinder (considered by OED the most likely suggestion).
Related: Taunted; taunting.


taunt (n.)

1520s, bitter invective, probably from taunt (v.).


taupe (n.)

dark brownish-gray color (the color of moleskin), 1906, from French taupe, the color, originally a
mole, Old French, from Latin talpa a mole. The story below lacks evidence appears to be a fanciful
attempt to divert the origin of the color name to something more appealing:    Before the season
advances very far you will find that taupe, pronounced tope, will be the most favored color in the
entire category of shades and blendings. The original word is taken from the German word taube
pronounced tob-a, which is the name for the dove, but the French have twisted the b into a p and
give us taupe. [The Illustrated Milliner, August, 1906]


taurine (n.)

also taurin, chemical substance (aminoethyl-sulphonic acid), 1845, from Latin taurus bull (see
Taurus) + chemical suffix -ine (2); obtained by German professor Leopold Gmelin in 1826 and so
called because it was first found in ox bile.


taurine (adj.)

1610s, from Latin taurus (see Taurus) + -ine (1). In reference to a period in history, it means the
time when the sun was in Taurus at the vernal equinox (roughly 4500-1900 B.C.E.).


tauromachy (n.)

bull-fighting, 1830, from Greek tauromakhia; see Taurus + -machy.


Taurus (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin taurus bull, bullock, steer, also the name of the
constellation, from PIE *tau-ro- bull (cognates: Greek tauros, Old Church Slavonic turu bull, steer;
Lithuanian tauras aurochs; Old Prussian tauris bison); from PIE *tauro- bull, from root *(s)taeu-
stout, standing, strong (cognates: Sanskrit sthura- thick, compact, Avestan staora- big cattle,
Middle Persian stor horse, draft animal, Gothic stiur young bull, Old English steor, see steer
(n.)); extended form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Klein proposes a Semitic origin (compare
Aramaic tora ox, bull, steer, Hebrew shor, Arabic thor, Ethiopian sor). Meaning person born under
the sign of the bull is recorded from 1901.    At midnight revels when the gossips met,  He was the
theme of their eternal chat:  This ask'd what form great Jove would next devise,  And when his
godship would again Taurise?  [William Somerville, The Wife, 1727]    The Taurid meteors (peaking
Nov. 20) so called from 1878.


taut (adj.)

mid-13c., tohte stretched or pulled tight, possibly from tog-, past participle stem of Old English
teon to pull, drag, from Proto-Germanic *tugn, from PIE *deuk- to lead (see duke (n.)), which would
connect it to tow (v.) and tie. Related: Tautness.


tauten (v.)

to make taut, 1814, from taut + -en (1). Intransitive meaning become taut is from 1849. Related:
Tautened; tautening.


tautog (n.)

edible marine fish of the Atlantic coast of North America, 1640s, from Narragansett tautauog, plural
of taut. Translated by Roger Williams as sheep's head.


tautology (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin tautologia representation of the same thing in other words, from Greek
tautologia, from tautologos repeating what has been said, from tauto the same (contraction of to
auto, with to the + auto, see auto-) + -logos saying, related to legein to say (see lecture (n.)).
Related: Tautological.


tavern (n.)

late 13c., wine shop, later public house (mid-15c.), from Old French taverne (mid-13c.) shed made of
boards, booth, stall, also tavern, inn, from Latin taberna shop, inn, tavern, originally hut, shed,
rude dwelling, possibly [Klein] by dissimilation from *traberna, from trabs (genitive trabis) beam,
timber, from PIE *treb- dwelling (cognates: Lithuanian troba a building, Old Welsh treb house,
dwelling, Welsh tref a dwelling, Irish treb residence, Old English &eth;orp village, hamlet, farm,
estate).


taw (v.)

to prepare (leather), from Old English tawian prepare, make ready, make; cultivate, also harass,
insult, outrage to do, make, from Proto-Germanic *tawjan (cognates: Old Frisian tawa, Old Saxon
toian, Middle Dutch tauwen, Dutch touwen, Old High German zouwen to prepare, Old High German zawen
to succeed, Gothic taujan to make, prepare), from Proto-Germanic root *taw- to make, manufacture
(compare tool (n.)).


taw (n.)

a game at marbles, 1709, of unknown origin.


tawdry (adj.)

no longer fresh or elegant but worn as if it were so; in cheap and ostentatious imitation of what is
rich or costly, 1670s, adjective use of noun tawdry silk necktie for women (1610s), shortened from
tawdry lace (1540s), an alteration (with adhesion of the -t- from Saint) of St. Audrey's lace, a
necktie or ribbon sold at the annual fair at Ely on Oct. 17 commemorating St. Audrey (queen of
Northumbria, died 679). Her association with lace necklaces is that she supposedly died of a throat
tumor, which, according to Bede, she considered God's punishment for her youthful stylishness.
Related: Tawdriness.    I know of a surety that I deservedly bear the weight of my trouble on my
neck, for I remember that, when I was a young maiden, I bore on it the needless weight of necklaces;
and therefore I believe the Divine goodness would have me endure the pain in my neck, that so I may
be absolved from the guilt of my needless levity, having now, instead of gold and pearls, the fiery
heat of a tumour rising on my neck. [A.M. Sellar translation, 1907]


tawny (adj.)

tan-colored, late 14c., from Anglo-French taun&eacute; of or like the brownish-yellow of tanned
leather, from Old French tan&eacute;t dark brown, tan (12c., Modern French tann&#233;), past
participle of taner to tan hides, from Medieval Latin tannare (see tan (v.)).Related: Tawniness.


tax (v.)

c.1300, impose a tax on, from Old French taxer impose a tax (13c.) and directly from Latin taxare
evaluate, estimate, assess, handle, also censure, charge, probably a frequentative form of tangere
to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Sense of to burden, put a strain on first recorded early 14c.; that
of censure, reprove is from 1560s. Its use in Luke ii for Greek apographein to enter on a list,
enroll is due to Tyndale. Related: Taxed; taxing.


tax (n.)

early 14c., obligatory contribution levied by a sovereign or government, from Anglo-French tax, Old
French taxe, and directly from Medieval Latin taxa, from Latin taxare (see tax (v.)). Related:
Taxes. Tax-deduction is from 1942; tax-shelter is attested from 1961.


taxable (adj.)

subject to taxation, late 15c., from Anglo-French taxable, Anglo-Latin taxabilis; see tax (v.) +
-able. As a noun meaning person subject to taxation from 1660s.


taxation (n.)

early 14c., imposition of taxes, from Anglo-French taxacioun, Old French taxacion, from Latin
taxationem (nominative taxatio) a rating, valuing, appraisal, noun of action from past participle
stem of taxare (see tax (v.)).


taxeme (n.)

1933, from comb. form of Greek taxis order, arrangement (see tactics) + -eme.


taxi (n.)

1907, shortening of taximeter cab (introduced in London in March 1907), from taximeter automatic
meter to record the distance and fare (1898), from French taxim&egrave;tre, from German Taxameter
(1890), coined from Medieval Latin taxa tax, charge.    An earlier English form was taxameter
(1894), used in horse-drawn cabs. Taxi dancer woman whose services may be hired at a dance hall is
recorded from 1930. Taxi squad in U.S. football is 1966, said to be from a former Cleveland Browns
owner who gave his reserves jobs with his taxicab company to keep them paid and available
[Dictionary of American Slang], but other explanations (short-term hire or shuttling back and forth
from the main team) seem possible.


taxi (v.)

1911, of airplanes, from slang use of taxi (n.) for aircraft, or from or reinforced in allusion to
the way a taxi driver slowly cruises when looking for fares [Barnhart]. Related: Taxied; taxiing.


taxicab (n.)

1907, short for taximeter cab; see taxi (n.) + cab (n.).


taxidermy (n.)

1820, from comb. form of Greek taxis arrangement, an arranging, the order or disposition of an army,
battle array; order, regularity (see tactics) + derma skin (see derma). Related: Taxidermist (1827).


taxine (adj.)

1888, from Latin taxus yew tree,  probably from a Scythian word, + -ine (1).


taxis (n.)

operation whereby displaced parts are put back in their natural situation, 1758, medical Latin, from
Greek taxis arrangement, an arranging, the order or disposition of an army, battle array; order,
regularity, verbal noun of tassein arrange, from PIE root *tag- to set aright, set in order (see
tangent).


taxman (n.)

1803, from tax (n.) + man (n.).


taxon (n.)

1929, from German (1926), shortened from taxonomie (see taxonomy).


taxonomy (n.)

science of classification, 1819, from French taxonomie (1813), coined irregularly from Greek taxis
arrangement (see tactics) + -nomia method, from -nomos managing, from nemein manage (see
numismatic). Related: Taxonomic; taxonomist.


taxpayer (n.)

also tax-payer, 1816, from tax (n.) + payer.


tay (n.)

mid-15c., case, sheath, from French teie (Old French toie pillowcase, cushion-cover), from Latin
theca, from Greek theke case to put something in (see theco-). As outer membrane of the brain from
1560s.


Tay-Sachs

fatal inherited disorder, 1907, named in German (1901) by German neurologist Henryk Higier
(1866-1942) from names of British ophthalmologist Warren Tay (1843-1927) and U.S. physician and
neurologist Warren Sachs (1858-1944) who had independently described it in 1881 and 1887
respectively.


Taylor

surname, attested from late 12c., variant of tailor.


tchotchke (n.)

tinket, gewgaw, also (transferred) pretty girl, 1964, American English, from Yiddish, from a Slavic
source (compare Russian tsatska).


Te Deum

early 12c., from Late Latin Te Deum laudamus Thee God we praise, first words of the ancient Latin
hymn.


tea (n.)

1650s, tay, also in early spellings thea, tey, tee and at first pronounced so as to rhyme with obey;
the modern pronunciation predominates from mid-18c. But earlier in English as chaa (1590s), also
cha, tcha, chia, cia. The two forms of the word reflect two paths of transmission: chaa is from
Portuguese cha, attested in Portuguese from 1550s, via Macao,  from Mandarin (Chinese) ch'a (cf
chai). The later form, which became  Modern English tea, is  via Dutch, from Malay teh and directly
from Chinese (Amoy dialect) t'e, which corresponds to Mandarin ch'a.    The distribution of the
different forms of the word in Europe reflects the spread of use of the beverage. The modern English
form, along with French th&eacute;, Spanish te, German Tee, etc., derive via Dutch thee from the
Amoy form, reflecting the role of the Dutch as the chief importers of the leaves (through the Dutch
East India Company, from 1610). Meanwhile, Russian chai, Persian cha, Greek tsai, Arabic shay, and
Turkish &ccedil;ay all came overland from the Mandarin form.    First known in Paris 1635, the
practice of drinking tea was first introduced to England 1644. Meaning afternoon meal at which tea
is served is from 1738. Slang meaning marijuana (which sometimes was brewed in hot water) is
attested from 1935, felt as obsolete by late 1960s. Tea ball is from 1895.


tea party (n.)

1772, from tea + party (n.). Political references to tea party all trace to the Boston tea party of
1773 (the name seems to date from 1824), in which radicals in Massachusetts colony boarded British
ships carrying tea and threw the product into Boston Harbor in protest royal taxation. It has been a
model for other libertarian political actions in the U.S. (mostly symbolic), including citizen
gatherings begun in early 2009 to protest government spending.


tea-berry (n.)

American wintergreen, 1818, from tea + berry, so called because the dried berries were used as a
substitute for tea.


tea-cup (n.)

1700, from tea + cup (n.).


tea-kettle (n.)

1705, from tea + kettle.


tea-leaf (n.)

1756, from tea + leaf (n.). Related: Tea-leaves.


tea-pot (n.)

also teapot, 1660s, from tea + pot (n.1). The children's song beginning I'm a little tea-pot
attested by 1943.


tea-rose (n.)

1825, from tea + rose (n.1); so called because it has a scent supposed to resemble that of tea.


tea-table (n.)

1680s, from tea + table (n.).


teabag (n.)

also tea-bag 1857, a small permeable packet for holding loose tea, from tea + bag (n.). As a sex
act, by 2000.


teach (v.)

Old English t&aelig;can (past tense t&aelig;hte, past participle t&aelig;ht) to show, point out,
declare, demonstrate, also to give instruction, train, assign, direct; warn; persuade, from Proto-
Germanic *taikijan to show (cognates: Old High German zihan, German zeihen to accuse, Gothic ga-
teihan to announce), from PIE *deik- to show, point out (see diction). Related to Old English tacen,
tacn sign, mark (see token). Related: Taught; teaching.    enraged Lemonade Vendor [Edgar Kennedy]:
I'll teach you to kick me!   Chico: you don't have to teach me, I know how. [kicks him]    The usual
sense of Old English t&aelig;can was show, declare, warn, persuade (compare German zeigen to show,
from the same root); while the Old English word for to teach, instruct, guide was more commonly
l&aelig;ran, source of modern learn and lore.


teachable (adj.)

late 15c., capable of being taught (of persons), from teach (v.) + -able. Of subjects, from 1660s.
Teachable moment, attested from 1917, not common until after c.1960, extends the sense to
appropriate for instruction. Related: Teachableness.


teacher (n.)

one who teaches, c.1300; agent noun from teach (v.). It was used earlier in a sense of index finger
(late 13c.). Teacher's pet attested from 1856.


teaching (n.)

Old English tecunge act of teaching, verbal noun from teach (v.). As that which is taught from
c.1300.


Teague (n.)

old contemptuous name for an Irishman, 1660s, from prevalence of Teague as an Irish name.


teak (n.)

type of large East Indian tree yielding dark, heavy wood, 1690s, from Portuguese teca, from Malayam
tekka, corresponding to Tamil tekku, Telugu teku, Kanarese tegu the teak tree. The Hindi name is
sagwan, sagun.


teal (n.)

small freshwater duck, early 14c., of uncertain origin, probably from an unrecorded Old English word
cognate with Middle Dutch teling teal, Middle Low German telink, from West Germanic *taili. As the
name of a shade of dark greenish-blue resembling the color patterns on the fowl's head and wings, it
is attested from 1923 in clothing advertisements.


team (n.)

Old English team descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft
animals yoked together, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (cognates: Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam
bridle; progeny, line of descent, Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, German Zaum bridle), probably
literally that which draws, from PIE *douk-mo-, from root *deuk- to pull (see duke (n.)).    Applied
in Old English to groups of persons working together for some purpose, especially group of people
acting together to bring suit; modern sense of persons associated in some joint action is from
1520s. Team spirit is recorded from 1928. Team player attested from 1886, originally in baseball.


team (v.)

1550s, to harness beasts in a team, from team (n.). From 1841 as drive a team. The meaning to come
together as a team (usually with up) is attested from 1932. Transitive sense to use (something) in
conjunction (with something else) is from 1948. Related: Teamed; teaming. The Old English verb,
teaman, tieman, is attested only in the sense bring forth, beget, engender, propagate.


teammate (n.)

also team-mate, 1901, from team (n.) + mate (n.).


teamster (n.)

person who drives a team of horses (especially in hauling freight), 1776, from team (n.) + -ster.
Transferred to motor truck drivers by 1907.


teamwork (n.)

also team-work, 1828 in the literal sense, work done by a team of horses, oxen, etc. (as
distinguished from manual labor), from team (n.) + work (n.). Attested by 1909 in the extended
sense.


tear (n.1)

fluid drop from the eye, Old English tear tear, drop, nectar, what is distilled in drops, from
earlier teahor, t&aelig;hher, from Proto-Germanic *tahr-, *tagr- (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian
tar, Old High German zahar, German Z&auml;hre, Gothic tagr tear), from PIE *dakru- (cognates: Latin
lacrima, Old Latin dacrima, Irish der, Welsh deigr, Greek dakryma). To be in tears weeping is from
1550s. Tear gas first recorded 1917.


tear (n.2)

act of ripping or rending, 1660s, from tear (v.1). Old English had ter (n.) tearing, laceration,
thing torn.


tear (v.1)

pull apart, Old English teran to tear, lacerate (class IV strong verb; past tense t&aelig;r, past
participle toren), from Proto-Germanic *teran (cognates: Old Saxon terian, Middle Dutch teren to
consume, Old High German zeran to destroy, German zehren, Gothic ga-tairan to tear, destroy), from
PIE *der- (2) to split, peel, flay, with derivatives referring to skin and leather (cognates:
Sanskrit drnati cleaves, bursts, Greek derein to flay, Armenian terem I flay, Old Church Slavonic
dera to burst asunder, Breton darn piece).    The Old English past tense survived long enough to get
into Bible translations as tare before giving place 17c. to tore, which is from the old past
participle toren. Sense of to pull by force (away from some situation or attachment) is attested
from late 13c. To be torn between two things (desires, loyalties, etc.) is from 1871.


tear (v.2)

early 15c., shed tears, 1650s, fill with tears mainly in American English, from tear (n.1). Related:
Teared; tearing. Old English verb t&aelig;herian, tearian to weep did not survive into Middle
English.


tear-drop (n.)

also teardrop, 1799, from tear (n.1) + drop (n.).


tear-jerker (n.)

1911, in reference to newspaper stories about tragic situations, on model of soda-jerker and perhaps
especially beer-jerker, from tear (n.1) + jerk (v.).


tearful (adj.)

1580s, from tear (n.1) + -ful. Related: Tearfully; tearfulness.


teary (adj.)

Old English tearig; see tear (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Tearily; teariness.


tease (v.)

formerly also teaze, Old English t&aelig;san pluck, pull, tear; pull apart, comb (fibers of wool,
flax, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *taisijan (cognates: Danish t&aelig;se, Middle Dutch tesen, Dutch
tezen to draw, pull, scratch, Old High German zeisan to tease, pick wool).    The original sense is
of running thorns through wool or flax to separate, shred, or card the fibers. The figurative sense
of vex, worry, annoy (sometimes done in good humor) emerged 1610s. For similar sense development,
compare heckle. Hairdressing sense is recorded from 1957. Related: Teased; teasing; teasingly.


tease (n.)

1690s, act of teasing, from tease (v.). Meaning one who teases is from 1852. Specifically as short
for cock-teaser, it was in use by 1976.


teasel (n.)

also teazel, teazle, type of plant, Old English t&aelig;sel large thistle used in teasing cloth,
from Proto-Germanic *taisilo (cognates: Old High German zeisala), from root of Old English
t&aelig;san to pluck (see tease (v.)).


teaser (n.)

one who teases (wool, flax, etc.), late 15c. (late 13c. as a surname), agent noun from tease (v.).
From 1934 as short sample, introductory advertisement.


teaspoon (n.)

1680s, from tea + spoon (n.). Related: teaspoonful.


teat (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French tete teat (12c., Modern French tette), from Proto-Germanic *titta (source
of Old English titt, see tit). Spanish teta, Italian tetta are from the same source.


tec (n.)

1879 in thieves' slang as short for detective (n.); 1934 as short for detective story.


tech (n.)

1906 as short for technical college (or institute, etc.), American English; 1942 as short for
technician.


techie (n.)

one well-versed in the latest technology, by 1984.


technetium (n.)

1947, coined in Modern Latin from Greek tekhnetos artificial, from tekhne art, skill, craft (see
techno-) + metallic element ending -ium.


technic (adj.)

1610s, technical, from Latin technicus, from Greek tekhnikos of or pertaining to art, made by art,
from tekhne art, skill, craft (see techno-). As a noun, performance method of an art, 1855, a
nativization of technique.


technical (adj.)

1610s, skilled in a particular art or subject, formed in English from technic + -al (1), or in part
from Greek tekhnikos of art; systematic, in reference to persons skillful, artistic, from tekhne
art, skill, craft (see techno-).    The sense narrowed to having to do with the mechanical arts
(1727). Basketball technical foul (one which does not involve contact between opponents) is recorded
from 1934. Boxing technical knock-out (one in which the loser is not knocked out) is recorded from
1921; abbreviation TKO is from 1940s. Technical difficulty is from 1805.


technicality (n.)

1814, that which is peculiar to any science, art, etc., from technical + -ity. Meaning technical
character or quality is from 1828. Related: Technicalities.


technician (n.)

1833, person expert in the technicalities of some question, from technic + -ian. Meaning person
skilled in mechanical arts is recorded from 1939.


technicolor (n.)

vivid color, 1946, earlier as a trademark name (Technicolor, registered in U.S. 1917) for a process
of making color movies, from technical + color (n.). As an adjective from 1940.


technics (n.)

1850, from technic; also see -ics. Technicist is attested from 1876.


technique (n.)

1817, at first especially in criticism of art and music, from French technique formal practical
details in artistic expression (18c.), noun use of technique (adj.) of art, technical, from Greek
tekhnikos pertaining to art, from tekhne art, skill, craft in work (see techno-).


techno-

word-forming element meaning art, craft, skill, later technical, technology, from Latinized form of
Greek tekhno-, combining form of tekhne art, skill, craft in work; method, system, an art, a system
or method of making or doing, from PIE *teks-na- craft (of weaving or fabricating), from suffixed
form of root *teks- to weave, fabricate, make (cognates: Sanskrit taksan carpenter, Greek tekton
carpenter, Latin texere to weave; see texture (n.)).


technocracy (n.)

1919, coined by W.H. Smyth as a name for a new system of government by technical experts, from
techno- + -cracy.    William Henry Smyth, a distinguished engineer of Berkeley, California, wrote at
the close of the war a series of thoughtful papers for the New York magazine Industrial Management,
on the subject of Technocracy. His thesis was the need of a Supreme National Council of Scientists
to advise us how best to live, and how most efficiently to realize our individual aspirations and
our national purpose. [The Bookman, March 1922]


technocrat (n.)

1932, back-formation from technocracy. Related: Technocratic.


technological (adj.)

1620s, in reference to terminology, from technology + -ical. Meaning of or relating to technology
from 1800. Related: Technologically.


technologist (n.)

one versed in technology, 1803, from technology + -ist.


technology (n.)

1610s, a discourse or treatise on an art or the arts, from Greek tekhnologia systematic treatment of
an art, craft, or technique, originally referring to grammar, from tekhno- (see techno-) + -logy.
The meaning study of mechanical and industrial arts (Century Dictionary, 1902, gives examples of
spinning, metal-working, or brewing) is first recorded 1859. High technology attested from 1964;
short form high-tech is from 1972.


technophile (n.)

1968, from techno- + -phile.


technophobe (n.)

by 1952, perhaps by 1946, from techno- + -phobe.    If the reader will consult such a book as Recent
Economic Changes, by David A. Wells, published in 1889, he will find passages that, except for the
dates and absolute amounts involved, might have been written by our technophobes (if I may coin a
needed word) of today. [Henry Hazlitt, Economics in One Lesson, 1952 edition]


tectonic (adj.)

1650s, of or relating to building or construction, from Late Latin tectonicus, from Greek tektonikos
pertaining to building, from tekton (genitive tektonos) builder, carpenter, woodworker; master in
any art (sculpture, metal-work, writing), from PIE root *teks- to make (see texture (n.)). The
geological sense, pertaining to the structure of the Earth's crust, is recorded from 1887.


tectonics (n.)

1899 in the geological sense, from tectonic (also see -ics); earlier it meant building or
constructive arts in general (1850).


Tecumseh

Native American leader (1768-1813), his name is Shawnee (Algonquian), perhaps literally flies
across; compare Menominee /takhamehse:w/ flies straight across.


ted (v.)

to spread (new-mown grass for drying), c.1300, from an unrecorded Old English *teddan or from a
Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse te&eth;ja to spread manure. Related to German verzetteln to
scatter, squander. Related: Tedding; tedder.


Teddy

pet form of masc. proper names Edward, Edmund, and Theodore, with -y (3). Meaning women's
undergarment (with lower-case t-) is recorded from 1924, of unknown origin, perhaps from some
fancied resemblance to a teddy bear (q.v.), a theory that dates to 1929. In British slang phrase
teddy boy (1954) it is short for Edward, from the preference of such youths for Edwardian styles
(1901-10). Teddies (probably from Teddy Roosevelt) was one of the names given to U.S. troops in
France in 1917.


teddy bear (n.)

1906, named for U.S. president Theodore Teddy Roosevelt (1858-1919), a noted big-game hunter, whose
conservationist fervor inspired a comic illustrated poem in the New York Times of Jan. 7, 1906,
about two bears named Teddy, whose names were transferred to two bears presented to the Bronx Zoo
that year. The name was picked up by toy dealers in 1907 for a line of Roosevelt bears imported from
Germany. Meaning big, lovable person first attested 1957, from the song popularized by Elvis
Presley.


tedesco (n.)

Teutonic influence in the arts, 1874 in this form, from Italian, literally German, from Medieval
Latin theodiscus (see Dutch). Compare Old French tiois a German, tiesche (adj.) German.


tedious (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French tedieus, from Late Latin taediosus wearisome, irksome, tedious, from
Latin taedium (see tedium). Related: Tediously; tediousness.


tedium (n.)

tediousness, 1660s, from Latin taedium weariness, irksomeness, disgust, related to taedet it is
wearisome, it excites loathing, and to taedere to weary, of uncertain origin. Possible cognates are
Old Church Slavonic te&#382;o, Lithuanian tingiu to be dull, be listless.


tee (n.)

in golf, 1721, back-formation from teaz (1673), taken as a plural; a Scottish word of uncertain
origin. The original form was a little heap of sand. The verb meaning place a ball on a golf tee is
recorded from 1670s; figurative sense of to make ready (usually with up) is recorded from 1938. Teed
off in the figurative sense of angry, annoyed is first recorded 1953, probably as a euphemism for
p(iss)ed off.


tee-hee

imitative of derisive tittering laughter at least since Chaucer (The Miller's Tale).


teem (v.1)

abound, swarm, be prolific, Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) beget, give birth to,
bring forth, produce, propagate, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE *deuk- to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of family, brood of
young animals. The meaning abound, swarm is first recorded 1590s, on the notion of be full of as if
ready to give birth. Related: Teemed; teeming.


teem (v.2)

to flow copiously, early 14c., to empty out (transitive), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old
Norse toema to empty, from tomr empty, cognate with Old English tom (adj.) empty, free from. The
original notion is of to empty a vessel, thus to pour out. Intransitive sense of to pour, flow,
stream is from 1828. Related: Teemed; teeming.


teeming (adj.)

swarming, 1715, earlier abundantly productive, fertile (1590s), present participle adjective from
teem (v.1).


teen (n.)

teen-aged person, 1818 (but rare before 20c.), from -teen. As an adjective meaning of or for teen-
agers, from 1947.


teenage (adj.)

also teen age, teen-age; 1911, from teen + age (n.). Originally in reference to Sunday School
classes. Teen-aged (adj.) is from 1922.


teenager (n.)

also teen ager, teen-ager; 1922, derived noun from teenage (q.v.). The earlier word for this was
teener, attested in American English from 1894, and teen had been used as a noun to mean teen-aged
person in 1818, though this was not common before 20c.


teens (n.)

1670s (plural), teen-age years of a person, formed from -teen taken as a separate word. As decade of
years comprising numbers ending in -teen, from 1889.


teeny (adj.)

1825, alteration of tiny; teeny-tiny attested from 1867. Alternative form teensy is attested from
1899 (teensy-weensy is from 1906). Also teenty (1844).


teeny-bopper (n.)

1966, from teen (n.) but also felt as influenced by teeny. For second element, see bop.


teeter (v.)

1843, to seesaw, alteration of Middle English titter move unsteadily, probably from a Scandinavian
source akin to Old Norse titra to shake, shiver, totter, tremble, from Proto-Germanic *ti-tra-
(cognates: German zittern to tremble). Meaning move unsteadily, be on the edge of imbalance is from
1844. Noun teeter-totter see-saw is attested from 1905 (earlier simply teeter, 1855, and titter-
totter in same sense is from 1520s). Totter (n.) board swing is recorded from late 14c.; see totter
(v.).


teeth (n.)

plural of tooth (n.). In reference to laws, contracts, etc., power of enforcement, from 1925. To be
armed to the teeth is from late 14c.


teethe (v.)

early 15c., probably from an unrecorded Old English verb *te&thorn;an, from to&thorn; (see tooth).
Related: Teethed; teething.


teething (n.)

1724, verbal noun from teethe (v.). Teething-ring attested from 1853.


teetotal (v.)

pledged to total abstinence from intoxicating drink, 1834, possibly formed from total (adj.) with a
reduplication of the initial T- for emphasis (T-totally totally, though not in an abstinence sense,
is recorded in Kentucky dialect from 1832 and is possibly older in Irish-English).    The use in
temperance jargon was first noted September 1833 in a speech advocating total abstinence (from beer
as well as wine and liquor) by Richard Dicky Turner, a working-man from Preston, England. Also said
to have been introduced in 1827 in a New York temperance society which recorded a T after the
signature of those who had pledged total abstinence, but contemporary evidence for this is wanting,
and while Century Dictionary allows that the word may have originated independently in the two
countries, OED favors the British origin and ones that Webster (1847) calls teetotaler a cant word
formed in England.


teetotaler (n.)

also teetotaller, 1834, agent noun from teetotal. Related: Teetotalism.


tefillin (n.)

1610s, from Rabbinical Hebrew t'phillim, plural of  t'phillah prayer.


Teflon (n.)

commercially important synthetic polymer, 1945, proprietary name registered in U.S. by du Pont, from
chemical name (poly)te(tra)fl(uoroethylene) + arbitrary ending -on; popularized as a coating of non-
stick pans in 1960s; metaphoric extension, especially in reference to U.S. President Ronald Reagan,
is attested from an Aug. 2, 1983, speech on the floor of Congress by Pat Schroeder.


teg (n.)

sheep in its second year, 1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare
Swedish tacka ewe).


tegular (adj.)

of or like a tile, 1796, from Latin tegula tile (see tile (n.)) + -ar. Related: Tegulated.


tegument (n.)

a covering, a natural protection of the body or some part of it, mid-15c., from Latin tegumentum a
covering, a cover, from tegere to cover, from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
Related: Tegumentary.


Tehran

also Teheran, Iranian capital, said to mean flat, level, lower, but sometimes derived from Old
Persian teh warm + ran place.


Tejano

native or inhabitant of Texas, 1925, from American Spanish, formerly Texano a Texan (see Texas).


tektite (n.)

small roundish glass bodies, probably of meteoric origin, 1909, from German tektit (Suess, 1900),
from Greek tektos molten, from tekein to melt.


Telamon

in Greek mythology, father of Ajax, brother of Peleus, literally the Bearer, from Greek telamon
broad strap for bearing something.


telangiectasia (n.)

1831, Modern Latin, from Greek telos end (see tele-), + angeion vessel (see angio-), + ektasis a
stretching out, extension, dilation, from ek (see ex-) + tasis a stretching, tension, intensity (see
tenet).


tele-

before vowels tel-, word-forming element meaning far, far off, operating over distance (also, since
c.1940, television), from Greek tele-, combining form of tele far off, afar, at or to a distance,
related to teleos (genitive telos) end, goal, completion, perfection, literally completion of a
cycle, from PIE *kwel-es- (cognates: Sanskrit caramah the last, Breton pell far off, Welsh pellaf
uttermost), perhaps from root *kwel- (1) (see cycle (n.)).


telecast (n.)

1937, from television + broadcast (n.). The verb is recorded from 1940.


telecom (n.)

abbreviation of telecommunication, attested by 1963.


telecommunication (n.)

1932, from French t&eacute;l&eacute;communication (see tele- + communication). Related:
Telecommunications.


telecommute (v.)

by 1974 (as a hypothetical experience), from tele- + commute. Related: Telecommuted. Compare
telecommuting.


telecommuting (n.)

by 1975, as a hypothetical workplace set-up; verbal noun from telecommute. Said to have been coined
by Jack Niles of USC.


teleconference (n.)

1952, originally a proprietary name, from tele- + conference. Not in common use until c.1974.


telegenic (adj.)

1939, from television + ending from photogenic.    Judith Barrett, pretty and blonde actress, is the
first Telegenic Girl to go on record. In other words, she is the perfect type of beauty for
television. ... She is slated for the first television motion picture. [Baltimore Sun, Oct. 16,
1939]


telegony (n.)

supposed influence of a sire on the offspring of a female by a later sire, 1893, from Greek tele far
off (see tele-) + -geneia origin, from -genes born (see genus).


telegram (n.)

telegraphic dispatch, according to Bartlett's 1859 edition a coinage of E. Peshine Smith of
Rochester, N.Y., from tele-, as in telegraph + -gram, and introduced in the Albany Evening Journal
of April 6, 1852. Damned in the cradle by purists who pointed out that the correct formation would
be telegrapheme (which is close to the Modern Greek word).  May I suggest to such as are not
contented with 'Telegraphic Dispatch' the rightly constructed word 'telegrapheme'? I do not want it,
but ... I protest against such a barbarism as 'telegram.' [Richard Shilleto, Cambridge Greek
scholar, in the London Times, Oct. 15, 1857]    Related: Telegrammic.


telegraph (n.)

1794, semaphor apparatus (hence the Telegraph Hill in many cities), literally that which writes at a
distance, from French t&eacute;l&eacute;graphe, from t&eacute;l&eacute;- far (from Greek tele-; see
tele-) + -graphe (see -graphy). The signaling device had been invented in France in 1791 by the
brothers Chappe, who had called it tachygraphe, literally that which writes fast, but the better
name was suggested to them by French diplomat Comte Andr&eacute;-Fran&ccedil;ois Miot de
M&eacute;lito (1762-1841). First applied 1797 to an experimental electric telegraph (designed by Dr.
Don Francisco Salva at Barcelona); the practical version was developed 1830s by U.S. inventor Samuel
F.B. Morse (1791-1872). Meaning telegraphic message is from 1821. Related: Telegraphy.


telegraph (v.)

1805, from telegraph (n.). Figurative meaning to signal one's intentions is first attested 1925,
originally in boxing. Related: Telegraphed; telegraphing.


telegraphese (n.)

stripped-down style used to save expenses in writing telegraphs, 1885, from telegraph (n.) + -ese.
Earlier in reference to the style of writing in the London Daily Telegraph, which was rather the
reverse.


telegraphic (adj.)

1794, originally of semaphor, etc.; from telegraph (n.) + -ic. Electric telegraph sense is from
1823. Related: Telegraphically.


telekinesis (n.)

1890, said in early references to have been coined by Alexander N. Aksakof (1832-1903) Imperial
Councilor to the Czar, in Modern Latin, literally motion at a distance, from tele- +  Greek kinesis
movement, motion, from PIE root *keie- to set in motion (see cite). Translates German Fernwirkung.
Related: Telekinetic.


Telemachus

son of Odysseus and Penelope, from Latinized form of Greek Telemakhos, literally fighting from afar,
from tele from afar (see tele-) + makhe a battle, fight (see -machy).


telemarketing (n.)

1970, from telephone (n.) + marketing. Related: Telemarketer (1984).


telemeter (n.)

1860, a rangefinder for surveying and artillery, from French t&eacute;l&eacute;m&egrave;tre (1852),
from t&eacute;l&eacute;- far (see tele-) + m&egrave;tre meter (see -meter). Used from 1953 for a
pay-as-you-watch TV system with a coin box attached to the set. Related: Telemetry.


teleology (n.)

study of final causes, 1740, from Modern Latin teleologia, coined  1728 by German philosopher Baron
Christian von Wolff (1679-1754) from Greek teleos entire, perfect, complete, genitive of telos end,
goal, result (see tele-), + -logia (see -logy). Related: Teleologist; teleological.


telepathic (adj.)

1884, from telepathy + -ic.


telepathy (n.)

1882, coined (along with tel&aelig;sthesia) by English psychologist Frederic Myers (1843-1901),
literally feeling from afar, from tele- + -pathy. The noun telepath is an 1889 back-formation.


telephone (v.)

1878, from telephone (n.). Related: Telephoned; telephoning.


telephone (n.)

1835, system for conveying words over distance by musical notes (devised in 1828 by French composer
Jean-Fran&#231;ois Sudr&eacute; (1787-1862); each tone played over several octaves represented a
letter of the alphabet), from French t&eacute;l&eacute;phone (c.1830), from t&eacute;l&eacute;- far
(see tele-) + phone sound (see fame (n.)). Sudr&eacute;'s system never proved practical. Also used
of other apparatus early 19c., including instrument similar to a foghorn for signaling from ship to
ship (1844). The electrical communication tool was first described in modern form by Philip Reis
(1861); developed by Scottish-born inventor Alexander Graham Bell (1847-1922), and so called by him
from 1876.


telephonic (adj.)

1830, pertaining to communication by sound over great distances, originally theoretical, from tele-
+ phonic. From 1834 in reference to the system of Sudr&eacute; using musical sounds (see telephone),
and with reference to Bell's invention from 1876, in which cases it can be taken as from telephone +
-ic.


telephony (n.)

1835, a system of signaling by musical sounds; from 1876 as the art of working a telephone; see
telephone (n.) + -y (4). Related: Telephonist.


telephoto (adj.)

also tele-photo, 1898, shortened form of telephotographic (1892), in reference to lenses introduced
at that time to increase the magnification of photographs taken by a camera, from tele- +
photographic.


teleport (v.)

1940, in reference to religious miracles, from tele- + ending from transport (v.). Related:
Teleported; teleporter; teleporting.


teleportation (n.)

1931 as a term in psychics and later (1951) science fiction; from tele- + (trans)portation.
Apparently coined by Charles Fort (1874-1932).


teleprompter (n.)

1951, originally a proprietary name in U.S., from tele- + prompter. The equivalent British
proprietary name is Autocue.


telescope (n.)

1640s, from Italian telescopio (Galileo, 1611), and Modern Latin telescopium (Kepler, 1613), both
from Greek teleskopos far-seeing, from tele- far (see tele-) + -skopos watcher (see scope (n.1)).
Said to have been coined by Prince Cesi, founder and head of the Roman Academy of the Lincei
(Galileo was a member). Used in English in Latin form from 1619.


telescope (v.)

to force together one inside the other (like the sliding tubes of some telescopes), 1867, from
telescope (n.). Related: Telescoped; telescoping.


telescopic (adj.)

1705, from telescope + -ic.


Teletex (n.)

proprietary name for a computer data-sharing network, 1978.


telethon (n.)

prolonged TV fundraiser, 1949, from television + marathon (see -athon). Milton Berle's 16-hour
television cancer fundraiser in April 1949 might have been the first to be so called.


teletype (n.)

1904, trademark for a system of typewriters connected electronically, short for teletypewriter
(1904), a form of telegraph in which the receiver prints messages like a typewriter, from tele- +
typewriter.


televangelist (n.)

1973, from tele(vision) + evangelist. Earliest usages are in reference to Rex Humbard (television
evangelist is from 1958).


televise (v.)

1927 back-formation from television, on model of other verbs from nouns ending in -(v)ision (such as
revise). Related: Televised; televising.


television (n.)

1907, as a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires; formed in
English or borrowed from French t&eacute;l&eacute;vision, from tele- + vision.    Television is not
impossible in theory. In practice it would be very costly without being capable of serious
application. But we do not want that. On that day when it will be possible to accelerate our methods
of telephotography by at least ten times, which does not appear to be impossible in the future, we
shall arrive at television with a hundred telegraph wires. Then the problem of sight at a distance
will without doubt cease to be a chimera. [Telegraphing Pictures in Windsor Magazine, 1907]    Other
proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were
telephote (1880) and televista (1904). The technology was developed in the 1920s and '30s. Nativized
in German as Fernsehen. Shortened form TV is from 1948. Meaning a television set is from 1941.
Meaning television as a medium is from 1927.  Television is the first truly democratic culture --
the first culture available to everyone and entirely governed by what the people want. The most
terrifying thing is what people do want. [Clive Barnes, New York Times, Dec. 30, 1969]


Telex

1932, a communication system of teletypewriters, from tel(etype) ex(change).


telic (adj.)

indicating purpose, 1846, from Greek telikos final, from telos end, goal, result (see tele-).


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


tell (n.)

mound, hill, 1864, from Arabic tall, related to Hebrew tel mount, hill, heap. Compare Hebrew talul
lofty, Akkadian tillu woman's breast.


teller (n.)

bank clerk who pays or receives money, late 15c., person who keeps accounts, agent noun from tell
(v.) in its secondary sense of count, enumerate, which is the primary sense of cognate words in many
Germanic languages. Earlier person who announces or narrates (c.1300).


telling (adj.)

having effect or force, 1852, past participle adjective from tell (v.).


telltale (n.)

also tell-tale, discloser of secrets, 1540s, from tell (v.) + tale. As an adjective from 1590s.
Phrase tell a tale relate a false or exaggerated story is from late 13c.


tellurian (adj.)

pertaining to the earth, 1846, from -ian + Latin tellus (genitive telluris) earth, land, ground; the
earth (related to Tellus, Roman goddess of the earth), from PIE root *tel- ground, floor (cognates:
Lithuanian telinat spread out, flat, Sanskrit talam plain, sole of the foot, Old Church Slavonic
tilo floor, Greek telia dice board, Old Irish talam earth, Old Norse &thorn;ilja, Middle Dutch dele
plank). As a noun, inhabitant of Earth (with reference to supposed inhabitants of other worlds) from
1847.


telluric (adj.)

1800, containing tellurium; 1836, pertaining to Earth as a planet; 1842, pertaining to or proceeding
from the earth; the last two senses from Latin tellus, tellum (genitive telluris) earth, the earth
(see tellurian) + -ic.


telluride (n.)

1849, compound of tellurium, from tellurium + -ide.


tellurium (n.)

metallic element, 1800, coined 1798 in Modern Latin by German chemist and mineralogist Martin
Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817) from Latin tellus (genitive telluris) earth (see tellurian) + -ium.


telly (n.)

chiefly British English shortening of television, attested by 1942.


telophase (n.)

1895 in cytology, from Greek telo-, comb. form of telos the end, fulfillment, completion (see tele-)
+ phase (n.).


telos (n.)

ultimate object or aim, 1904, from Greek telos the end, fulfillment, completion (see tele-).


telson (n.)

last section of the abdomen of a crustacean, 1855, from Greek telson a limit, boundary (see tele-).


Telugu (n.)

Dravidian language of southern India, 1731.


temblor (n.)

earthquake, 1876, from American Spanish temblor earthquake, from Spanish temblor, literally a
trembling, from temblar to tremble, from Vulgar Latin *tremulare (see tremble (v.)).


temerarious (adj.)

rash, reckless, 1530s, from Latin temerarius rash, heedless, thoughtless, indiscreet, from temere
blindly, rashly, by chance (see temerity). Related: Temerariously; temerariousness.


temerity (n.)

late 14c., from Latin temeritatem (nominative temeritas) blind chance, accident; rashness,
indiscretion, foolhardiness, from temere by chance, at random; indiscreetly, rashly, related to
tenebrae darkness, from PIE root *teme- dark (cognates: Sanskrit tamas- darkness, tamsrah dark;
Avestan temah darkness; Lithuanian tamsa darkness, tamsus dark; Old Church Slavonic tima darkness;
Old High German dinstar dark; Old Irish temel darkness). The connecting notion is blindly, without
foreseeing.


temp (adj.)

1909, American English, shortened form of temporary (job, employee, etc.). As a noun by 1932; as a
verb by 1973. Related: Temped; temping.


temp (n.)

1886, short for temperature.


temper (v.)

late Old English temprian to moderate, bring to a proper or suitable state, to modify some excessive
quality, to restrain within due limits, from Latin temperare observe proper measure, be moderate,
restrain oneself, also transitive, mix correctly, mix in due proportion; regulate, rule, govern,
manage, usually described as from tempus time, season (see temporal), with a sense of proper time or
season. Meaning to make (steel) hard and elastic is from late 14c. Sense of to tune the pitch of a
musical instrument is recorded from c.1300. Related: Tempered; tempering.


temper (n.)

late 14c., due proportion of elements or qualities, from temper (v.). The sense of characteristic
state of mind, inclination, disposition is first recorded 1590s; that of calm state of mind,
tranquility in c.1600; and that of angry state of mind (for bad temper) in 1828. Meaning degree of
hardness and resiliency in steel is from late 15c.


tempera (n.)

also tempra, 1832, from Italian tempera (in phrase pingere a tempera), back-formation from temperare
to mix colors, temper, from Latin temperare to mix in due proportion (see temper (v.)).


temperament (n.)

late 14c., proportioned mixture of elements, from Latin temperamentum proper mixture, a mixing in
due proportion, from temperare to mix (see temper (v.)). In medieval theory, it meant a combination
of qualities (hot, cold, moist, dry) that determined the nature of an organism; thus also a
combination of the four humors (sanguine, choleric, phlegmatic, and melancholic) that made up a
person's characteristic disposition. General sense of habit of mind, natural disposition is from
1821.


temperamental (adj.)

of or pertaining to temperament, 1640s, from temperament + -al (1); in the sense of moody it is
recorded from 1907. Related: Temperamentally.


temperance (n.)

mid-14c., self-restraint, moderation, from Anglo-French temperaunce (mid-13c.), from Latin
temperantia moderation, sobriety, discretion, self-control, from temperans, present participle of
temperare to moderate (see temper (v.)). Latin temperantia was used by Cicero to translate Greek
sophrosyne moderation. In English, temperance was used to render Latin continentia or abstinentia,
specifically in reference to drinking alcohol and eating; hence by early 1800s it had come to mean
abstinence from alcoholic drink.


temperate (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, modest, forbearing, self-restrained, not swayed by passion; of climates or
seasons, not liable to excessive heat or cold, from Latin temperatus restrained, regulated, limited,
moderate, sober, calm, steady, from past participle of temperare to moderate, regulate (see temper
(v.)). Related: Temperately; temperateness. Temperate zone is attested from 1550s.


temperature (n.)

mid-15c., fact of being tempered, proper proportion; 1530s, character or nature of a substance, from
Latin temperatura a tempering, moderation, from temperatus, past participle of temperare to be
moderate; to mingle in due proportion (see temper (v.)). Sense of degree of heat or cold first
recorded 1670 (Boyle), from Latin temperatura, used in this sense by Galileo. Meaning fever, high
temperature is attested from 1898.


tempered (adj.)

1650s, brought to desired hardness (of metals, especially steel), past participle adjective from
temper (v.). Meaning toned down by admixture is from 1650s; of music or musical instruments, tuned,
from 1727.


tempest (n.)

violent storm, late 13c., from Old French tempeste storm; commotion, battle; epidemic, plague
(11c.), from Vulgar Latin *tempesta, from Latin tempestas a storm; weather, season, time, point in
time, season, period, also commotion, disturbance, related to tempus time, season (see temporal).
Sense evolution is from period of time to period of weather, to bad weather to storm. Words for
weather originally were words for time in languages from Russia to Brittany. Figurative sense of
violent commotion in English is recorded from early 14c. Tempest in a teapot attested from 1818; the
image in other forms is older, such as storm in a creambowl (1670s).


tempestuous (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin tempestuosus stormy, turbulent, from Latin tempestas storm, commotion,
time (see tempest). The figurative sense is older in English; literal sense is from c.1500. Related:
Tempestuously; tempestuousness.


Templar (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French templer, Old French templier (c.1200), from Medieval Latin templaris
(mid-12c.), member of the medieval religious/military order known as Knights Templars (c.1118-1312),
so called because they had headquarters in a building near Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem (see temple
(n.1)). Their distinguishing garb was a white mantle with a red cross.


template (n.)

1670s, templet horizontal piece under a girder or beam, probably from French templet weaver's
stretcher, diminutive of temple, which meant the same thing, from Latin templum plank, rafter, also
consecrated place (see temple (n.1)).    The meaning pattern or gauge for shaping a piece of work is
first recorded 1819 in this form, earlier temple (1680s); the form was altered mid-19c., probably
influenced by plate [Barnhart], but the pronunciation did not begin to shift until more recently
(templet is still the primary entry for the word in Century Dictionary).


temple (n.1)

building for worship, edifice dedicated to the service of a deity or deities, Old English tempel,
from Latin templum piece of ground consecrated for the taking of auspices, building for worship of a
god, of uncertain signification. Commonly referred to PIE root *tem- to cut (see tome), on notion of
place reserved or cut out [Watkins], or to root *temp- to stretch [Klein's sources], on notion of
cleared space in front of an altar (see tenet). Compare Greek temenos sacred area around a temple,
literally place cut off, from stem of temnein to cut. Figurative sense of any place regarded as
occupied by divine presence was in Old English. Applied to Jewish synagogues from 1590s.


temple (n.2)

side of the forehead, mid-14c., from Old French temple side of the forehead (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *tempula (plural taken as fem. singular), from Latin tempora, plural of tempus (genitive
temporis) side of the forehead, perhaps originally the thin stretch of skin at the side of the
forehead, from PIE *temp- to stretch, an extension of the root *ten- to stretch (see tenet), from
the notion of stretched, thus thin, which is the notion in cognate Old English &eth;unwange,
literally thin cheek. Or possibly associated with tempus span timely space (for a mortal blow with a
sword).


tempo (n.)

relative speed of a piece of music, 1724, from Italian tempo, literally time (plural tempi), from
Latin tempus time, season, portion of time (see temporal). Extended (non-musical) senses by 1898.


temporal (adj.)

late 14c., worldly, secular; also terrestrial, earthly; temporary, lasting only for a time, from Old
French temporal earthly, and directly from from Latin temporalis of a time, but for a time,
temporary, from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season, proper time or season, of unknown origin.
Related: Temporally.


temporality (n.)

late 14c., temporal power, from Late Latin temporalitas, from temporalis of a time, but for a time
(see temporal).


temporary (adj.)

lasting only for a time, 1540s, from Latin temporarius of seasonal character, lasting a short time,
from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season (see temporal, late 14c., which was the earlier word
for lasting but for a time). The noun meaning person employed only for a time is recorded from 1848.
Related: Temporarily; temporariness.


temporize (v.)

to comply with the times; to yield ostensibly to the current of opinion or circumstances, 1550s
(implied in temporizer), from Middle French temporiser to pass one's time, wait one's time (14c.),
from Medieval Latin temporizare pass time, perhaps via Vulgar Latin *temporare to delay, from Latin
tempus (genitive temporis) time (see temporal). Related: Temporized; temporizing.


tempt (v.)

c.1200, of the devil, flesh, etc., draw or entice to evil or sin, lure (someone) from God's law; be
alluring or seductive, from Old French tempter (12c.), from Latin temptare to feel, try out, attempt
to influence, test, a variant of tentare handle, touch, try, test. The Latin alteration is
explainable only as an ancient error due to some confusion [Century Dictionary]. From late 14c. as
to provoke, defy (God, fate, etc.). Related: Tempted; tempting.


temptation (n.)

c.1200, act of enticing someone to sin, also an experience or state of being tempted, from Old
French temptacion (12c., Modern French tentation), from Latin temptationem (nominative temptatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of temptare to feel, try out (see tempt). Meaning that
which tempts a person (to sin) is from c.1500.


tempter (n.)

mid-14c., one who solicits to sin; that which entices to evil (originally especially the devil),
from Middle French tempteur (14c.), Old French *tempteor, from Latin temptatorem, agent noun from
temptare to feel, try out (see tempt).


tempting (adj.)

inviting, seductive, alluring, 1590s, present participle adjective from tempt (v.). Related:
Temptingly.


temptress (n.)

1590s, from tempter + -ess.


tempura (n.)

1920, from Japanese, probably from Portuguese tempero seasoning.


ten (n., adj.)

Old English ten (Mercian), tien (West Saxon), adjective and noun, from Proto-Germanic *tehun
(cognates: Old Saxon tehan, Old Norse tiu, Danish ti, Old Frisian tian, Old Dutch ten, Dutch tien,
Old High German zehan, German zehn, Gothic taihun ten).    The Germanic words are from PIE *dekm ten
(cognates: Sanskrit dasa, Avestan dasa, Armenian tasn, Greek deka, Latin decem (source of Spanish
diez, French dix), Old Church Slavonic deseti, Lithuanian desimt, Old Irish deich, Breton dek, Welsh
deg, Albanian djetu ten).    Meaning ten o'clock is from 1712. Tenner ten-pound note is slang first
recorded 1861; as ten-dollar bill, 1887 (ten-spot in this sense dates from 1848). The Texan's
exaggerated ten-gallon hat is from 1919. The ten-foot pole that you wouldn't touch something with
(1909) was originally a 40-foot pole; the notion is of keeping one's distance, the same as in the
advice to use a long spoon when you dine with the devil. Ten-four I understand, message received, is
attested in popular jargon from 1962, from use in CB and police radio 10-code (in use in U.S. by
1950).


tenable (adj.)

capable of being held or maintained, 1570s, from Middle French tenable, from Old French (12c.), from
tenir to hold, from Latin tenere to hold, keep (see tenet).


tenacious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin stem of tenacity + -ous. Related: Tenaciously; tenaciousness.


tenacity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French t&eacute;nacit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin tenacitas an
act of holding fast, from tenax (genitive tenacis) holding fast, gripping, clingy; firm, steadfast,
from tenere to hold (see tenet).


tenant (n.)

early 14c., person who holds lands by title or by lease, from Anglo-French tenaunt (late 13c.), Old
French tenant possessor; feudal tenant (12c.), noun use of present participle of tenir to hold, from
Latin tenere hold, keep, grasp (see tenet). Related: Tenancy. Tenant-farmer attested from 1748.


tend (v.1)

to incline, to move in a certain direction, early 14c., from Old French tendre stretch out, hold
forth, hand over, offer (11c.), from Latin tendere to stretch, extend, make tense; aim, direct;
direct oneself, hold a course (see tenet).


tend (v.2)

attend to, c.1200, a shortening of Middle English atenden (see attend).


tendency (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin tendentia inclination, leaning, from Latin tendens, present participle of
tendere to stretch, extend, aim (see tenet). Earlier in same sense was tendaunce (mid-15c.), from
Old French tendance.


tendential (adj.)

1877, from Latin stem of tendency + -al (1). Related: Tendentially.   Tendenzi&#246;se is a term
that has become very common in Germany to describe the T&#252;bingen criticism, and has arisen from
the lengths to which theologians of this school have shown themselves ready to go, to establish the
hypothesis that the New Testament writings arose out of conflicting tendencies in the early church
and efforts to bring about compromises between these factions. The word has been transferred in the
translation under the form tendential. [translator's preface to Hermeneutics of the New Testament by
Dr. Abraham Immer, translated by Albert H. Newman, 1877]


tendentious (adj.)

having a definite purpose, 1871, formed after or from German tendenzi&ouml;s, from Tendenz tendency,
from Medieval Latin tendentia (see tendency).


tender (adj.)

soft, easily injured, early 13c., from Old French tendre soft, delicate; young (11c.), from Latin
tenerem (nominative tener) soft, delicate; of tender age, youthful, from a derivative of PIE root
*ten- stretch (see tenet), on the notion of stretched, hence thin, hence weak or young. Compare
Sanskrit tarunah young, tender, Greek teren tender, delicate, Armenian t'arm young, fresh, green.
Meaning kind, affectionate, loving first recorded early 14c. Meaning having the delicacy of youth,
immature is attested in English from early 14c. Related: Tenderly; tenderness. Tender-hearted first
recorded 1530s.


tender (v.)

to offer formally, 1540s, from Middle French tendre to offer, hold forth (11c.), from Latin tendere
to stretch, extend (see tenet). The retention of the ending of the French infinitive is unusual (see
render (v.) for another example). The noun meaning formal offer for acceptance is from 1540s;
specific sense of money that may be legally offered as payment is from 1740; hence legal tender
currency.


tender (n.)

person who tends another, late 15c., probably an agent noun formed from Middle English tenden attend
to (see tend (v.2)); later extended to locomotive engineers (1825) and barmen (1883). The meaning
small boat used to attend larger ones first recorded 1670s.


tenderfoot (n.)

1866, American English, originally of newcomers to ranching or mining districts, from tender (adj.)
+ foot (n.). The U.S. equivalent of what in Great Britain was generally called a greenhand. As a
level in Boy Scouting, it is recorded from 1908.    Among the Indians, more than half of every
sentence is expressed by signs. And miners illustrate their conversation by the various terms used
in mining. I have always noticed how clearly these terms conveyed the idea sought. Awkwardness in
comprehending this dialect easily reveals that the hearer bears the disgrace of being a pilgrim, or
a tender-foot, as they style the new emigrant. [A Year in Montana, Atlantic Monthly, August 1866]
Tender-footed (adj.) cautious, originally of horses, is recorded from 1680s; of persons from 1854.


tenderize (v.)

1733, from tender + -ize. Specifically of food, recorded by 1935, originally American English.
Related: Tenderized; tenderizing.


tenderizer (n.)

1942, agent noun from tenderize.


tenderloin (n.)

1828, tender part of a loin of pork or beef, from tender (adj.) + loin. The slang meaning police
district noted for vice appeared first 1887 in New York, on the notion of the neighborhood of the
chief theaters, restaurants, etc., being the juciest cut for graft and blackmail.


tendinitis (n.)

1900, from Medieval Latin tendinis, genitive of tendo (see tendon) + -itis.


tendon (n.)

1540s, from Medieval Latin tendonem (nominative tendo), altered (by influence of Latin tendere to
stretch) from Late Latin tenon, from Greek tenon (genitive tenontos) tendon, sinew, from PIE *ten-
on- something stretched, from root *ten- to stretch (see tenet).


tendonitis (n.)

see tendinitis.


tendril (n.)

leafless plant-organ attaching to another for support, 1530s, from Middle French tendrillon bud,
shoot, cartilage, perhaps a diminutive of tendron cartilage, from Old French tendre soft (see tender
(adj.)), or else from Latin tendere to stretch, extend (see tender (v.)).


tenebrism (n.)

1959, with -ism + tenebroso (1886), in reference to 17c. Italian painters in the style of
Caravaggio, from Italian tenebroso dark, from Latin tenebrosus dark, gloomy, from tenebrae darkness
(see temerity).


tenebrous (adj.)

full of darkness, late 15c., from Old French tenebros dark, gloomy (11c., Modern French
t&#233;n&#233;breux), from Latin tenebrosus dark, from tenebrae darkness (see temerity). Related:
Tenebrosity.


tenement (n.)

c.1300, holding of immovable property (such as land or buildings,) from Anglo-French (late 13c.),
Old French tenement fief, land, possessions, property (12c.), from Medieval Latin tenementum a
holding, fief (11c.), from Latin tenere to hold (see tenet). The meaning dwelling place, residence
is attested from early 15c.; tenement house house broken up into apartments, usually in a poor
section of a city is first recorded 1858, American English, from tenament in an earlier sense
(especially in Scotland) large house constructed to be let to a number of tenants (1690s).


tenesmus (n.)

a straining (to void the contents of the bowels), 1520s, medical Latin, from Greek tenesmos a
straining, from teinein to stretch (see tenet).


tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


tenfold (adj.)

Old English tienfeald; see ten + -fold. As an adverb in modern use from 1530s.


Tennessee

state and river, from Cherokee (Iroquoian) village name ta'nasi', of unknown origin. Related:
Tennesseean.


tennis (n.)

mid-14c., most likely from Anglo-French tenetz hold! receive! take!, from Old French tenez,
imperative of tenir to hold, receive, take (see tenet), which was used as a call from the server to
his opponent. The original version of the game (a favorite sport of medieval French knights) was
played by striking the ball with the palm of the hand, and in Old French was called la paulme,
literally the palm, but to an onlooker the service cry would naturally seem to identify the game.
Century Dictionary says all of this is purely imaginary.    The use of the word for the modern game
is from 1874, short for lawn tennis, which originally was called sphairistike (1873), from Greek
sphairistike (tekhne) (skill) in playing at ball, from the root of sphere. It was invented, and
named, by Maj. Walter C. Wingfield and first played at a garden party in Wales, inspired by the
popularity of badminton.    The name 'sphairistike,' however, was impossible (if only because people
would pronounce it as a word of three syllables to rhyme with 'pike') and it was soon rechristened.
[Times of London, June 10, 1927] Tennis-ball attested from mid-15c.; tennis-court from 1560s;
tennis-elbow from 1883; tennis-shoes from 1887.


Tenochtitlan

former Aztec city, Nahuatl (Aztecan), literally place of the nopal rock, from tetl rock + nuchtli
nopal, a species of cactus sacred to the sun god.


tenon (n.)

projection inserted to make a joint, late 14c., from Middle French tenon a tenon, from Old French
tenir to hold (see tenet). As a verb from 1590s.


tenor (n.)

c.1300, general meaning, prevailing course, purpose, drift, from Old French tenor substance,
contents, meaning, sense; tenor part in music (13c. Modern French teneur), from Latin tenorem
(nominative tenor) a course, originally continuance, uninterrupted course, a holding on, from tenere
to hold (see tenet). The musical sense of high male voice is attested from late 14c. in English, so-
called because the sustained melody (canto fermo) was carried by the tenor's part. Meaning singer
with a tenor voice is from late 15c. As an adjective in this sense from 1520s.


tenpins (n.)

c.1600, from ten + plural of pin (n.). From the number of pins to be knocked down.


tense (adj.)

stretched tight, 1660s, from Latin tensus, past participle of tendere to stretch, extend (see
tenet). Figurative sense of in a state of nervous tension is first recorded 1821. Related: Tensely;
tenseness.


tense (n.)

form of a verb showing time of an action or state, early 14c., tens time, also tense of a verb (late
14c.), from Old French tens time, period of time, era; occasion, opportunity; weather (11c., Modern
French temps), from Latin tempus a portion of time (also source of Spanish tiempo, Italian tempo;
see temporal).


tense (v.)

to make tense, 1670s, from tense (adj.); intransitive sense of to become tense (often tense up) is
recorded from 1946. Related: Tensed; tensing.


tensile (adj.)

1620s, stretchable, from Modern Latin tensilis capable of being stretched, from Latin tensus, past
participle of tendere to stretch (see tenet). Meaning pertaining to tension is from 1841.


tension (n.)

1530s, a stretched condition, from Middle French tension (16c.) or directly from Latin tensionem
(nominative tensio) a stretching (in Medieval Latin a struggle, contest), noun of state from tensus,
past participle of tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- stretch (see tenet). The sense of nervous
strain is first recorded 1763. The meaning stress along lines of electromotive force (as in high-
tension wires) is recorded from 1785.


tensor (n.)

muscle that stretches or tightens a part, 1704, Modern Latin agent noun from tens-, past participle
stem of Latin tendere to stretch (see tenet).


tent (n.)

c.1300, portable shelter of skins or coarse cloth stretched over poles, from Old French tente tent,
hanging, tapestry (12c.), from Medieval Latin tenta a tent, literally something stretched out, noun
use of fem. singular of Latin tentus stretched, variant past participle of tendere to stretch (see
tenet). The notion is of stretching hides over a framework. Tent caterpillar first recorded 1854, so
called from the tent-like silken webs in which they live gregariously.


tent (v.)

to camp in a tent, 1856, from tent (n.). Earlier to pitch a tent (1550s). Related: Tented; tenting.


tentacle (n.)

1762, from Modern Latin tentaculum, literally feeler, from Latin tentare to feel, try + -culum,
diminutive suffix. Related: Tentacular.


tentative (adj.)

1580s, from Medieval Latin tentativus trying, testing, from Latin tentatus, past participle of
tentare to feel, try. Related: Tentatively; tentativeness.


tenter (n.)

c.1300, wooden framework for stretching cloth, of uncertain origin, probably via Old French (but the
evolution of the ending is obscure), and ultimately from Latin tentorium tent made of stretched
skins, from tentus stretched, variant past participle of tendere to stretch (see tenet).


tenterhooks (n.)

plural of tenterhook (late 15c.), one of the hooks that holds cloth on a tenter, from tenter + hook
(n.). The figurative phrase on tenterhooks in painful suspense is from 1748; earlier to be on
tenters (1530s).


tenth (adj.)

mid-12c., ten&eth;e; see ten + -th (1). Replacing Old English teo&eth;a (West Saxon), tei&eth;a
(Northumbrian), which is preserved in tithe. Compare Old Saxon tehando, Old Frisian tegotha, Dutch
tiende, Old High German zehanto, German zehnte, Gothic taihunda. As a noun from c.1200.


tenuious (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin tenuis thin (see tenuous) + -ous.


tenuous (adj.)

1590s, thin, unsubstantial, irregularly formed from Latin tenuis thin, drawn out, meager, slim,
slender, figuratively trifling, insignificant, poor, low in rank, from PIE root *ten- to stretch
(cognates: Sanskrit tanuh thin, literally stretched out; see tenet) + -ous. The correct form with
respect to the Latin is tenuious. The figurative sense of having slight importance, not substantial
is found from 1817 in English. Related: Tenuously; tenuousness.


tenure (n.)

early 15c., holding of a tenement, from Anglo-French and Old French tenure a tenure, estate in land
(13c.), from Old French tenir to hold, from Vulgar Latin *tenire, from Latin tenere to hold (see
tenet). The sense of condition or fact of holding a status, position, or occupation is first
attested 1590s. Meaning guaranteed tenure of office (usually at a university or school) is recorded
from 1957. Related: Tenured (1961).


teocalli (n.)

place of worship of ancient Mexicans, 1570s, from American Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) teohcalli
temple, church, literally god-house, from teotl god + calli house.


teonanacatl (n.)

native name for a hallucinogenic fungi (Psilocybe mexicana) found in Central America, 1875, from
Nahuatl (Aztecan), from teotl god + nancatl mushroom.


tepee (n.)

1743, ti pee, from Dakota (Siouan) thipi dwelling, house.


tephromancy (n.)

1650s, divination by means of ashes, from Modern Latin tephromantia, from comb. form of Greek tephra
ashes + manteia divination, from mantis prophet (see mania).


tepid (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin tepidus lukewarm, from tepere be moderately warm, from PIE root *tep- to be hot
(cognates: Sanskrit tapati makes warm, heats, burns, tapas heat, austerity; Avestan tafnush fever;
Old Church Slavonic topiti to warm, teplu warm; Old Irish tene fire; Welsh tes heat). Related:
Tepidly; tepidity.


tequila (n.)

Mexican brandy, 1849 (from 1841 as vino de Tequila), from American Spanish tequila, from Tequila,
name of a district in central Mexico noted for the fine quality of its tequila. Tequila sunrise is
attested by 1965.


ter-

word-forming element meaning thrice, three times, from Latin ter thrice, from *tris-, from root of
three. Compare Latin tertius third.


tera-

prefix meaning trillion, used in forming large units of measure (such as terabyte), officially
adopted 1947, from Greek teras marvel, monster (see terato-).


terabyte (n.)

by 1982, from tera- + byte.


terato-

before vowels terat-, word-forming element meaning marvel, monster, from comb. form of Greek teras
(genitive teratos) marvel, sign, wonder, monster, from PIE *kewr-es-, from root *kwer- to make, form
(cognates: Sanskrit krta- make, do, perform, Lithuanian keras charm, Old Church Slavonic &#269;aru
charm).


teratogen (n.)

1959, from terato- marvel, monster + -gen.


teratogenic (adj.)

causing the formation of monsters, 1873, from teratogeny + -ic; probably based on German teratogenic
(by 1856).


teratogeny (n.)

the production of monsters, 1855, from terato- + -geny. Related: Teratogenesis.


teratology (n.)

study of marvels and monstrosities, 1842, from terato- + -logy. Earlier it meant marvelous narrative
(1670s), from Greek teratologia a telling of marvels. Related: Teratological; teratologist.


teratoscopy (n.)

augury from prodigies, 1660s; see terato- + -scopy.


terbium (n.)

1843, from Latinized form of Ytterby, Swedish town near the place where mineral containing the
element was found (see Ytterbium) + -ium.


tercel (n.)

male falcon, late 14c., from Old French tercel (c.1200), from Medieval Latin tertiolus, from Latin
tertius third, a third, from root of tres three (see three). Various theories as to why it is called
this; one says it's because the males are a third smaller than the females, another because a third
egg in the nest (smaller than the other two) is believed always to produce a male bird.


tercentenary (adj.)

1832, pertaining to a period of 300 years, from ter- three times + centenary. As a noun from 1835.
Related: Tercentennial (1862 as an adjective; 1872 as a noun).


terceroon (n.)

offspring of a white and a mulatto, 1760, from Spanish *terceron, from tercero a third (person),
from tercio third, from Latin tertius a third, from root of tres three (see three). So called from
being third in descent from a Negro.


tercet (n.)

three successive lines rhyming together, 1590s, from Italian terzetto, diminutive of terzo third,
from Latin tertius (see third). Spelling influenced by French tercet, from the Italian.


terebinth (n.)

Mediterranean tree, a member of the sumac family, late 14c., from Old French therebint (13c.), from
Latin terebinthus (Pliny), from Greek terebinthos, earlier terminthos, probably from a non-Indo-
European language (Klein suggests Creto-Minoic). The tree is the source of Chian turpentine.
Related: Terebinthine; terebinthaceous.


tergiversate (v.)

1650s, back-formation from tergiversation, or else from Latin tergiversatus, past participle of
tergiversari be evasive, literally to turn one's back. Related: Tergiversated; tergiversating.


tergiversation (n.)

turning dishonestly from a straightforward action or statement; shifting, shuffling, equivocation,
1560s, from Latin tergiversationem (nominative tergiversatio) a shifting, evasion, declining,
refusing, from past participle stem of tergiversari turn one's back on, evade, from tergum the back
(of unknown origin) + versare to spin, turn (see versus).


teriyaki

1962, from Japanese, from teri gloss, luster + yaki roast.


term (n.)

c.1200, terme limit in time, set or appointed period, from Old French terme limit of time or place,
date, appointed time, duration (11c.), from Latin terminus end, boundary line, in Medieval Latin
expression, definition, related to termen boundary, end (see terminus). Old English had termen term,
end, from Latin. Sense of period of time during which something happens first recorded c.1300,
especially of a school or law court session (mid-15c.).    The meaning word or phrase used in a
limited or precise sense is first recorded late 14c., from Medieval Latin use of terminus to render
Greek horos boundary, employed in mathematics and logic. Hence in terms of in the language or
phraseology peculiar to. Meaning completion of the period of pregnancy is from 1844. Term-paper in
U.S. educational sense is recorded from 1931.


term (v.)

to give a particular name to, 1550s, from term (n.). Related: Termed; terming.


termagant (n.)

c.1500, violent, overbearing person (especially of women), from Teruagant, Teruagaunt (c.1200), name
of a fictitious Muslim deity appearing in medieval morality plays, from Old French Tervagant, a
proper name in Chanson de Roland (c.1100), of uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1590s.


terminable (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin stem of terminate (v.) + -able.


terminal (adj.)

mid-15c., relating to or marking boundaries, from Latin terminalis pertaining to a boundary or end,
final, from terminus end, boundary line (see terminus). Meaning fatal (terminal illness) is first
recorded 1891. Sense of situated at the extreme end (of something) is from 1805. Slang meaning
extreme first recorded 1983. Related: Termninally.


terminal (n.)

end point of a railway line, 1888, from terminal (adj.); sense of device for communicating with a
computer is first recorded 1954. Earlier final part of a word (1831).


terminate (v.)

early 15c., bring to an end, from Latin terminatus, past participle of terminare to limit, set
bounds, end (see terminus). Intransitive sense of to come to an end is recorded from 1640s; meaning
dismiss from a job is recorded from 1973; that of to assassinate is from 1975. Related: Terminated;
terminating.


termination (n.)

late 14c., authoritative resolution of a matter, from Old French terminacion (13c.) and directly
from Latin terminationem (nominative terminatio) a fixing of boundaries, a bounding, determining,
noun of action from past participle stem of terminare to limit, end (see terminus). Meaning end of a
person's employment is recorded from 1961; meaning artificial end of a pregnancy is attested from
1969; sense of assasination is recorded from 1975.


terminator (n.)

1770, line of separation between the bright and dark parts of a moon or planet, from Late Latin
terminator he who sets bounds, agent noun from terminare (see terminus). Meaning one who terminates
(something) is attested from 1846.


terminer (n.)

a determining, legal term, from French terminer to end, in Old French to decide, rule on, from Latin
terminare (see terminus; also see oyer).


terminology (n.)

1770, from German Terminologie, a hybrid coined by Christian Gottfried Sch&uuml;tz (1747-1832),
professor of poetry and rhetoric at Jena, from Medieval Latin terminus word, expression (see
terminus) + Greek -logia a dealing with, a speaking of (see -logy). Related: Terminological.


terminus (n.)

1550s, goal, end, final point, from Latin terminus (plural termini) end, boundary line, from PIE
*ter-men-, from root *ter-, base of words meaning peg, post, boundary, marker, goal (cognates:
Sanskrit tarati passes over, crosses over, tarantah sea; Hittite tarmaizzi he limits; Greek terma
boundary, end, limit; Gothic &#254;airh, Old English &#254;urh through; Old English &#254;yrel hole;
Old Norse &#254;r&#246;mr edge, chip, splinter).    In ancient Rome, Terminus was the name of the
deity who presided over boundaries and landmarks, focus of the important Roman festival of
Terminalia (held Feb. 23, the end of the old Roman year). Meaning either end of a transportation
line is first recorded 1836.


termite (n.)

1849, back-formation from plural form termites (1781), from Modern Latin termites (three syllables),
plural of termes (genitive termitis), a special use of Late Latin termes woodworm, white ant,
altered (by influence of Latin terere to rub, wear, erode) from earlier Latin tarmes. Their nest is
a terminarium (1863). Earlier in English known as wood ant or white ant.


terms (n.)

limiting conditions, early 14c.; see term (n.). Hence expressions such as come to terms, make terms,
on any terms, etc. Meaning standing, footing, mutual relations, as in expression on good terms (with
someone), is recorded from 1540s.


tern (n.)

gull-like shore bird (subfamily Sterninae), 1670s, via East Anglian dialect, from a Scandinavian
source (compare Danish terne, Swedish t&auml;rna, F&aelig;roese terna) related to Old Norse
&thorn;erna tern (also maid-servant), cognate with Old English stearn.


ternary (adj.)

threefold, early 15c., from Late Latin ternarius consisting of three, from terni three by three,
from ter thrice, which is related to tres three (see three).


Terpsichore (n.)

the muse of the dance, Greek Terpsikhore, literally enjoyment of dance, from terpein to delight
(from PIE root *terp- to satisfy; cognates: Sanskrit trpyati takes one's fill, Lithuanian tarpstu to
thrive, prosper) + khoros dance, chorus (see chorus).


terpsichorean (adj.)

pertaining to dancing, 1869, literally of Terpsichore, from Latinized form of Greek Terpsikhore,
muse of dancing and dramatic chorus (see Terpsichore). Hence theatrical slang terp stage dancer,
chorus girl (1937).


terr (n.)

Rhodesian slang abbreviation of terrorist, 1976, used in reference to guerrilla fighting against
white minority government.


terra (n.)

Latin, literally earth (see terrain).


terra firma (n.)

c.1600, part of the Italian mainland ruled by Venice, from Modern Latin terra firma, literally firm
land, from Latin terra earth, land  (see terrain) + firma firm, fem. of firmus (see firm (adj.)).
Meaning the land (as distinct from the sea) is first attested 1690s.


terra incognita (n.)

unknown or unexplored region, 1610s, Latin, literally unknown land, from terra (see terrain) + fem.
of incognito.


terra-cotta (n.)

1722, from Italian terra cotta, literally cooked earth, from terra earth (see terrain) + cotta
baked, from Latin cocta, fem. past participle of coquere (see cook (n.)). As a color name for
brownish-red, attested from 1882.


terrace (n.)

1510s, gallery, portico, balcony, later flat, raised place for walking (1570s), from Middle French
terrace (Modern French terasse), from Old French terrasse (12c.) platform (built on or supported by
a mound of earth), from Vulgar Latin *terracea, fem. of *terraceus earthen, earthy, from Latin terra
earth, land (see terrain). As a natural formation in geology, attested from 1670s. In street names,
originally in reference to a row of houses along the top of a slope, but lately applied arbitrarily
as a fancy name for an ordinary road. As a verb from 1610s, to form into a terrace. Related:
Terraced.


terrain (n.)

1727, ground for training horses, from French terrain piece of earth, ground, land, from Old French
(12c.), from Vulgar Latin *terranum, from Latin terrenum land, ground, noun use of neuter of
terrenus of earth, earthly, from terra earth, land, literally dry land (as opposed to sea); from PIE
root *ters- to dry (cognates: Sanskrit tarsayati dries up, Avestan tarshu- dry, solid, Greek
teresesthai to become or be dry, Latin torrere dry up, parch, Gothic &thorn;aursus dry, barren, Old
High German thurri, German d&uuml;rr, Old English &thorn;yrre dry; Old English &thorn;urstig
thirsty). Meaning tract of country, considered with regard to its natural features first attested
1766.


terran (adj.)

of or pertaining to the planet Earth, 1881, in science fiction writing, from Latin terra (see
terrain). Also used as a noun meaning inhabitant of the Earth (1953). An earlier form, terrene was
used in Middle English in sense of belonging to this world, earthly, secular, temporal (c.1300),
later, of the Earth as a planet (1630s).


terrapin (n.)

North American turtle, 1670s, earlier torope (1610s), from an Algonquian source (such as Abenaki
turepe, Munsee (Delaware) tolpew turtle). Subsequently extended to allied species in South America,
East Indies, China, North Africa.


terraqueous (adj.)

consisting of both land and water, 1650s, from comb. form of Latin terra earth (see terrain) +
aqueous.


terrarium (n.)

1877, from Modern Latin, formed from Latin terra land (see terrain) + -arium, abstracted from
aquarium.


terrazzo (n.)

type of flooring material, 1893, from Italian terrazzo terrace, balcony (see terrace).


terrene (adj.)

earthly, terrestrial, of or pertaining to the earth, c.1300, from Anglo-French terreine, Old French
terrien, from Latin terrenus on the earth, earthly, from terra earth (see terrain).


terrestrial (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to the earth, with + -al (1) + from Latin terrestris earthly, of the
earth, on land, from terra earth (see terrain). Originally opposed to celestial; natural history
sense of living on land is attested from 1630s. The noun meaning a human being, a mortal is recorded
from 1590s.


terrible (adj.)

late 14c., causing terror, awe, or dread; frightful, from Old French terrible (12c.), from Latin
terribilis frightful, from terrere fill with fear, from PIE root *tres- to tremble (cognates:
Sanskrit trasati trembles, Avestan tarshta feared, revered, Greek tre&#235;in to tremble, Lithuanian
tri&#353;eti to tremble, Old Church Slavonic treso I shake, Middle Irish tarrach timid). Weakened
sense of very bad, awful is first attested 1590s.


terribly (adv.)

dreadfully, so as to cause terror, in a horrible manner, mid-15c., from terrible + -ly (2). In the
sense of extremely it is first recorded 1833; in the sense of extremely badly it dates from 1930.


terrier (n.)

kind of dog, early 15c., from Old French chien terrier terrier dog, literally earth dog, from
Medieval Latin terrarius of earth, from Latin terra earth (see terrain). So called because the dogs
pursue their quarry (foxes, badgers, etc.) into their burrows.


terrific (adj.)

1660s, frightening, from Latin terrificus causing terror or fear, frightful, from terrere fill with
fear (see terrible) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Weakened sensed of very great, severe
(as in terrific headache) appeared 1809; inverted colloquial sense of excellent began 1888. Related:
Terrifically.


terrify (v.)

1570s, from Latin terrificare to frighten, make afraid, from terrificus causing terror (see
terrific). Related: Terrified; terrifying.


terrine (n.)

earthenware dish, 1706, obsolete original form of tureen.


territorial (adj.)

1620s, of or pertaining to a territory, from Late Latin territorialis, from territorium (see
territory). In reference to British regiments, from 1881. In reference to an area defended by an
animal, from 1920. Territorial waters is from 1841. Territorial army British home defense is from
1908. Territorial imperative animal need to claim and defend territory is from 1966.


territoriality (n.)

possession and control of territory, 1839, as a concept in international law, from territorial +
-ity. From 1941 in reference to animal behavior.


territory (n.)

late 14c., land under the jurisdiction of a town, state, etc., probably from Latin territorium land
around a town, domain, district, from terra earth, land (see terrain) + -orium, suffix denoting
place (see -ory). Sense of any tract of land, district, region is first attested c.1600. Specific
U.S. sense of organized self-governing region not yet a state is from 1799. Of regions defended by
animals from 1774.    Since -torium is a productive suffix only after verbal stems, the rise of
terri-torium is unexplained [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic
Languages]. An alternative theory, somewhat supported by the vowels of the original Latin word,
suggests derivation from terrere to frighten (see terrible); thus territorium would mean a place
from which people are warned off.


terror (n.)

early 15c., something that intimidates, an object of fear, from Old French terreur (14c.), from
Latin terrorem (nominative terror) great fear, dread, alarm, panic; object of fear, cause of alarm;
terrible news, from terrere fill with fear, frighten, from PIE root *tres- to tremble (see
terrible).    Meaning quality of causing dread is attested from 1520s. Sense of a person fancied as
a source of terror (often with deliberate exaggeration, as of a naughty child) is recorded from
1883. Terror bombing first recorded 1941, with reference to German air attack on Rotterdam. Terror-
stricken is from 1831. The Reign of Terror in French history (March 1793-July 1794) was the period
when the nation was ruled by a faction whose leaders made policy of killing by execution anyone
deemed an impediment to their measures; so called in English from 1801. Old English words for terror
included broga and egesa.


terrorise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of terrorize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related: Terrorised;
terrorising.


terrorism (n.)

1795, in specific sense of government intimidation during the Reign of Terror in France (March
1793-July 1794), from French terrorisme, from Latin terror (see terror).    If the basis of a
popular government in peacetime is virtue, its basis in a time of revolution is virtue and terror --
virtue, without which terror would be barbaric; and terror, without which virtue would be impotent.
[Robespierre, speech in French National Convention, 1794]    General sense of systematic use of
terror as a policy is first recorded in English 1798 (in reference to the Irish Rebellion of that
year). At one time, a word for a certain kind of mass-destruction terrorism was dynamitism (1883);
and during World War I frightfulness (translating German Schrecklichkeit) was used in Britain for
deliberate policy of terrorizing enemy non-combatants.


terrorist (n.)

in the modern sense, 1944, especially in reference to Jewish tactics against the British in
Palestine -- earlier it was used of extremist revolutionaries in Russia who attempted to demoralize
the government by terror (1866); and Jacobins during the French Revolution (1795) -- from French
terroriste; see terror + -ist (also see terrorism).    The term now usually refers to a member of a
clandestine or expatriate organization aiming to coerce an established government by acts of
violence against it or its subjects. [OED]    The tendency of one party's terrorist to be another's
guerilla or freedom fighter was noted in reference to the British action in Cyprus (1956) and the
war in Rhodesia (1973). The word terrorist has been applied, at least retroactively, to the Maquis
resistance in occupied France in World War II (as in in the Spectator, Oct. 20, 1979).


terroristic (adj.)

1842, from terrorist + -ic. Related: Terroristical.


terrorize (v.)

coerce or deter by terror, 1823, from terror + -ize (also see terrorism). Related: Terrorized;
terrorizing; terrorization.


terry (n.)

loop raised in pile-weaving, left uncut, 1784, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of French
tir&eacute; drawn, from past participle of tirer draw out (compare German gezogener Sammet drawn
velvet).


terse (adj.)

1590s (implied in tersely), clean-cut, burnished, neat, from French ters clean, and directly from
Latin tersus wiped off, clean, neat, from past participle of tergere to rub, polish, wipe. Sense of
concise or pithy in style or language is from 1777, which led to a general sense of neatly concise.
The pejorative meaning brusque is a fairly recent development. Related: Terseness.


tertiary (adj.)

1650s, of the third order, rank, degree, etc., from Latin tertiarius of or pertaining to a third,
from tertius third, a third, from root of tres three (see three). The geological sense (with capital
T-) of era after the Mesozoic (which formerly was called the Secondary) is attested from 1794, after
Italian terziari, used in this sense 1760 by Italian geologist Giovanni Arduino (1714-1795).


tertium quid (n.)

something indeterminate between two other things, 1724, Latin, literally third something, from
tertius third, a third, from the root of tres three (see three). A loan-translation of Greek triton
ti (Plato), used in alchemy for unidentified element present in a combination of two known ones. The
Latin word also figures in phrases tertium non datur no third possibility exists, and tertius
gaudens a third party that benefits from conflict between the other two.


terza rima (n.)

1819, Italian, literally third rhyme. Dante's measure: a-b-a-b-c-b-c-d-c-, etc.


tesla (n.)

unit of magnetic flux density, 1960, from Nikola Tesla (1856-1943), Croatian-born U.S. engineer.
Tesla coil is attested from 1896.


tessellated (adj.)

1690s, from Late Latin tessellatus made of small square stones or tiles, past participle of
tesselare, from tessella small square stone or tile, diminutive of tessera a cube or square of stone
or wood, perhaps from Greek tessera, neuter of tesseres, Ionic variant of tessares four (see four),
in reference to four corners. Related: Tessellate (v.), a 1791 back-formation (from 1826 as an
adjective, 1909 as a noun); tessellating.


tessellation (n.)

minute arrangement of parts or colors, 1650s, noun of action from Late Latin tessellatus (see
tessellated).


tessera (n.)

plural tesserae, small, square piece of stone, 1650s, from Latin tessera a die, cube, square tablet
with writing on it used as a token or ticket, from Ionic Greek tessera, neuter of tesseres (Attic
tessares) four (see four).


tesseract (n.)

four-dimensional 'cube,' 1888, from tessera + Greek aktis ray (see actino-).


test (n.)

late 14c., small vessel used in assaying precious metals, from Old French test, from Latin testum
earthen pot, related to testa piece of burned clay, earthen pot, shell (see tete).    Sense of trial
or examination to determine the correctness of something is recorded from 1590s. The connecting
notion is ascertaining the quality of a metal by melting it in a pot. Test Act was the name given to
various laws in English history meant to exclude Catholics and Nonconformists from office,
especially that of 1673, repealed 1828. Test drive (v.) is first recorded 1954.


test (v.)

1748, to examine the correctness of, from test (n.), on the notion of put to the proof. Earlier
assay gold or silver in a test (c.1600). Meaning to administer a test is from 1939; sense of undergo
a test is from 1934. Related: Tested; testing.


test-tube (n.)

1809, from test (n.) + tube (n.). So called because it originally was used to test the properties of
liquids. Test-tube baby is recorded from 1935.


testament (n.)

late 13c., last will disposing of property, from Latin testamentum a last will, publication of a
will, from testari make a will, be witness to, from testis witness, from PIE *tri-st-i- third person
standing by, from root *tris- three (see three) on the notion of third person, disinterested
witness.    Use in reference to the two divisions of the Bible (early 14c.) is from Late Latin vetus
testamentum and novum testamentum, loan-translations of Greek palaia diatheke and kaine diatheke.
Late Latin testamentum in this case was a confusion of the two meanings of Greek diatheke, which
meant both covenant, dispensation and will, testament, and was used in the former sense in the
account of the Last Supper (see testimony) but subsequently was interpreted as Christ's last will.


testamentary (adj.)

pertaining to a will or wills, mid-15c., from Latin testamentarius, from testamentum (see
testament).


testate (adj.)

having left a valid will, late 15c., from Latin testatus public, manifest, published, past
participle of testari make a will, be witness to, declare (see testament).


testator (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French testatour (c.1300), from Late Latin testator one who makes a will, from
testari (see testate). Fem. form testatrix is attested from 1590s.


tester (n.1)

one who tests, puts to trial, or assays, 1660s, agent noun from test (v.). Earlier a crucible for
trying metals by heating them (mid-15c.).


tester (n.2)

canopy over a four-post bed, mid-14c., from Medieval Latin testerium, from testera head-stall of the
bridle of a horse, extended use and form of Late Latin testa skull, in Vulgar Latin head (see tete).
From Medieval Latin testa as head also come tester in obsolete senses of piece of armor for the head
(late 14c., via Old French testiere) and coin of Henry VIII (1546), the first English coin to bear a
true portrait.


testes (n.)

see testis.


testicle (n.)

early 15c., alteration of testicule (late 14c.), from Latin testiculus, diminutive of testis
testicle (see testis). Old English had beallucas (see ballocks) and her&thorn;an, probably
originally leather bag (compare heor&thorn;a deer-skin). The commonest slang terms for them in other
languages are words that mean balls, stones, nuts, eggs.


testicular (adj.)

1650s, from Latin testiculus (see testicle) + -ar.


testify (v.)

late 14c., give legal testimony, affirm the truth of, bear witness to; of things, c.1400, serve as
evidence of, from Anglo-French testifier, from Latin testificari bear witness, show, demonstrate,
also call to witness, from testis a witness (see testament) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Biblical sense of openly profess one's faith and devotion is attested from 1520s.
Related: Testified; testifying; testification.


testimonial (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to testimony, in part from testimonial (n.) and from Late Latin
testimonialis, from Latin testimonium (see testimony). Originally especially in phrase letters
testimonial (Middle French lettres testimoniaulx, Latin litter&aelig; testimoniales) document or
documents attesting to a fact or to the good standing of the bearer, literally letters serving for
evidence.


testimonial (n.)

statement, declaration, also writing testifying to one's qualification or character, early 15c.
(from Old French testimonial, variant of tesmoignal), short for letters testimonial (see testimonial
(adj.)). Meaning gift presented as an expression of appreciation is from 1838.


testimony (n.)

c.1400, proof or demonstration of some fact, evidence, piece of evidence; early 15c., legal
testimony, sworn statement of a witness, from Old North French testimonie (Old French testimoine
11c.), from Latin testimonium evidence, proof, witness, attestation, from testis a witness, one who
attests (see testament) + -monium, suffix signifying action, state, condition. Despite the common
modern assertion, the sense of the word is unlikely to have anything to do with testicles (see
testis).    Earliest attested sense in English is the Ten Commandments (late 14c.), from Vulgate use
of Late Latin testimonium, along with Greek to martyrion (Septuagint), translations of Hebrew 'eduth
attestation, testimony (of the Decalogue), from 'ed witness.


testis (n.)

(plural testes), 1704, from Latin testis testicle, usually regarded as a special application of
testis witness (see testament), presumably because it bears witness to male virility [Barnhart].
Stories that trace the use of the Latin word to some supposed swearing-in ceremony are modern and
groundless.    Compare Greek parastatai testicles, from parastates one that stands by; and French
slang t&eacute;moins, literally witnesses. But Buck thinks Greek parastatai testicles has been
wrongly associated with the legal sense of parastates supporter, defender and suggests instead
parastatai in the sense of twin supporting pillars, props of a mast, etc. Or it might be a
euphemistic use of the word in the sense comrades. OED, meanwhile, points to Walde's suggestion of a
connection between testis and testa pot, shell, etc. (see tete).


testosterone (n.)

male sex hormone, 1935, from German Testosteron (1935), coined from a presumed comb. form of Latin
testis testicle (see testis) + first syllable of sterol + chemical ending -one.


testy (adj.)

early 15c., impetuous, rash, altered from Middle English testif headstrong (late 14c.), from Anglo-
French testif, Old French testu (Modern French t&#234;tu) stubborn, headstrong, obstinate, literally
heady, from teste head (see tete). Meaning easily irritated, irascible is first recorded 1520s.
Related: Testily; testiness.


Tet (n.)

Vietnamese lunar new year, 1885, short for Tet Nguyen Dan feast of the first day. The North
Vietnamese Tet Offensive in the U.S. Vietnam War began Jan. 30, 1968.


tetanus (n.)

infectious disease, late 14c., from Latin tetanus tetanus, from Greek tetanos tetanus, muscular
spasm, literally a stretching, tension, from teinein to stretch (see tenet); so called because the
disease is characterized by violent spasms and stiffness of the muscles [Barnhart]. Related:
Tetanoid (adj.).


tetany (n.)

1890, from French t&eacute;tanie intermitent tetanus, from Modern Latin tetania (see tetanus).


tetched (adj.)

1930, U.S. colloquial variant of touched in the sense of slightly crazy (see touch (v.)).


tetchy (adj.)

easily irritated, 1592, teachie, in Romeo &amp; Juliet I.iii.32; of uncertain origin. Perhaps from
Middle English tatch a mark, quality, derived via Old French from Vulgar Latin *tecca, from a
Germanic source akin to Old English tacen (see token).


tete (n.)

as a type of women's tall dressed hair or wig, 1756, from French t&ecirc;te head, Old French teste,
from Latin testa, literally piece of earthenware, tile, potsherd; earthen pot, pitcher, jug; shell
of shellfish, related to  Latin testudo tortoise and texere to weave (compare Lithuanian ti&#353;tas
vessel made of willow twigs; see texture (n.)).    The head sense arose in Vulgar Latin, perhaps as
a humorous use of the jug, pot meaning, or via Late Latin use of testa as skull, from testa
(capitis) shell (of the head). Compare German Kopf head from the root of English cup (n.).


tete-a-tete (n.)

a private meeting, from French t&#234;te-&#224;-t&#234;te, literally head-to-head, from Old French
teste head (see tete). The adjective, private, confidential, with none present but the persons
concerned is recorded from 1728; as an adverb from 1790.


tether (n.)

late 14c., rope for fastening an animal, not found in Old English, probably from a Scandinavian
source akin to Old Norse tjo&eth;r tether, from Proto-Germanic *teudran (cognates: Danish
t&oslash;ir, Old Swedish tiuther, Swedish tjuder, Old Frisian tiader, Middle Dutch tuder, Dutch
tuier line, rope, Old High German zeotar pole of a cart), from PIE root *deu- to fasten +
instrumentive suffix *-tro-. Figurative sense of measure of one's limitations is attested from
1570s.


tether (v.)

late 14c. (implied in tethering), confine by a tether, originally of grazing animals, from tether
(n.). Figurative use also from late 14c. Related: Tethered.


tetherball (n.)

also tether-ball, 1900, from tether (n.) + ball (n.1).


Tethys

name for the sea that anciently lay between Eurasia and Africa-Arabia, coined 1893 by German
geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914), from Tethys, name of a Greek sea goddess, sister and consort of
Oceanus.


Teton (n.)

member of a western Sioux people, 1806, from Dakota titonwan, literally dwellers on the prairie,
from thi + huwa. Not related to the Grand Teton mountain range.


tetra-

before vowels tet-, word-forming element meaning four, from Greek tetra-, combining form of tettares
(Attic), tessares the numeral four (see four).


tetracycline (n.)

1952, with chemical suffix -ine (2) + tetracyclic containing four fused hydrocarbon rings, from
tetra- + cyclic (see cycle (n.)).


tetrad (n.)

the number four, collection of four things, 1650s, from Greek tetras (comb. form tetrad-) group of
four, number four (see tetra-).


tetragrammaton (n.)

c.1400, from Greek (to) tetragrammaton (the word) of four letters, from tetra- four (see four) +
gramma (genitive grammatos) letter, something written (see grammar). The Hebrew divine name,
transliterated as YHWH, usually vocalized in English as Jehovah or Yahweh.


tetrahedron (n.)

triangular pyramid, solid figure contained by four triangular surfaces, 1560s, from Late Greek
tetraedron, noun use of neuter of tetraedros (adj.) four-sided, from tetra- four (see tetra-) +
hedra seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).
Related: Tetrahedral.


tetralogy (n.)

1650s, from Greek tetralogia, from tetra- (see tetra-) + -logia (see -logy). A group of four
dramatic compositions, originally three tragedies (the trilogia) and a Satyric play.


tetrameter (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin tetrametrus, from Greek tetrametron verse of four measures (generally
trochaic), noun use of neuter of tetrametros (adj.) having four measures, from tetra- four (see
tetra-) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)).


tetrapod (n.)

four-footed animal, quadruped, 1826, from Modern Latin tetrapodus, from Greek tetrapous four-footed,
as a noun, four-footed animal, from tetra- (see tetra-) + pous (see foot n.)).


tetrarch (n.)

late Old English tetrarche ruler of one of four divisions of a kingdom or province, from Late Latin
tetrarcha, from tetrarches, from Greek tetrarkhes leader of four companies, ruler of four provinces,
from tetra- four (see tetra-) + arkhein to rule (see archon). Applied generally to subordinate
rulers in the Roman Empire, especially in Syria. Related: Tetrarchy.


tetter (n.)

skin disease, Old English teter, from a reduplicated form of PIE *der- (2) to split, peel, flay (see
tear (v.1)).


Teuton (n.)

a German, 1833, in modern use often in contrast to Celt, probably a back-formation from Teutonic.


Teutonic (adj.)

1610s, of or pertaining to the Germanic languages and to peoples or tribes who speak or spoke them,
from Latin Teutonicus, from Teutones, Teutoni, name of a tribe that inhabited coastal Germany near
the mouth of the Elbe and devastated Gaul 113-101 B.C.E., probably via Celtic from Proto-Germanic
*theudanoz, from PIE *teuta-, the common word for people, tribe (cognates: Lithuanian tauto, Oscan
touto, Old Irish tuath, Gothic &thorn;iuda, Old English &thorn;eod people, race, nation).    Used in
English in anthropology to avoid the modern political association of German; but in this
anthropological sense French uses germanique and German uses germanisch, because neither uses its
form of German for the narrower national meaning (compare French allemand, for which see Alemanni;
and German deutsch, under Dutch).    The Teutonic Knights (founded c.1191) were a military order of
German knights formed for service in the Holy Land, but who later crusaded in then-pagan Prussia and
Lithuania. The Teutonic cross (1882) was the badge of the order.


Tex

nickname for a Texan, by 1903, from Texas.


Tex-Mex (adj.)

by 1914, from Texas + Mexico. An earlier noun for Texan of Mexican background was Texican (1863).


Texas

Mexican province, briefly an independent nation and now a U.S. state, from Spanish Texas, Tejas,
earlier pronounced ta-shas, originally an ethnic name, from Caddo (eastern Texas Indian tribe)
taysha friends, allies, written by the Spanish as a plural. Related: Texan. Baseball Texas-leaguer
ball popped up just over the head of the infielders and falling too close for outfielders to catch
is recorded from 1905, named for the minor league that operated in Texas from 1902 (one theory is
that outfielders played unusually deep in Texas because hit balls bounced hard off the hard, sun-
baked ground).


text (n.)

late 14c., wording of anything written, from Old French texte, Old North French tixte text, book;
Gospels (12c.), from Medieval Latin textus the Scriptures, text, treatise, in Late Latin written
account, content, characters used in a document, from Latin textus style or texture of a work,
literally thing woven, from past participle stem of texere to weave, to join, fit together, braid,
interweave, construct, fabricate, build, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to make; make
wicker or wattle framework (see texture (n.)).    An ancient metaphor: thought is a thread, and the
raconteur is a spinner of yarns -- but the true storyteller, the poet, is a weaver. The scribes made
this old and audible abstraction into a new and visible fact. After long practice, their work took
on such an even, flexible texture that they called the written page a textus, which means cloth.
[Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style]


text (v.)

to send a text message by mobile system, 2005; see text (n.).  Related: Texted; texting. Formerly it
meant to write in text letters (1590s), text letters being a kind of large writing used by clerks in
the text or body of a manuscript (distinguished from the smaller hand used in the notes).


textbook (n.)

also text-book, book used by students, 1779, from text (n.) + book (n.). Earlier (1730) it meant
book printed with wide spaces between the lines for notes or translation (such a book would have
been used by students), from the notion of the text of a book being more open than the close notes.
As an adjective from 1916.


textile (n.)

1620s, from Latin textilis a web, canvas, woven fabric, cloth, something woven, noun use of textilis
woven, wrought, from texere to weave, from PIE root *teks- to make (see texture (n.)). As an
adjective from 1650s.


textual (adj.)

late 14c., textuel of or pertaining to text, also well-read, from Old French textuel, from Latin
textus (see text). English spelling conformed to Latin from late 15c. Related: Textually.


texture (n.)

early 15c., network, structure, from Middle French texture and directly from Latin textura web,
texture, structure, from stem of texere to weave, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to
make; make wicker or wattle framework (cognates: Sanskrit taksati he fashions, constructs, taksan
carpenter; Avestan ta&#353;a ax, hatchet, thwax&#353;- be busy; Old Persian tax&#353;- be active;
Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric; Greek tekton carpenter, tekhne art; Old Church Slavonic tesla
ax, hatchet; Lithuanian tasau to carve; Old Irish tal cooper's ax; Old High German dahs, German
Dachs badger, literally builder; Hittite taksh- to join, unite, build). Meaning structural character
is recorded from 1650s. Related: Textural.


texture (v.)

1888 (implied in textured), to give a texture to, to make not smooth or plain, from texture (n.).


TGIF

also T.G.I.F., by 1946, slang abbreviation of Thank God (or goodness), it's Friday (end of the work
week).


th

A sound found chiefly in words of Old English, Old Norse or Greek origin, unpronounceable by Normans
and many other Europeans. In Greek, the sound corresponds etymologically to Sanskrit -dh- and
English -d-; and it was represented graphically by -TH- and at first pronounced as a true aspirate
(as still in English outhouse, shithead, etc.). But by 2c. B.C.E. the Greek letter theta was in
universal use and had the modern -th- sound. Latin had neither the letter nor the sound, however,
and the Romans represented Greek theta by -TH-, which they generally pronounced, at least in Late
Latin, as simple -t- (passed down to Romanic languages, as in Spanish termal thermal, teoria theory,
teatro theater).    In Germanic languages it represents PIE *-t- and was common at the start of
words or after stressed vowels. To represent it, Old English and Old Norse used the characters &eth;
eth (a modified form of -d-) and &thorn; thorn, which originally was a rune. Old English, unlike Old
Norse, seems never to have standardized which of the two versions of the sound (hard and soft) was
represented by which of the two letters.    The digraph -th- sometimes appears in early Old English,
on the Roman model, and it returned in Middle English with the French scribes, driving out eth by
c.1250, but thorn persisted, especially in demonstratives (&thorn;at, &thorn;e, &thorn;is, etc.),
even as other words were being spelled with -th-. The advent of printing dealt its death-blow,
however, as types were imported from continental founders, who had no thorn. For a time y was used
in its place (especially in Scotland), because it had a similar shape, hence ye for the in
historical tourist trap Ye Olde _______ Shoppe (it never was pronounced ye, only spelled that way).
The awareness that some Latin words in t- were from Greek th- encouraged over-correction in English
and created unetymological forms such as Thames and author, while some words borrowed from Romanic
languages preserve, on the Roman model, the Greek -th- spelling but the simple Latin t pronunciation
(as in Thomas and thyme).


Thaddeus

masc. proper name, from Latin Thaddaeus, from Greek Thaddaios, from Talmudic Hebrew Tadday. Klein
derives this from Aramaic tedhayya (pl.) breasts. Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the New
Testament suggests the sense might be large-hearted, hence courageous. In the Bible, a surname of
the apostle Jude, brother of James the Less.


Thai

1808, native name, Tai, literally free.


Thailand

from Thai, indigenous name of the inhabitants, + land (n.). Also see Siam.


thalamus (n.)

plural thalami, 1753, the receptacle of a flower, Modern Latin, from Latin thalamus inner chamber,
sleeping room (hence, figuratively, marriage, wedlock), from Greek thalamos inner chamber, bedroom,
related to thalame den, lair, tholos vault, vaulted building. Used in English since 1756 of a part
of the forebrain where a nerve appears to originate.


thalassemia (n.)

from thalasso- sea + haima blood (see -emia).


thalasso-

before vowels thalass-, word-forming element meaning sea, the sea, from comb. form of Greek thalassa
the sea (in Homer, when used of a particular sea, the Mediterranean, as opposed to okeanos), a word
from a lost pre-Greek Mediterranean language. In Attic Greek thalatta, hence sometimes thalatto-.


thaler (n.)

old German silver coin; see dollar.


Thalia

fem. proper name, from Latinized form of Greek Thaleia, the joyful Muse, presiding over comedy and
idyllic poetry, literally the blooming one, fem. proper name from adjective meaning blooming,
luxuriant, bounteous, from thallein to bloom, related to thalia abundance, thallos young shoot (see
thallus). Also the name of one of the three Graces, patroness of festive meetings.


Thalidomide (n.)

1958, from phthalimidoglutarimide, based on abbreviated form of naphthalene; a morning-sickness drug
responsible for severe birth defects in Europe from 1956 to 1961, when it was withdrawn. It never
was approved for use in America thanks to the efforts of Dr. Helen Brooke Taussig (1898-1986).
Thalidomide baby is attested from 1962.


thallium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1861, Modern Latin, from Greek thallos young shoot, green branch (see
thallus) + element name ending -ium. So called by its discoverer, Sir William Crookes (1832-1919),
from the green line in its spectrum by which he detected it. Related: Thallic.


thallus (n.)

1829, Latin, from Greek thallos green shoot, young branch, twig, related to thalia abundance, thalos
scion, child, ultimately from PIE root *dhal- to bloom (cognates: Armenian dalar green, fresh,
Albanian dal' I sprout, Old Irish duilesc, a type of algae).


thalweg (n.)

1831, from German Thalweg path along the bottom of a valley, from thal (see dale) + weg (see way).


Thames

river through London, Old English Temese, from Latin Tamesis (51 B.C.E.), from British Tamesa, an
ancient Celtic river name perhaps meaning the dark one. The -h- is unetymological (see th).


Thammuz (n.)

1530s, from Hebrew tammuz, tenth month of the Jewish civil year, fourth of the sacred, covering
parts of June and July; also the name of a Syrian deity equivalent to Phoenician Adon, whose
festival began with the new moon of this month (compare Tammuz).


than (conj.)

Old English &thorn;an, conjunctive particle used after a comparative adjective or adverb, from
&thorn;anne, &thorn;&aelig;nne, &thorn;onne then (see then). Developed from the adverb then, and not
distinguished from it by spelling until c.1700.    The earliest use is in West Germanic comparative
forms introducing the second member, i.e. bigger than (compare Dutch dan, German denn), which
suggests a semantic development from the demonstrative sense of then: A is bigger than B, evolving
from A is bigger, then (after that) B. Or the word may trace to Old English &thorn;onne when, when
as, such as When as B is big, A is more (so).


thanage (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French thaynage (c.1300), from English thane + Old French suffix -age (see -age).


thanatism (n.)

belief that at death the soul ceases to exist, 1900, from thanato- + -ism.


thanato-

before vowels thanat-, word-forming element meaning death, from Greek thanatos death, from PIE
*dhwene- to disappear, die, perhaps from a root meaning dark, cloudy (compare Sanskrit dhvantah
dark). Hence Bryant's Thanatopsis, with Greek opsis a sight, view.


thanatology (n.)

scientific study of death, 1837, from thanato- death + -logy. In 1970s, some undertakers made a bid
to be called thanatologists; but from 1974 that word has been used principally in reference to
specialists in the needs of the terminally ill.


thanatos (n.)

death instinct, 1935, in Freudian psychology, from Greek thanatos death (see thanato-).


thane (n.)

Old English &thorn;egn military follower, one who holds lands in exchange for military service, also
vassal, retainer, attendant, from Proto-Germanic *thegnas (cognates: Old Saxon thegan follower,
warrior, boy, Old Norse &thorn;egn thane, freeman, Old High German thegan, German Degen thane,
warrior, hero), from PIE *tek-no- (cognates: Sanskrit takman descendant, child, Greek teknon child),
from root *tek- to beget, give birth to (cognates: Greek tekos child, the young of animals, tokos
childbirth, offspring, produce of money, interest). Also used in Old English for disciple of Christ.
Specific sense of man who ranks between an earl and a freeman is late 15c.    The modern spelling is
from Scottish, where early 13c. it came to mean chief of a clan, king's baron, and it has
predominated in English probably due to the influence of Macbeth; normal orthographic changes from
Old English &eth;egn would have produced Modern English *thain. Some historians now use thegn to
distinguish Anglo-Saxon thanes from Scottish thanes.


thang (n.)

by 1937, representing in print a Southern U.S. pronunciation thing.


thank (v.)

Old English &thorn;ancian, &thorn;oncian to give thanks, thank, to recompense, reward, from Proto-
Germanic *thankojan (cognates: Old Saxon thancon, Old Norse &thorn;akka, Danish takke, Old Frisian
thankia, Old High German danchon, Middle Dutch, Dutch, German danken to thank), from *thankoz
thought, gratitude, from PIE root *tong- to think, feel.    Related phonetically to think as song is
to sing; for sense evolution, compare Old High German minna loving memory, originally memory.
Related to Old English noun &thorn;anc, &thorn;onc, originally thought, but by c.1000 good thoughts,
gratitude. In ironical use, to blame, from 1550s. To thank (someone) for nothing is recorded from
1703. Related: Thanked; thanking.


thank you

polite formula used in acknowledging a favor, c.1400, short for I thank you (see thank). As a noun,
from 1792.


thankful (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ancful satisfied, grateful, also thoughtful, ingenious, clever; see thank + -ful.
Related: Thankfully; thankfulness. Thankfully in the sense thankful to say is attested by 1966, but
deplored by purists (compare hopefully).


thankless (adj.)

likely to not be rewarded with thanks, 1540s, from thank + -less. Related: Thanklessly;
thanklessness.


thanks (n.)

Old English &thorn;anc, &thorn;onc in late use grateful thought, gratitude, plural form thanks from
mid-13c., from the same root as thank (v.). Compare Old Saxon thank, Old Frisian thank, Old Norse
&#254;&#246;kk, Dutch dank, German Dank. The Old English noun originally and chiefly meant thought,
reflection, sentiment; mind, will, purpose; also grace, mercy, pardon; pleasure, satisfaction.    As
short for I give you thanks from 1580s; often with extensions, such as thanks a lot (1908). Spelling
thanx attested by 1907.


thanksgiving (n.)

1530s, the giving of thanks, from thanks (n.) + present participle of give (v.). In the specific
sense of public celebration acknowledging divine favors thanksgiving dates from 1630s (the first one
in America was held October 1621 by Plymouth Colony Pilgrims in appreciation of assistance from
members of the Massasoit tribe and celebration of the first harvest); though Thanksgiving Day itself
is not attested until 1670s.


thar

now representing dialectal pronunciation of there; in literary use in Middle English.


that (pron.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;t, that, so that, after that, neuter singular demonstrative pronoun (A
Man's a Man for a' that), relative pronoun (O thou that hearest prayer), and   demonstrative
adjective (Look at that caveman go!), corresponding to masc. se, fem. seo. From Proto-Germanic
*that, from PIE *tod-, extended form of demonstrative pronomial base *-to- (see -th (1)). With the
breakdown of the grammatical gender system, it came to be used in Middle English and Modern English
for all genders. Germanic cognates include Old Saxon that, Old Frisian thet, Middle Dutch, Dutch dat
that, German der, die, das the.    Generally more specific or emphatic than the, but in some cases
they are interchangeable. From c.1200 opposed to this as indicating something farther off. In
adverbial use (I'm that old), in reference to something implied or previously said, c.1200, an
abbreviation of the notion of to that extent, to that degree. Slang that way in love first recorded
1929. That-a-way in that direction is recorded from 1839. Take that! said while delivering a blow,
is recorded from early 15c.


thatch (v.)

late 14c., thecchen, from Old English &thorn;eccan to cover, cover over, conceal, in late Old
English specifically cover the roof of a house, related to &thorn;&aelig;c roof, thatching material,
from Proto-Germanic *thakan (cognates: Old Saxon thekkian, Old Norse &thorn;ekja, Old Frisian
thekka, Middle Dutch decken, Dutch dekken, Old High German decchen, German decken to cover), from
PIE *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).


thatch (n.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;c roof, thatch, cover of a building, from the source of thatch (v.).
Compare Old Norse &thorn;ak, Old Frisian thek, Swedish tak, Danish tag, Middle Dutch, Dutch dak
roof, Old High German dah covering, cover, German Dach roof.


thatcher (n.)

early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname); agent noun from thatch (v.). Corresponds to Old English
&thorn;ecere, Dutch dekker, German Decker. Thatcherite in British politics (1976) refers to policies
and principles of Conservative politician and prime minister Margaret Thatcher (1925-2013).


thaught (n.)

rower's bench, 1620s, alteration of thoft, from Old English &thorn;ofte, from Proto-Germanic
*thufto- (cognates: Dutch doft, German ducht), from PIE *tupta-, from root *tup- to squat.


thaumaturge (n.)

wonder-worker, 1715, from Medieval Latin thaumaturgus, from Greek thaumatourgos wonder-working;
conjurer, from thauma (genitive thaumatos) wonder, astonishment; wondrous thing, literally a thing
to look at, from root of theater, + ergon work (see organ).


thaumaturgy (n.)

wonder-working, 1727, from Greek thaumatourgia, from thaumatourgos (see thaumaturge). Related:
Thaumaturgic; thaumaturgical (1620s).


thaw (n.)

the melting of ice or snow, also spell of weather causing this, c.1400, from thaw (v.). Figurative
sense is from 1590s; specifically relaxation of political harshness or hostility from 1950, an image
from the Cold War.


thaw (v.)

Old English &thorn;awian (transitive), from Proto-Germanic *thawon- (cognates: Old Norse
&thorn;eyja, Middle Low German doien, Dutch dooien, Old High German douwen, German tauen to thaw),
from PIE root *ta- to melt, dissolve (cognates: Sanskrit toyam water, Ossetic thayun to thaw, Welsh
tawadd molten, Doric Greek takein to melt, waste, be consumed, Old Irish tam pestilence, Latin tabes
a melting, wasting away, putrefaction, Old Church Slavonic tajati to melt). Intransitive sense from
early 14c. Related: Thawed; thawing.


THC (n.)

active ingredient in marijuana and hashish, 1968, short for tetrahydrocannabinol (1940).


the

definite article, late Old English &thorn;e, nominative masculine form of the demonstrative pronoun
and adjective. After c.950, it replaced earlier se (masc.), seo (fem.), &thorn;&aelig;t (neuter),
and probably represents se altered by the th- form which was used in all the masculine oblique cases
(see below).   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1>
<tr> <td></td> <td>Masc.</td> <td>Fem.</td> <td>Neut.</td> <td>Plural</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Nom.</td>
<td>se</td> <td>seo</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;t</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Acc.</td>
<td>&thorn;one</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;t</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> </tr> <tr>
<td>Gen.</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;s</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;re</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;s</td>
<td>&thorn;ara</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Dat.</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;re</td>
<td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Inst.</td> <td>&thorn;y,
&thorn;on</td> <td>--</td> <td>&thorn;y, &thorn;on</td> <td>--</td> </tr> </table>   Old English se
is from PIE root *so- this, that (cognates: Sanskrit sa, Avestan ha, Greek ho, he the, Irish and
Gaelic so this). For the &thorn;- forms, see that. The s- forms were entirely superseded in English
by mid-13c., excepting a slightly longer dialectal survival in Kent. Old English used 10 different
words for the (see table), but did not distinguish the from that. That survived for a time as a
definite article before vowels (that one or that other).    Adverbial use in the more the merrier,
the sooner the better, etc. is a relic of Old English &thorn;y, the instrumentive case of the neuter
demonstrative (see that).


Thea

fem. proper name, from Greek thea goddess, fem. equivalent of theos god (see theo-).


theater (n.)

late 14c., open air place in ancient times for viewing spectacles and plays, from Old French theatre
(12c., Modern French th&#233;&#226;tre, improperly accented) and directly from Latin theatrum play-
house, theater; stage; spectators in a theater (source also of Spanish, Italian teatro), from Greek
theatron theater; the people in the theater; a show, a spectacle, literally place for viewing, from
theasthai to behold (related to thea a view, a seeing; a seat in the theater, theates spectator) +
-tron, suffix denoting place.    Meaning building where plays are shown is from 1570s in English.
Transferred sense of plays, writing, production, the stage is from 1660s. Generic sense of place of
action is from 1580s; especially region where war is being fought (1914). Spelling with -re arose
late 17c. and prevailed in Britain after c.1700 by French influence, but American English retained
or revived the older spelling in -er.


theatre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of theater (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


theatrical (adj.)

1550s, pertaining to the theater; see theater + -ical. Sense of stagy, histrionic is attested from
1709. Related: Theatrically; theatricality.


theatrics (n.)

1807, matters pertaining to the stage, from noun use of theatric (adj.) pertaining to the theater
(1706), from theater. Meaning theatrical behavior is attested from 1929, American English.


Thebaid (n.)

1727, district around Thebes (in Egypt), formerly haunted by hermits and ascetics. Also, pertaining
to (Boeotian) Thebes in Greece, especially in reference to the poem by Statius.


theco-

before vowels thec-, word-forming element used in botany and zoology with the sense case, capsule,
from Latinized combining form of Greek theke case, receptacle, from root of tithenai to put, place
(see theme).


thee (pron.)

Old English &thorn;e (accusative and dative singular of &thorn;u thou), from Proto-Germanic *theke
(cognates: Old Frisian thi, Middle Dutch di, Old High German dih, German dich, Old Norse &thorn;ik,
Norwegian deg, Gothic &thorn;uk), from PIE *tege-, accusative of root *tu-, second person singular
pronoun (see thou). The verb meaning to use the pronoun 'thee' to someone is recorded from 1662, in
connection with the rise of Quakerism.    In Middle English, people began to use plural forms in all
cases, at first as a sign of respect to superiors, then as a courtesy to equals. By the 1600s, the
singular forms had come to represent familiarity and lack of status, and fell from use except in the
case of a few dialects, notably in the north of England. People in Lancashire north of the
Rossendale Forest and Yorkshire formerly were noted for use of the singular second person pronouns
tha (nom.) and thee (acc.). For religious reasons (Christian equality of persons, but also justified
as grammatically correct), the Quakers also retained the familiar forms.    Thou and Thee was a sore
cut to proud flesh and them that sought self-honour, who, though they would say it to God and
Christ, could not endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and abused, and
sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words to some proud men, who would say, What! you
ill-bred clown, do you Thou me? as though Christian breeding consisted in saying You to one; which
is contrary to all their grammar and teaching books, by which they instructed their youth. [George
Fox's journal, 1661]   <hr />   While the Quakers originally adopted thee and thou on account of
their grammatical correctness, they soon fell into the careless habit of using thee, the objective,
instead of thou, the nominative. Common illustrations are: How does thee do? or Will thee, etc.
[George Fox Tucker, A Quaker Home, Boston, 1891]


theft (n.)

mid-13c., from Old English &thorn;eof&eth; (West Saxon &thorn;ief&eth;) theft, from Proto-Germanic
*theubitho (cognates: Old Frisian thiufthe, Old Norse &thorn;yf&eth;), from *theubaz thief (see
thief) + abstract formative suffix *-itha (cognate with Latin -itatem; see -th (2)).


thegn (n.)

military tenant of an Anglo-Saxon king, 1848, a modern revival of an Old English form; see thane.


their (pron.)

plural possessive pronoun, c.1200, from Old Norse &thorn;ierra of them, genitive of plural personal
and demonstrative pronoun &thorn;eir they (see they). Replaced Old English hiera. As an adjective
from late 14c. Use with singular objects, scorned by grammarians, is attested from c.1300, and OED
quotes this in Fielding, Goldsmith, Sydney Smith, and Thackeray. Theirs (c.1300) is a double
possessive. Alternative form theirn (1836) is attested in Midlands and southern dialect in U.K. and
the Ozarks region of the U.S.


theirs (pron.)

possessive pronoun, their own, early 14c., from their + possessive -s, on analogy of his, etc. In
form, a double possessive.


theirself (pron.)

emphatic plural pronoun, c.1300, from their + self, with self, originally an inflected adjective,
treated as a noun with a meaning person. Related: Theirselves.


theism (n.)

1670s, belief in a deity or deities, (as opposed to atheism); by 1711 as belief in one god (as
opposed to polytheism); by 1714 as belief in the existence of God as creator and ruler of the
universe (as opposed to deism), the usual modern sense; see theist + -ism.    Theism assumes a
living relation of God to his creatures, but does not define it. It differs from deism in that the
latter is negative and involves a denial of revelation, while the former is affirmative, and
underlies Christianity. One may be a theist and not be a Christian, but he cannot be a Christian and
not be a theist. [Century Dictionary]


theist (n.)

1660s, from Greek theos god (see theo-) + -ist. The original senses was that later reserved to
deist: one who believes in a transcendent god but denies revelation. Later in 18c. theist was
contrasted with deist, as believing in a personal God and allowing the possibility of revelation.


theistic (adj.)

1780, from theist + -ic. Related: Theistical (1690s); theistically.


them (pron.)

third person plural pronoun, c.1200, from Old Norse &#254;eim, dative of plural personal and
demonstrative pronoun &#254;eir (see they). Replaced Old English cognate him, heom.


thematic (adj.)

1690s, in logic, from Greek thematikos, from thema (genitive thematos; see theme). From 1871 of
writing or discourse. Related: Thematical; thematically.


theme (n.)

early 14c., subject or topic on which a person writes or speaks, from Old French tesme (13c., with
silent -s- indicating vowel length [OED], Modern French th&#232;me) and directly from Latin thema a
subject, thesis, from Greek thema a proposition, subject, deposit, literally something set down,
from root of tithenai put down, place, from PIE *dhe-mn, from root *dhe- to put, to do (see
factitious). Meaning school essay is from 1540s. Extension to music first recorded 1670s; theme song
first attested 1929. Theme park is from 1960.


Themis

Greek goddess of law and justice, the name means custom, right, literally that which is laid down or
established (by custom); also laws, ordinances, but closer in sense to Latin jus than lex; related
to thema proposition; that which is placed (see theme).


Themistocles

name of great Athenian political leader, from Greek Themistokles, literally famed in law and right,
from themis custom, law, right (see Themis) + -kles (see Damocles).


themselves (pron.)

mid-15c. in northern dialect, standard from 1540s, alteration of Middle English tham-self, emphatic
plural pronoun, also reciprocal pronoun (14c.); see them + self, with self, originally an inflected
adjective, treated as a noun with a meaning person and pluralized. Displacing Old English heom
selfum (dative). Themself returned late 20c. as some writers took to replacing himself with gender-
neutral everyone, anyone, etc.


then (adv.)

adverb of time, Old English &thorn;anne, &thorn;&aelig;nne, &thorn;onne, from Proto-Germanic *thana-
(cognates: Old Frisian thenne, Old Saxon thanna, Dutch dan, Old High German danne, German dann),
from PIE demonstrative pronoun root *to- (see the).    As a conjunction, in that case, therefore, in
Old English. As an adjective, being at that time, from 1580s. As a noun from early 14c. For further
sense development, see than. Similar evolutions in other Germanic languages; Dutch uses dan in both
senses, but German has dann (adv.) then, denn (conj.) than. Now and then at various times is
attested from 1550s; earlier then and then (c.1200).


thence (adv.)

late 13c., from Old English &thorn;anone, &thorn;anon from that place + adverbial genitive -es. Old
English &thorn;anone/&thorn;anon is from Proto-Germanic *thanana (cognates: Old Saxon thanana, Old
Norse &thorn;ana, Old Frisian thana, Old High German danana, German von dannen), related obscurely
to the root of then, and ultimately from PIE demonstrative base *to- (see the). Written with -c- to
indicate a voiceless s sound. Meaning from that time is from late 14c.; sense of for that reason is
from 1650s. From thence is redundant.


thenceforth (adv.)

late 14c., from thence + forth.


thenceforward (adv.)

mid-15c., from thence + forward.


theo-

word-forming element meaning god, gods, God, from comb. form of Greek theos god, from PIE root
*dhes-, root of words applied to various religious concepts, such as Latin feriae holidays, festus
festive, fanum temple.


Theobald

masc. proper name, from Medieval Latin Theobaldus, from Old High German Theudobald, from theuda
folk, people (see Teutonic) + bald bold (see bold). Form influenced in Medieval Latin by the many
Greek-derived names beginning in Theo-.


theocentric (adj.)

1856, from theo- + -centric.


theocracy (n.)

1737; earlier as un-Latinized theocraty (1620s), form of government in which God is recognized as
supreme ruler and his laws form the statute book, originally of the sacerdotal government of Israel
before the rise of kings, from later Greek theokratia (Josephus), literally  the rule of God, from
theos god (see theo-) + kratos a rule, regime, strength (see -cracy). Meaning priestly or religious
body wielding political and civil power is recorded from 1825.  Related: Theocratic (1741).


theocrat (n.)

1827, a ruler in the name of God, from Greek theos god (see theo-) + -crat, from aristocrat, etc.
From 1843 as one who favors a system of theocracy. Theocratist was the name of a publication begun
in 1828 to maintain the essential relation which subsists between religion and politics, and might
be used in the sense one who emphasizes divine authority over reason and individual freedom and who
explains social order as a revelation from God.


theodicy (n.)

vindication of divine justice, 1771, from French th&eacute;odic&eacute;e, title of a 1710 work by
Leibniz to prove the justice of God in a world with much moral and physical evil, from Greek theos
god (see theo-) + dike judgment, justice, usage, custom (cognate with Latin dicere to show, tell;
see diction). Related: Theodicean.


theodolite (n.)

surveying instrument, 1570s, of unknown origin (see OED for discussion). The word has a Gr[eek]
semblance, but no obvious Gr[eek] basis [Century Dictionary].


Theodore

masc. proper name, from Latin Theodorus, from Greek Theodoros, literally gift of god, from theos god
(see theo-) + doron gift (see date (n.1)). The fem. form is Theodora.


Theodoric

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Theodoricus, from Gothic, literally ruler of the people, from
Gothic &thorn;iuda people (see Teutonic) + *reiks ruler (see Reich). For spelling, see Theobald.


Theodosia

fem. proper name, from Greek Theodosia, literally gift of the gods, from theos god (see theo-) +
dosis a giving, from stem of didonai to give (see date (n.1)).


theogony (n.)

1610s, the account of the birth or genealogy of the gods, from Greek theogonia generation or
genealogy of the gods, from theos a god (see theo-) + -gonia a begetting, from gonos birth  (see
genus).


theologian (n.)

late 15c., from Old French theologien (14c.), from theologie; see theology. A petty or paltry
theologist is a theologaster (1620s), used in Medieval Latin by Martin Luther (1518).


theological (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to theology, from Medieval Latin theologicalis, from Latin theologicus, from
theologia (see theology). Related: Theologically.


theologist (n.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin theologista, agent noun from theologizare, from Latin theologia (see
theology). Earlier in the same sense was theologician (1550s).


theology (n.)

mid-14c., the science of religion, study of God and his relationship to humanity, from Old French
theologie philosophical study of Christian doctrine; Scripture (14c.), from Latin theologia, from
Greek theologia an account of the gods, from theologos one discoursing on the gods, from theos god
(see theo-) + -logos treating of (see -logy). Meaning a particular system of theology is from
1660s.Theology moves back and forth between two poles, the eternal truth of its foundations and the
temporal situation in which the eternal truth must be received. [Paul Tillich, Systematic Theology,
1951]


theophany (n.)

an appearance of God to man, 1630s, from Late Latin theophania, from Greek theos god (see theo-) +
phainein to show (see phantasm). In Middle English Epiphany (late 12c.). Ancient Greek Theophaneia
was the name of a festival at Delphi during which the statues of Apollo and other gods were
displayed to the public.


Theophilus

masc. proper name, Latinized form of Greek Theophilos, literally dear to God; loved by the gods,
from theos god (see theo-) + philos loved, beloved (see -phile).


theorem (n.)

1550s, from Middle French th&eacute;or&egrave;me (16c.) and directly from Late Latin theorema, from
Greek theorema spectacle, sight, in Euclid proposition to be proved, literally that which is looked
at, from theorein to look at, behold (see theory).


theoretical (adj.)

1610s, contemplative, with -al (1) + Late Latin theoreticus of or pertaining to theory, from Greek
theoretikos contemplative, speculative, pertaining to theory (by Aristotle contrasted to praktikos),
from theoretos that may be seen or considered, from theorein to consider, look at (see theory).
Meaning pertaining to theory, making deductions from theory not from fact (opposed to practical) is
from 1650s; earlier in this sense was theorical (c.1500). Meaning ideal, hypothetical is from 1790s
(implied in theoretically). Related: theoretician.


theorist (n.)

one given to theory and speculation, 1590s; see theory + -ist.


theorize (v.)

1630s, perhaps a formation in English from theory + -ize. Related: Theorized; theorizing.


theory (n.)

1590s, conception, mental scheme, from Late Latin theoria (Jerome), from Greek theoria
contemplation, speculation; a looking at, viewing; a sight, show, spectacle, things looked at, from
theorein to consider, speculate, look at, from theoros spectator, from thea a view (see theater) +
horan to see, possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)).    Earlier in this sense
was theorical (n.), late 15c. Sense of principles or methods of a science or art (rather than its
practice) is first recorded 1610s (as in music theory, which is the science of musical composition,
apart from practice or performance). Sense of an intelligible explanation based on observation and
reasoning is from 1630s.


theosophy (n.)

1640s (implied in theosophical), knowledge of divine things obtained through mystic study, from
Medieval Latin theosophia (c.880), from Late Greek theosophia (c.500) wisdom concerning God or
things divine, from Greek theosophos one wise about God, from theos god (see theo-) + sophia skill,
knowledge of, acquaintance with; philosophy, from sophos wise, learned (see sophist).    Applied
variously over the years, including to the followers of Swedenborg. Taken as the name of a modern
philosophical system (sometimes called Esoteric Buddhism), founded in New York 1875 as Theosophical
Society by Madame Blavatsky and others, which has elements of Hinduism and Buddhism and claims
supernatural knowledge of the divinity and his words deeper than that obtained from empiricism.
Related: Theosophist.


ther-

often thero-, word-forming element meaning beast, from comb. form of Greek ther wild beast, beast of
prey, from PIE *ghwer- wild beast (cognates: Latin ferus wild, ferox fierce; see fierce). Also
therio-, from Greek therion.


therapeutic (adj.)

pertaining to the healing of disease, 1640s, from Modern Latin therapeuticus curing, healing, from
Greek therapeutikos, from therapeutein to cure, treat medically, primarily do service, take care of,
provide for, of unknown origin, related to therapon attendant. Therapeutic was used from 1540s as a
noun meaning the branch of medicine concerned with treatment of disease. Related: Therapeutical
(c.1600).


therapist (n.)

1880, from therapy + -ist; earlier was therapeutist (1816). Especially of psychotherapy
practitioners from c.1930s.


therapy (n.)

1846, medical treatment of disease, from Modern Latin therapia, from Greek therapeia curing,
healing, service done to the sick; a waiting on, service, from therapeuein to cure, treat medically,
literally attend, do service, take care of (see therapeutic).


there (adv., conj.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;r in or at that place, so far as, provided that, in that respect, from
Proto-Germanic *th&aelig;r (cognates: Old Saxon thar, Old Frisian ther, Middle Low German dar,
Middle Dutch daer, Dutch daar, Old High German dar, German da, Gothic &thorn;ar, Old Norse
&thorn;ar), from PIE *tar- there (cognates: Sanskrit tar-hi then), from root *to- (see the) +
adverbial suffix -r.    Interjectional use is recorded from 1530s, used variously to emphasize
certainty, encouragement, or consolation. To have been there had previous experience of some
activity is recorded from 1877.


thereabouts (adv.)

early 15c., in that area, around there; mid-15c., near to that time, approximately thence, from Old
English &thorn;&aelig;r onbutan about that place + adverbial genitive -es; see there + about.


thereafter (adv.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;r &aelig;fter; see there + after. Similar formation in Dutch daarachter,
Swedish derefter.


thereby (adv.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;rbig thus, by means of or because of that; see there + by. Similar
formation in Old Frisian therbi, Middle Low German darbi, German dabei, Dutch daarbij.


therefor (adv.)

for this, for that, Middle English variant spelling of therefore (q.v.); in modern use perhaps
perceived as there + for.


therefore (adv.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;rfore; from there + fore, Old English and Middle English collateral form
of for. Since c.1800, therefor has been used in sense of for that, by reason of that; and therefore
in sense of in consequence of that. Similar formation in Dutch daarfoor, German daf&#252;r, Danish
derfor.


therefrom (adv.)

mid-13c., there from. One word from 17c.; see there + from.


therein (adv.)

in that place, time, or thing, Old English &thorn;&aelig;rin; see there + in. Similar formation in
German darin.


theremin (n.)

1927, from the name of its inventor, Russian engineer L&eacute;on Th&eacute;r&eacute;min
(1896-1993).


thereof (adv.)

of that, of it, Old English &thorn;&aelig;rof; see there + of. Similar formation in Swedish, Danish
deraf.


thereon (adv.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;ron; see there + on. Similar formation in German daran.


Theresa

also Teresa, fem. proper name, from French Th&eacute;r&egrave;se, from Latin Therasia, apparently
from Greek Therasia, name of two volcanic islands, one near Sicily, one near Crete. In the top 50
most popular names for girls born in the U.S. from 1953 to 1969.


thereto (adv.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;rto to it, in that place, for that purpose, belonging to; see there + to.
Similar formation in Old Saxon tharto, Old High German darazuo, German dazu.


thereunder (adv.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;runder; see there + under. Similar formation in Old Frisian therunder,
German darunter.


thereupon (adv.)

late 12c., &thorn;er uppon; see there + upon.


therewith (adv.)

c.1200, along with, in company with, from there + with. Old English &thorn;&aelig;r wi&thorn; meant
against, in exchange for. Similar formation in Swedish dervid, Danish derved.


thermal (adj.)

1756, having to do with hot springs, from French thermal (Buffon), from Greek therme heat, feverish
heat, from PIE *gwher- to heat, warm (cognates: Latin fornax an oven, kiln, formus warm, Old English
wearm; see warm (adj.)). Sense of having to do with heat is first recorded 1837. The noun meaning
rising current of relatively warm air is recorded from 1933.


thermo-

before vowels therm-, word-forming element meaning hot, heat, temperature, used in scientific and
technical words, from comb. form of Greek thermos hot, warm, therme heat (see thermal).


thermochemistry (n.)

also thermo-chemistry, 1840, from thermo- + chemistry.


thermocline (n.)

1897, from thermo- + -cline, from Greek klinein to slope (see lean (v.)).


thermocouple (n.)

also thermo-couple, 1862, from thermo-electric + couple (n.).


thermodynamic (adj.)

1849, from thermo- + dynamic (adj.).


thermodynamics (n.)

theory of relationship between heat and mechanical energy, 1854, from thermodynamic (adj.); also see
-ics. The consideration of moving forces, though suggested by the form of the word, does not enter
into the subject to any considerable extent [Century Dictionary].


thermograph (n.)

automatic self-registering thermometer, 1881, from thermo- + -graph instrument for recording;
something written. Related: Thermographic.


thermography (n.)

1840, method of writing which requires heat to develop the characters, from thermo- + -graphy.


thermometer (n.)

1630s, from French thermom&egrave;tre (1620s), coined by Jesuit Father Jean Leur&eacute;chon from
Greek thermos hot (see thermal) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)). An earlier, Latinate form was
thermoscopium (1610s). The earliest such device was Galileo's air-thermometer, invented c.1597. The
typical modern version, with mercury in glass, was invented by Fahrenheit in 1714. Related:
Thermometric; thermometrical.


thermonuclear (adj.)

1938 with reference to stars, 1953 of weapons (technically only to describe the hydrogen bomb), from
thermo- + nuclear.


thermoplastic (adj.)

1870, see thermo- + plastic (adj.). As a noun from 1929.


Thermopylae

narrow land passage along the Malian Gulf in ancient Greece, from Greek thermos hot (see thermal) +
pylai, plural of pyle gate; mountain pass, entrance into a region (see pylon). In reference to
nearby hot sulfur springs. Often simply hai pylai the gates. Figurative of heroic resistance against
overwhelming numbers since the battle fought there between the Greeks and Persians in 480 B.C.E.


Thermos (n.)

trademark registered in Britain 1907, invented by Sir James Dewar (patented 1904 but not named
then), from Greek thermos hot (see thermal). Dewar built the first one in 1892, but it was first
manufactured commercially in Germany in 1904, when two glass blowers formed Thermos GmbH. Supposedly
the company sponsored a contest to name the thing, and a Munich resident won with a submission of
Thermos.


thermosphere (n.)

1924, from thermo- + sphere.


thermostat (n.)

automatic instrument for regulating temperature, 1831, from thermo- + -stat.


Theropoda (n.)

order of dinosaurs, from ther- beast + podos genitive of pous foot (see foot (n.)). So called
because the structure of the feet resembled quadrupeds rather than birds. Related: Theropod.


thesaurus (n.)

1823, treasury, storehouse, from Latin thesaurus treasury, a hoard, a treasure, something laid up,
figuratively repository, collection, from Greek thesauros a treasure, treasury, storehouse, chest,
from root of tithenai to put, to place (see theme). The meaning encyclopedia filled with information
is from 1840, but existed earlier as thesaurarie (1590s), used as a title by early dictionary
compilers, on the notion of thesaurus verborum a treasury of words. Meaning collection of words
arranged according to sense is first attested 1852 in Roget's title. Thesaurer is attested in Middle
English for treasurer and thesaur treasure was in use 15c.-16c.


these (pron.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;s, variant of &thorn;as (which became those and took the role of plural of
that), nominative and accusative plural of &thorn;es, &thorn;eos, &thorn;is this (see this).
Differentiation of these and those is from late 13c. OED begins its long entry with the warning,
This word has a complicated history.


Theseus

legendary hero-king of Athens; the name is of uncertain origin.


thesis (n.)

late 14c., unaccented syllable or note, from Latin thesis unaccented syllable in poetry, later (and
more correctly) stressed part of a metrical foot, from Greek thesis a proposition, also downbeat (in
music), originally a setting down, a placing, an arranging; position, situation, from root of
tithenai to place, put, set, from PIE root *dhe- to set, to put (see factitious). Sense in logic of
a formulation in advance of a proposition to be proved is first recorded 1570s; that of dissertation
presented by a candidate for a university degree is from 1650s.


thespian (adj.)

1670s, of or pertaining to tragedy or dramatic acting, from Greek Thespis, semi-legendary 6c. B.C.E.
poet of Icaria in Attica, often called the Father of Greek Tragedy. The literal meaning of the name
is inspired by the gods.


thespian (n.)

an actor, 1827, from thespian (adj.). Short form thesp is attested from 1962.


Thessaly

district south of Macedonia and east of Epirus, from Greek Thessalia (Attic Thettalia), an Illyrian
name of unknown origin. Related: Thessalian. The city of Thessalonika on the Thermaic Gulf was
ancient Therme, renamed when rebuilt by the Macedonian king Cassander, son of Antipater, and named
in honor of his wife, Thessalonica, half-sister of Alexander the Great, whose name contains the
region name and Greek nike victory. The adjectival form of it is Thessalonian Related:
Thessalonians.


theta (n.)

eighth letter of the Greek alphabet; in ancient Greece, from Hebrew teth; originally an aspirated
-t- (see th). Written on ballots to indicate a vote for a sentence of death (thanatos), hence
occasional allusive use for death.


Thetis

name of a sea goddess in Greek mythology, mother of Achilles by Peleus. Since Roman times,
sometimes, in poetry, the sea personified.


theurgy (n.)

1560s, white magic, from Latin theurgia, from Greek theourgia sorcery, from theos (genitive theou) a
god (see theo-) + -ergos working (see organ). From 1858 as the working of divine forces in human
affairs. Related: Theurgical.


thew (n.)

Old English &thorn;eaw usage, custom, habit; see thews.


thews (n.)

Old English &thorn;eawes customs, habit, manners; morals, conduct, disposition, personal qualities,
plural of &thorn;eaw habit, custom, from Proto-Germanic *thawaz (cognates: Old Saxon thau usage,
custom, habit, Old High German thau discipline). According to OED, with no certain cognates outside
West Germanic and of unknown origin, but Watkins traces it to PIE root *teue- (1) to pay attention.
Meaning bodily powers or parts indicating strength, good physique is attested from 1560s, from
notion of good qualities. Acquired a sense of muscular development when it was revived by Scott
(1818).


they (pron.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source (Old Norse &#254;eir, Old Danish, Old Swedish &#254;er,
&#254;air), originally masculine plural demonstrative pronoun, from Proto-Germanic *thai, nominative
plural pronoun, from PIE *to-, demonstrative pronoun (see that). Gradually replaced Old English hi,
hie, plurals of he, heo she, hit it by c.1400. Colloquial use for anonymous people in authority is
attested from 1886. They say for it is said is in Milton.    The most important importation of this
kind [from Scandinavian to English] was that of the pronomial forms they, them and their, which
entered readily into the system of English pronouns beginning with the same sound (the, that, this)
and were felt to be more distinct than the old native forms which they supplanted. Indeed these were
liable to constant confusion with some forms of the singular number (he, him, her) after the vowels
has become obscured, so that he and hie, him and heom, her (hire) and heora could no longer be kept
easily apart. [Jespersen, Growth and Structure of the English Language]


thiamin (n.)

also thiamine, alternative name for vitamin B1, 1937, coined by U.S. chemist Dr. Robert R. Williams
(1886-1965) from thio-, indicating the presence of sulfur, comb. form of Greek theion sulfur, +
amine, indicating the amino group. Or the second element might be from vitamin.


thick (adj.)

Old English &thorn;icce dense, viscous, solid, stiff; numerous, abundant; deep, also as an adverb,
thickly, closely, often, frequently, from Proto-Germanic *thiku- (cognates: Old Saxon thikki, Old
High German dicchi, German dick, Old Norse &thorn;ykkr, Old Frisian thikke), from PIE *tegu- thick
(cognates: Gaelic tiugh). Secondary Old English sense of close together is preserved in thickset and
proverbial phrase thick as thieves (1833). Meaning stupid is first recorded 1590s. Related: Thickly.
As a noun, the thick part (of anything), from mid-13c. Phrase through thick and thin, indicating
rough or smooth going, hence unwaveringly, is in Chaucer (late 14c.); thick-skinned is attested from
1540s; in figurative sense from c.1600. To be in the thick of some action, etc., to be at the most
intense moment is from 1680s, from a Middle English noun sense.


thicken (v.)

late 14c. (transitive), 1590s (intransitive), from thick + -en (1). Related: Thickened; thickening.
An earlier verb was Middle English thick, Old English &thorn;iccian to thicken, to crowd together.


thickening (n.)

substance used to thicken something, 1839, verbal noun from thicken.


thicket (n.)

close-set growth of shrubs, bushes, trees, etc., late Old English &thorn;iccet, from &thorn;icce
(see thick) + denominative suffix -et. Absent in Middle English, reappearing early 16c., perhaps a
dialectal survival or a re-formation.


thickness (n.)

Old English &thorn;icness density, viscosity, hardness; depth; anything thick or heavy; darkness;
thicket; see thick + -ness.


thickset (adj.)

also thick-set, late 14c., thikke sette with parts or things set close together (of grass on a
sward, etc.), from thick + set (v.). Meaning stocky, strong and square-built is recorded from 1724.


thief (n.)

Old English &thorn;eof thief, robber, from Proto-Germanic *theubaz (cognates: Old Frisian thiaf, Old
Saxon thiof, Middle Dutch and Dutch dief, Old High German diob, German dieb, Old Norse &thorn;iofr,
Gothic &thorn;iufs), of uncertain origin.


thieve (v.)

Old English &thorn;eofian to thieve, steal, from &thorn;eof (see thief). Rare in Old English, rarer
in Middle English, not common until 17c.; perhaps the modern word is a late 16c. re-formation.
Thieving (adj.) first attested 1520s.


thievery (n.)

1560s, from thieve + -ery. An Old English word for it was &thorn;eofend.


thievish (adj.)

mid-15c., of or pertaining to thieves, from thieve or thief + -ish. Meaning inclined to steal is
from 1530s. Wyclif and Chaucer used thiefly (late 14c.). Related: Thievishly; thievishness.


thigh (n.)

Old English &thorn;eoh, &thorn;eh, from Proto-Germanic *theuham (cognates: Old Frisian thiach, Old
Dutch thio, Dutch dij, Old Norse &thorn;jo, Old High German dioh), probably literally the thick or
fat part of the leg, from PIE *teuk- from root *teue- (2) to swell (cognates: Lithuanian taukas, Old
Church Slavonic tuku, Russian tuku fat of animals; Lithuanian tukti to become fat; Avestan tuma fat;
Greek tylos callus, lump, tymbos burial mound, grave, tomb; Old Irish ton rump; Latin tumere to
swell, tumulus raised heap of earth, tumidus swollen;tumor a swelling; Middle Irish tomm a small
hill, Welsh tom mound).


thigmotropism (n.)

1900, from thigmo-, comb. form meaning touch, from Greek thigma touch + tropism.


thilk (pron., adj.)

that same, the very thing, early 13c., contraction from &thorn;e the (see the) + ilce same (see
ilk).


thimble (n.)

Old English &thorn;ymel sheath or covering for the thumb, from thuma (see thumb) + -el, suffix used
in forming names of instruments (compare handle). Excrescent -b- began mid-15c. (compare humble,
nimble). Originally of leather, metal ones came into use 17c. Related: Thimbleful. Thimblerig, con
game played with three thimbles and a pea or button, is attested from 1825 by this name, though
references to thimble cheats, probably the same swindle, date back to 1716 (see rig (v.)).


thin (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ynne narrow, lean, scanty, not dense; fluid, tenuous; weak, poor, from Proto-
Germanic *thunni thin (cognates: West Frisian ten, Middle Low German dunne, Middle Dutch dunne,
Dutch dun, Old High German dunni, German d&uuml;nn, Old Norse &thorn;unnr, Swedish tunn, Danish
tynd), from PIE *tnu- stretched, stretched out (hence thin), from root *ten- to stretch (cognates:
Latin tenuis thin, slender; see tenet).    These our actors ... were all Spirits, and Are melted
into Ayre, into thin Ayre. [Shakespeare, The Tempest, IV.i.150, 1610]    Loose or sparse, hence
easily seen through, with figurative extensions. Related: Thinly; thinness. Thin-skinned is attested
from 1590s; the figurative sense of touchy is from 1670s.


thin (v.)

Old English &thorn;ynnian to make thin, lessen, dilute, also intransitive, become thin, from thin
(adj.). Intransitive sense of to become less numerous is attested from 1743; that of to become
thinner is recorded from 1804. Compare similarly formed German d&uuml;nnen, Dutch dunnen. Related:
Thinned; thinning.


thine (pron.)

Old English &thorn;in, possessive pronoun (originally genitive of &thorn;u thou), from Proto-
Germanic *thinaz (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon thin, Middle Dutch dijn, Old High German din,
German dein, Old Norse &thorn;in), from PIE *t(w)eino-, suffixed form of second person singular
pronomial base *tu-. A brief history of the second person pronoun in English can be found here; see
also thou.


thing (n.)

Old English &thorn;ing meeting, assembly, council, discussion, later entity, being, matter (subject
of deliberation in an assembly), also act, deed, event, material object, body, being, creature, from
Proto-Germanic *thingam assembly (cognates: Old Frisian thing assembly, council, suit, matter,
thing, Middle Dutch dinc court-day, suit, plea, concern, affair, thing, Dutch ding thing, Old High
German ding public assembly for judgment and business, lawsuit, German ding affair, matter, thing,
Old Norse &thorn;ing public assembly). The Germanic word is perhaps literally appointed time, from a
PIE *tenk- (1), from root *ten- stretch, perhaps on notion of stretch of time for a meeting or
assembly.    The sense meeting, assembly did not survive Old English. For sense evolution, compare
French chose, Spanish cosa thing, from Latin causa judicial process, lawsuit, case; Latin res
affair, thing, also case at law, cause. Old sense is preserved in second element of hustings and in
Icelandic Althing, the nation's general assembly.    Of persons, often pityingly, from late 13c.
Used colloquially since c.1600 to indicate things the speaker can't name at the moment, often with
various meaningless suffixes (see thingamajig). Things personal possessions is from c.1300. The
thing what's stylish or fashionable is recorded from 1762. Phrase do your thing follow your
particular predilection, though associated with hippie-speak of 1960s is attested from 1841.


thingamajig (n.)

also thingumajig, 1824, see thing. Compare thingum (1670s), thingumbob (1751), thingummy (1796).


think (v.)

Old English &thorn;encan imagine, conceive in the mind; consider, meditate, remember; intend, wish,
desire (past tense &thorn;ohte, past participle ge&thorn;oht), probably originally cause to appear
to oneself, from Proto-Germanic *thankjan (cognates: Old Frisian thinka, Old Saxon thenkian, Old
High German denchen, German denken, Old Norse &thorn;ekkja, Gothic &thorn;agkjan).    Old English
&thorn;encan is the causative form of the distinct Old English verb &thorn;yncan to seem, to appear
(past tense &thorn;uhte, past participle ge&thorn;uht), from Proto-Germanic *thunkjan (cognates:
German d&uuml;nken, d&auml;uchte). Both are from PIE *tong- to think, feel which also is the root of
thought and thank.    The two Old English words converged in Middle English and &thorn;yncan to seem
was absorbed, except for its preservation in archaic methinks it seems to me. As a noun, act of
prolonged thinking, from 1834. The figurative thinking cap is attested from 1839.


think tank (n.)

also think-tank, 1959 as research institute (first reference is to Center for Behavioral Sciences,
Palo Alto, Calif.); it had been colloquial for the brain since 1905. See think + tank (n.).


thinkable (adj.)

1805; see think (v.) + -able. Possibly a back-formation from unthinkable.


thinker (n.)

one who has cultivated the powers of thought, mid-15c., agent noun from think (v.).


thinner (n.)

liquid used to dilute paint, ink, etc., 1904, agent noun from thin (v.).


third (adj.)

late Old English metathesis of &thorn;ridda, from Proto-Germanic *thridja- (cognates: Old Frisian
thredda, Old Saxon thriddio, Middle Low German drudde, Dutch derde, Old High German dritto, German
dritte, Old Norse &thorn;ri&eth;e, Danish tredie, Swedish tredje, Gothic &thorn;ridja), from PIE
*tri-tyo- (cognates: Sanskrit trtiyas, Avestan thritya, Greek tritos, Latin tertius (source of
Italian terzo, Spanish tercio, French tiers), Old Church Slavonic tretiji, Lithuanian trecias, Old
Irish triss, Welsh tryde), suffixed form of root *trei-  (see three).    Metathesis of thrid into
third is attested from c.950 in Northumbrian, but overall thrid was prevalent up to 16c. The noun
meaning third part of anything is recorded from late 14c. Third rail in electric railway sense is
recorded from 1890. Third World War as a possibility first recorded 1947. Third-rate of poor quality
is from 1814, ultimately from classification of ships (1640s); third class in railway travel is from
1839. Third Reich (1930) is a partial translation of German drittes Reich (1923). Third party in
law, insurance, etc., is from 1818.


third degree (n.)

intense interrogation by police, 1900, probably a reference to Third Degree of master mason in
Freemasonry (1772), the conferring of which included an interrogation ceremony. Third degree as a
measure of severity of burns (most severe) is attested from 1866, from French (1832); in American
English, as a definition of the seriousness of a particular type of crime (the least serious type)
it is recorded from 1865.


Third World (n.)

1963, from French tiers monde, formulated 1952 by French economic historian Alfred Sauvy (1898-1990)
on model of the third estate (French tiers &eacute;tat) of Revolutionary France; his first world
(The West) and second world (the Soviet bloc) never caught on.


thirst (v.)

Old English &thorn;yrstan to thirst, thirst after, from the noun (see thirst (n.)); the figurative
sense of the verb was present in Old English. Compare Old Saxon thurstian, Dutch dorsten, Old High
German dursten, German d&#252;rsten, all verbs from nouns. Related: Thirsted; thirsting.


thirst (n.)

Old English &thorn;urst, from Proto-Germanic *thurstu- (cognates: Old Saxon thurst, Frisian torst,
Dutch dorst, Old High German and German durst), from Proto-Germanic verbal stem *thurs- (cognates:
Gothic thaursjan, Old English thyrre), from PIE root *ters- dry (see terrain). Figurative sense of
vehement desire is attested from c.1200.


thirsty (adj.)

Old English &thorn;urstig thirsty, greedy; see thirst (n.) + -y (2). Related: Thirstily;
thirstiness. Similar formation in Old Frisian, Dutch dorstig, German durstig.


thirteen (adj.)

late 145c., metathesis of Middle English thrittene, from Old English &thorn;reotene (Mercian),
&thorn;reotiene (West Saxon), from &thorn;reo three (see three) + -tene (see -teen). Similar
formation in Old Saxon thriutein, Old Frisian thretten, Dutch dertien, German dreizehn, Old Norse
threttan, Swedish tretton. As a noun from late Old English.    Not an unlucky number in medieval
England, but associated rather with the customary extra item (as in baker's dozen). Superstitions
began with association with the Last Supper, and the unluckiness of 13 sitting down together to dine
(attested from 1690s). Most of the modern superstitions (buildings with floor 12-A, etc.) have
developed since 1890.


thirteenth (adj.)

15c. metathesis of &#254;riteen&#254;e (mid-14c.; see thirteen + -th (1)), which replaced forms from
Old English &#254;reoteo&#240;a (West Saxon), &#254;riteoge&#240;a (Anglian). Similar formation in
Old Norse &#254;rettande, Danish trettende, Swedish trettonde, Old Frisian threttinde, Dutch
dertiende, Old High German dritto-zehanto, German dreizehnte.


thirties (n.)

1827 as the years of someone's life between 30 and 39; 1830 as the fourth decade of years in a given
century. See thirty.


thirtieth

Middle English threttyth, from Old English &thorn;ritigo&eth;a; see thirty + -th (1). Respelled 16c.
to conform to new spelling of thirty.


thirty (adj.)

late 14c. metathesis of thritti, from Old English &thorn;ritig, from &thorn;ri, &thorn;reo three
(see three) + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)). Similar formation in Old Frisian thritich, Old Saxon
thritig, Dutch dertig, Old High German drizzug, German dreissig.    The Thirty Years' War (1842) was
a religious power struggle waged 1618-48, mainly on German soil. The symbol -30- as printer and
telegrapher's code to indicate the last sheet or line of copy or a dispatch is recorded from 1895.
In 20c. jargon of newspaper journalism, it came to be a traditional sign-off signal and slang word
for the end.


this (pron.)

Old English &thorn;is, neuter demonstrative pronoun and adjective (masc. &thorn;es, fem.
&thorn;eos), probably from a North Sea Germanic pronoun *tha-si-, formed by combining the base
*&thorn;a- (see that) with -s, which is probably identical with Old English se the (representing
here a specific thing), or with Old English seo, imperative of see (v.) to behold. Compare Old Saxon
these, Old Frisian this, Old Norse &thorn;essi, Middle Dutch dese, Dutch deze, Old High German
deser, German dieser.    Once fully inflected, with 10 distinct forms (see table below); the oblique
cases and other genders gradually fell away by 15c. The Old English plural was &thorn;&aelig;s
(nominative and accusative), which in Northern Middle English became thas, and in Midlands and
Southern England became thos. The Southern form began to be used late 13c. as the plural of that
(replacing Middle English tho, from Old English &thorn;a) and acquired an -e (apparently from the
influence of Middle English adjective plurals in -e; compare alle from all, summe from sum some),
emerging early 14c. as modern those.    About 1175 thes (probably a variant of Old English
&thorn;&aelig;s) began to be used as the plural of this, and by 1200 it had taken the form these,
the final -e acquired via the same mechanism that gave one to those.  <table width=90%
bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1><tr><td></td><td>Masc.</td><td>Fem
.</td><td>Neut.</td><td>Plural</td></tr><tr><td>Nom.</td><td>&thorn;es</td><td>&thorn;eos</td><td>&t
horn;is</td><td>&thorn;as</td></tr><tr><td>Acc.</td><td>&thorn;isne</td><td>&thorn;as</td><td>&thorn
;is</td><td>&thorn;as</td></tr><tr><td>Gen.</td><td>&thorn;isses</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>&thorn;
isses</td><td>&thorn;issa</td></tr><tr><td>Dat.</td><td>&thorn;issum</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>&th
orn;issum</td><td>&thorn;issum</td></tr><tr><td>Inst.</td><td>&thorn;ys</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>
&thorn;ys</td><td>&thorn;issum</td></tr></table>


thistle (n.)

prickly herbaceous plant, Old English &thorn;istel, from Proto-Germanic *thistilaz (cognates: Old
Saxon thistil, Old High German distil, German Distel, Old Norse &thorn;istell, Danish tidsel), of
uncertain origin; perhaps from an extended form of PIE root *steig- to prick, stick, pierce.
Emblematic of Scotland since 15c.


thither (adv.)

Old English &thorn;ider to or toward that place, altered (by influence of its opposite hider) from
earlier &thorn;&aelig;der to that place, from Proto-Germanic *thadra- (cognates: Old Norse
&thorn;a&eth;ra there, Gothic &thorn;a&thorn;ro thence), from PIE pronomial root *to- (see that) +
PIE suffix denoting motion toward (compare Gothic -dre, Sanskrit -tra). The medial -th- developed
early 14c. but was rare before early 16c. (compare gather, murder, burden).


thixotropy (adj.)

1927, coined in German from Greek thixis touching (related to thinganein to touch, from PIE root
*dheigh- to form, build; see dough) + trope turning (see trope (n.)). Related: Thixotropic.


tho (conj.)

in modern use, an abbreviated spelling of though.


thole (v.)

to be subjected to or exposed to, to endure without complaint, now Scottish and Northern English
dialect, from Old English &thorn;olian to suffer, endure, undergo; remain, survive; to lose, lack,
forfeit, from Proto-Germanic stem *thul- (cognates: Old Saxon tholon, Old High German dolon, Old
Norse &thorn;ola, Gothic &thorn;ulan to suffer, German geduld patience), from PIE *tele- to bear,
carry (see extol).


thole (n.)

peg, from Old English &thorn;oll oar-pin, from Proto-Germanic *thulnaz (cognates: Old Norse
&thorn;ollr, Middle Low German dolle, East Frisian dolle, Dutch dol), of unknown origin. No record
of the word in English from c.1000 to mid-15c.


Thomas

masc. proper name, from Greek Thomas, of Aramaic origin and said to mean a twin (John's gospel
refers to Thomas as ho legomenos didymos called the twin; compare Syriac toma twin, Arabic tau'am
twin). Before the Conquest, found only as the name of a priest, but after 1066, one of the most
common given names in English. Also see Tom, Tommy. Doubting Thomas is from John xx:25; A Thomist
(1530s, from Medieval Latin Thomista, mid-14c.) is a follower of 13c. scholastic theologian St.
Thomas Aquinas.


Thompson (n.)

type of sub-machine gun, 1919, named for U.S. Gen. John T. Thompson (1860-1940), who conceived it
and whose company financed it. Familiarly Tommy gun by 1929.


thong (n.)

Old English &thorn;wong, &thorn;wang narrow strip of leather (used as a cord, band, strip, etc.),
from Proto-Germanic *thwang- (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;vengr), from PIE root *twengh- to press in
on, to restrain (cognates: Old English twengan to pinch, squeeze). As a kind of sandal, first
attested 1965; as a kind of bikini briefs, 1990.


Thor

Odin's eldest son, strongest of the gods though not the wisest, c.1020, from Old Norse &THORN;orr,
literally thunder, from *&thorn;unroz, related to Old English &thorn;unor (see thunder (n.)). His
weapon was the hammer mj&#246;lnir (crusher).


thoracic (adj.)

1650s, from stem of thorax + -ic, or else from Medieval Latin thoracicus.


thoracotomy (n.)

1890, from comb. form of thorax + -ectomy.


thoral (adj.)

1690s, from Latin torus couch, marriage bed, stuffed cushion + -al (1).


thorax (n.)

chest of the body, late 14c., from Latin thorax the breast, chest; breastplate, from Greek thorax
(genitive thorakos) breastplate, chest, of unknown origin.


Thorazine (n.)

central nervous system depressant, 1954, proprietary name (Smith, Kline &amp; French) formed from a
rearrangement of various elements in the full chemical name.


thorium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1832, Modern Latin, named by its discoverer, Swedish chemist J&ouml;ns Jakob
Berzelius (1779-1848) from thorite (silicate of thorium), the name of a mineral found in Norway from
which it was extracted (which Berzelius also had named, as thoria, in 1828), and named in honor of
the Scandinavian god Thor. With chemical ending -ium.


thorn (n.)

Old English &thorn;orn sharp point on a stem or branch, earlier thorny tree or plant, from Proto-
Germanic *thurnuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian  thorn, Dutch doorn, Old High German dorn,
German Dorn, Old Norse &thorn;orn, Gothic &thorn;aurnus), from PIE *trnus (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic trunu thorn, Sanskrit trnam blade of grass, Greek ternax stalk of the cactus, Irish trainin
blade of grass), from *(s)ter-n- thorny plant, from root *ster- (1) stiff (see stark).    Figurative
sense of anything which causes pain is recorded from early 13c. (thorn in the flesh is from II Cor.
xii:7). Also an Anglo-Saxon and Icelandic runic letter (&thorn;), named for the word of which it was
the initial (see -th-).


thorny (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ornig; see thorn + -y (2). Figurative sense is attested from mid-14c. Related:
Thorniness. Similar formation in Dutch doornig, German dornig.


thoro

abbreviated spelling of thorough.


thorough (adj.)

c.1300, adjectival use of Old English &thorn;uruh (adv.) from end to end, from side to side,
stressed variant of &thorn;urh (adv., prep.); see through. Related: thoroughly; thoroughness.


thoroughbred (adj.)

1701, of persons, thoroughly accomplished, from thorough + past tense of breed. In reference to
horses, of pure breed or stock, from 1796; the noun is first recorded 1842.


thoroughfare (n.)

late 14c., passage or way through, from thorough (before it had differentiated from through) + fare
(n.).


thoroughgoing (adj.)

1800, from thorough + going.


thorp (n.)

Old English &eth;orp village, hamlet, farm, estate, reinforced by Old Norse &eth;orp, both from
Proto-Germanic *thurpa- (cognates: Old Frisian thorp, Frisian terp, Middle Dutch, Dutch dorp, German
dorf village, Gothic &thorn;aurp estate, land, field), probably from PIE root *treb- dwelling (see
tavern). Preserved in place names ending in -thorp, -thrup.


those (pron.)

c.1300, Midlands and southern variant of Old English &thorn;as, nominative and accusative plural of
&thorn;es, &thorn;eos this (see this). A collateral form of these, now used as the plural of that.


Thoth

ancient Egyptian god of wisdom and magic, hieroglyphics, and the reckoning of time, from Latin, from
Greek Thoth, from Egyptian Tehuti. Usually represented as a human figure with the head of an ibis.
By the Greeks, assimilated to their Hermes.


thou (pron.)

2nd nominative singular personal pronoun, Old English &thorn;u, from Proto-Germanic *thu (cognates:
Old Frisian thu, Middle Dutch and Middle Low German du, Old High German and German du, Old Norse
&thorn;u, Gothic &thorn;u), from PIE *tu-, second person singular pronoun (cognates: Latin tu, Irish
tu, Welsh ti, Greek su, Lithuanian tu, Old Church Slavonic ty, Sanskrit twa-m).    Superseded in
Middle English by plural form you (from a different root), but retained in certain dialects (e.g.
early Quakers). The plural at first was used in addressing superior individuals, later also (to err
on the side of propriety) strangers, and ultimately all equals. By c.1450 the use of thou to address
inferiors gave it a tinge of insult unless addressed by parents to children, or intimates to one
another. Hence the verb meaning to use 'thou' to a person (mid-15c.).  Avaunt, caitiff, dost thou
thou me! I am come of good kin, I tell thee!  [Hickscorner, c.1530]    A brief history of the second
person pronoun in English can be found here.


though (adv., conj.)

c.1200, from Old English &thorn;eah though, although, even if, however, nevertheless, although,
still, yet; and in part from Old Norse &thorn;o though, both from Proto-Germanic *thaukh (cognates:
Gothic &thorn;auh, Old Frisian thach, Middle Dutch, Dutch doch, Old High German doh, German doch),
from PIE demonstrative pronoun *to- (see that). The evolution of the terminal sound did not follow
laugh, tough, etc., though a tendency to end the word in f existed c.1300-1750 and persists in
dialects.


thought (n.)

Old English &thorn;oht, ge&thorn;oht process of thinking, a thought; compassion, from stem of
&thorn;encan to conceive of in the mind, consider (see think). Cognate with the second element in
German Ged&auml;chtnis memory, Andacht attention, devotion, Bedacht consideration, deliberation.
Second thought later consideration is recorded from 1640s. Thought-crime is from Nineteen Eighty-
Four (1949); thought police is attested from 1945, originally in reference to war-time Japanese
Special Higher Police (Tokubetsu Koto Keisatsu).


thoughtful (adj.)

c.1200, contemplative, occupied with thought, from thought + -ful. Also in Middle English, prudent;
moody, anxious. Meaning showing consideration for others is from 1851 (compare thoughtless.)
Related: Thoughtfully; thoughtfulness.


thoughtless (adj.)

1610s, heedless, imprudent, from thought + -less. Meaning inconsiderate of others is from 1794.
Related: Thoughtlessly; thoughtlessness.


thousand (adj.)

Old English &thorn;usend, from Proto-Germanic *thusundi (cognates: Old Frisian thusend, Dutch
duizend, Old High German dusunt, German tausend, Old Norse &thorn;usund, Gothic &thorn;usundi).
Related to words in Balto-Slavic (Lithuanian tukstantis, Old Church Slavonic tysashta, Polish
tysi&#261;c, Russian tysiacha, Czech tisic), and probably ultimately a compound with indefinite
meaning great multitude, several hundred, literally swollen-hundred, with first element from PIE
root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh).    Used to translate Greek khilias, Latin mille, hence the
refinement into the precise modern meaning. There was no general Indo-European word for thousand.
Slang shortening thou first recorded 1867. Thousand island dressing (1916) presumably is named for
the region of New York on the St. Lawrence River.


thousandth (adj.)

1550s, from thousand + -th (1).


Thrace

Greek Thrake, named for the people who inhabited it, whose name is of unknown origin, perhaps
Semitic. Related: Thracian.


thraldom (n.)

also thralldom, c.1200; see thrall + -dom.


thrall (n.)

late Old English &thorn;r&aelig;l bondman, serf, slave, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse
&thorn;r&aelig;ll slave, servant, figuratively wretch, scoundrel, probably from Proto-Germanic
*thrakhilaz, literally runner, from root *threh- to run (cognates: Old High German dregil servant,
properly runner; Old English &thorn;r&aelig;gan, Gothic &thorn;ragjan to run). Meaning condition of
servitude is from early 14c.


thrash (v.)

1580s, to separate grains from wheat, etc., by beating, dialectal variant of threshen (see thresh).
Sense of beat (someone) with (or as if with) a flail is first recorded 1620s. Meaning to make wild
movements like those of a flail or whip is attested from 1846. Related: Thrashed; thrashing. As a
noun from 1660s, threshing tool; 1840s as a beating; 1982 as the name for a type of fast heavy metal
music.


thread (n.)

Old English &thorn;r&aelig;d fine cord, especially when twisted (related to &thorn;rawan to twist),
from Proto-Germanic *thredu- twisted yarn (cognates: Old Saxon thrad, Old Frisian thred, Middle
Dutch draet, Dutch draad, Old High German drat, German Draht, Old Norse &thorn;ra&eth;r), literally
twisted, from suffixed form of PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, rub by turning, turn (see throw (v.)).
Meaning spiral ridge of a screw is from 1670s. Threads, slang for clothes is 1926, American English.


thread (v.)

to put thread through a needle, mid-14c., from thread (n.); in reference to film cameras from 1913.
The dancing move called thread the needle is attested from 1844. Related: Threaded; threading.


threadbare (adj.)

late 14c., from thread (n.) + bare. The notion is of having the nap worn off, leaving bare the
threads.


threat (n.)

Old English &thorn;reat crowd, troop, also oppression, coercion, menace, related to &thorn;reotan to
trouble, weary, from Proto-Germanic *thrautam (cognates: Dutch verdreiten, German verdrie&szlig;en
to vex), from PIE *treud- to push, press squeeze (cognates: Latin trudere to press, thrust, Old
Church Slavonic trudu oppression, Middle Irish trott quarrel, conflict, Middle Welsh cythrud
torture, torment, afflict). Sense of conditional declaration of hostile intention was in Old
English.


threaten (v.)

late 13c., attempt to influence by menacing, from Old English &thorn;reatnian to threaten (see
threat). Related: Threatened. Threatening in the sense of portending no good is recorded from 1520s.


three (adj.)

Old English &thorn;reo, fem. and neuter (masc. &thorn;ri, &thorn;rie), from Proto-Germanic *thrijiz
(cognates: Old Saxon thria, Old Frisian thre, Middle Dutch and Dutch drie, Old High German dri,
German drei, Old Norse &thorn;rir, Danish tre), from nominative plural of PIE root *trei- three
(cognates: Sanskrit trayas, Avestan thri, Greek treis, Latin tres, Lithuanian trys, Old Church
Slavonic trye, Irisn and Welsh tri three).   3-D first attested 1952, abbreviation of three-
dimensional (1878). Three-piece suit is recorded from 1909. Three cheers for ______ is recorded from
1751. Three-martini lunch is attested from 1972. Three-ring circus first recorded 1898. Three-sixty
complete turnaround is from 1927, originally among aviators, in reference to the number of degrees
in a full circle. Three musketeers translates French les trois mousquetaires, title of the 1844
novel by Alexandre Dumas p&egrave;re.


Three Rs (n.)

1824; said to have been given as a toast by Sir William Curtis (1752-1829), a beloved lord mayor of
London in the 1820s, who seems to have been a figure of fun to whom many mangled phrases were
attributed. Among the toasts he is alleged to have given at public dinners were The Female Ladies of
London; The three C's--Cox, King, and Curtis; and The three R's--Reading, Writing, and Rithmetic.
It has been very much the fashion amongst a class of persons to attribute to Sir W. C. ... a
vulgarity and ignorance of speech which are by no means consistent with his character and conduct.
The worthy and hospitable baronet has a rapid mode of speech, but it is always correct ; and
although some eccentricities are mixed up in his composition, he is highly honourable, and has been
a very useful member of society, particularly to his London constituents. [The Mirror, Jan. 29,
1825]    After listing some examples, the article continues:    It is, however, very certain, that
at a city festival some years ago, having indulged very freely, he fell asleep, when some wag,
choosing to consider him dead, wrote his epitaph, which was found next morning pinned to the
baronet's dress coat:--  Here lies the great Curtis,  Of London, Lord May'r:  He's left this here
world,  And gone to that there.


threefold (adj.)

late Old English &thorn;rifeald; see three + -fold.


threesome (n.)

late 14c., from three + -some (2).


threnody (n.)

song of lamentation, 1630s, from Greek threnodia lamentation, from threnos dirge, lament + oide ode
(see ode). Greek threnos probably is from PIE imitative root *dher- (3) to drone, murmur, hum;
cognates: Old English dran drone, Gothic drunjus sound, Greek tenthrene a kind of wasp.


thresh (v.)

Old English &thorn;rescan, &thorn;erscan, to beat, sift grain by trampling or beating, from Proto-
Germanic *threskan to thresh, originally to tread, to stamp noisily (cognates: Middle Dutch
derschen, Dutch dorschen, Old High German dreskan, German dreschen, Old Norse &thorn;reskja, Swedish
tr&#246;ska, Gothic &thorn;riskan), from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)).    The
basic notion is of men or oxen treading out wheat; later, with the advent of the flail, the word
acquired its modern extended sense of to knock, beat, strike. The original Germanic sense is
suggested by the use of the word in Romanic languages that borrowed it, such as Italian trescare to
prance, Old French treschier to dance, Spanish triscar to stamp the feet.


thresher (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from thresh. The thresher shark (c.1600) so called for its long upper tail,
which resembles a threshing tool.


threshold (n.)

Old English &thorn;rescold, &thorn;&aelig;rscwold, &thorn;erxold, etc., door-sill, point of
entering, probably literally something to tread upon, with first element related to Old English
&thorn;rescan (see thresh), with its original sense of tread, trample. Second element of unknown
origin and much transformed in all the Germanic languages, suggesting its literal sense was lost
even in ancient times. In English it probably has been altered to conform to hold, but the oft-
repeated story that the threshold was a barrier placed at the doorway to hold the chaff flooring in
the room is mere folk etymology. Cognates include Old Norse &thorn;reskjoldr, Swedish tr&ouml;skel,
Old High German driscufli, German dialectal drischaufel. Figurative use was in Old English.


threw

past tense of throw (q.v.).


thrice (adv.)

c.1200, from Old English &thorn;riga, &thorn;riwa thrice (from &thorn;rie three; see three) +
adverbial genitive -es, changed c.1600 to -ce to reflect voiceless pronunciation.


thrift (n.)

c.1300, fact or condition of thriving, also prosperity, savings, from Middle English thriven to
thrive (see thrive), influenced by (or from) Old Norse &thorn;rift, variant of &thorn;rif
prosperity, from &thorn;rifask to thrive. Sense of habit of saving, economy first recorded 1550s
(thrifty in this sense is recorded from 1520s; also see spendthrift). Thrift shop attested by 1919.


thrifty (adj.)

late 14c., respectable, from thrift + -y (2). Meaning frugal is from 1520s. Related: Thriftily;
thriftiness.


thrill (v.)

early 14c., to pierce, penetrate, metathesis of Old English &thorn;yrlian to perforate, pierce, from
&thorn;yrel hole (in Middle English, also nostril), from &thorn;urh through (compare Middle High
German d&uuml;rchel pierced, perforated; see through) + -el. Meaning give a shivering, exciting
feeling is first recorded 1590s, via metaphoric notion of pierce with emotion. Related: Thrilled;
thrilling.


thrill (n.)

a shivering, exciting feeling, 1670s, from thrill (v.). Meaning a thrilling experience is attested
from 1936.


thriller (n.)

1889, sensational story, agent noun from thrill (v.).


thrive (v.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse &thorn;rifask to thrive, originally grasp to
oneself, probably reflexive of &thorn;rifa to clutch, grasp, grip, take hold of (compare Norwegian
triva to seize, Swedish trifvas, Danish trives to thrive, flourish), of unknown origin. Related:
Thrived (or throve); thriving.


thro (prep.)

shorter spelling of through.


throat (n.)

Old English &thorn;rote (implied in &thorn;rotbolla the Adam's apple, larynx, literally throat
boll), related to &thorn;rutian to swell, from Proto-Germanic *thrut- (cognates: Old High German
drozza, German Drossel, Old Saxon strota, Middle Dutch strote, Dutch strot throat), of uncertain
origin. Italian strozza throat, strozzare to strangle are Germanic loan-words. College slang for
competitive student is 1970s, from cutthroat.


throaty (adj.)

1640s, from throat + -y (2). Related: Throatily; throatiness.


throb (v.)

late 14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps meant to represent in sound the pulsation of arteries and
veins or the heart. Related: Throbbed; throbbing. The noun is first attested 1570s.


throe (n.)

c.1200, throwe pain, pang of childbirth, agony of death, of uncertain origin, possibly from Old
English &thorn;rawan twist, turn, writhe (see throw (v.)), or altered from Old English &thorn;rea
(genitive &thorn;rawe) affliction, pang, evil; threat, persecution (related to &thorn;rowian to
suffer), from Proto-Germanic *thrawo (cognates: Middle High German dro threat, German drohen to
threaten). Modern spelling first recorded 1610s. Related: Throes.


thrombo-

before vowels thromb-, word-forming element meaning blood clot, from comb. form Greek thrombos clot
of blood (see thrombus).


thrombophlebitis (n.)

1872, from thrombo- + phlebitis.


thrombosis (n.)

1706, Modern Latin, from Greek thrombosis a clumping or curdling (from thrombousthai become curdled
or clotted, from thrombos clot, curd, lump; see thrombus) + -osis.


thrombus (n.)

1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek thrombos lump, piece, clot of blood, curd of milk.


throne (n.)

c.1200, trone, the seat of God or a saint in heaven; c.1300 as seat occupied by a sovereign, from
Old French trone (12c., Modern French tr&#244;ne), from Latin thronus, from Greek thronos elevated
seat, chair, throne, from PIE root *dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (cognates: Latin firmus firm,
steadfast, strong, stable, Sanskrit dharma statute, law; see firm (adj.)). From late 14c. as a
symbol of royal power. Colloquial meaning toilet is recorded from 1922. The classical -h- begins to
appear in English from late 14c.


throng (n.)

c.1300, probably shortened from Old English ge&thorn;rang crowd, tumult (related to verb
&thorn;ringan to push, crowd, press), from Proto-Germanic *thrangan (cognates: Old Norse
&thorn;r&ouml;ng, Dutch drang, German Drang crowd, throng).


throng (v.)

go in a crowd, 1530s, from throng (n.). Earlier it meant to press, crush (c.1400). Related:
Thronged; thronging.


throstle (n.)

thrush, Old English &thorn;rostle thrush, from Proto-Germanic *thrust- (cognates: Old Saxon throsla,
Old High German droscala, German Drossel thrush), altered from (perhaps a diminutive of) *thurstaz
(see thrush (n.1)).


throttle (v.)

strangle to death, c.1400, probably from Middle English throte throat (see throat) + -le, perhaps a
frequentive suffix (as in spark/sparkle), or a utensil suffix (as in handle), or simply to
distinguish it from throat (v.), which in late 14c. was used to mean cut the throat of, kill by
cutting the throat. Related: Throttled; throttling.


throttle (n.)

1540s, throat; it appears to be an independent formation from throat, perhaps a diminutive form, not
derived directly from the verb. The mechanical sense is first recorded 1872, short for throttle-
valve (1824). Full-throttle (allowing maximum speed) is from 1848 in reference to steam engines.


through (prep., adv.)

late 14c., metathesis of Old English &thorn;urh, from Proto-Germanic *thurkh (cognates: Old Saxon
thuru, Old Frisian thruch, Middle Dutch dore, Dutch door, Old High German thuruh, German durch,
Gothic &thorn;airh through), from PIE root *tere- (2) to cross over, pass through, overcome
(cognates: Sanskrit tirah, Avestan taro through, beyond, Latin trans beyond, Old Irish tre, Welsh
tra through). Not clearly differentiated from thorough until early Modern English. Spelling thro was
common 15c.-18c. Reformed spelling thru (1839) is mainly American English.


throughly (adv.)

fully, completely, mid-15c., from through + -ly (2). Archaic alternative to thoroughly.


throughout (prep.)

late Old English &thorn;urhut; see through + out (adv.). Similar formation in German durchaus.


throughput (n.)

energy, activity, 1808, Scottish slang; from through + put. Industrial sense is from 1915.


throughway (n.)

expressway, large toll road, 1934, American English, from through + way (n.).


throve

sometime past tense of thrive (v.).


throw (v.)

to project, propel, c.1300, from Old English &thorn;rawan to twist, turn, writhe, curl, (past tense
&thorn;reow, past participle &thorn;rawen), from Proto-Germanic *threw- (cognates: Old Saxon
thraian, Middle Dutch dr&aelig;yen, Dutch draaien, Old High German draen, German drehen to turn,
twist; not found in Scandinavian or Gothic), from PIE *tere- (1) to rub, turn, rub by turning, bore
(cognates: Sanskrit turah wounded, hurt, Greek teirein to rub, rub away, Latin terere to rub,
thresh, grind, wear away, Old Church Slavonic tiro to rub, Lithuanian trinu to rub, Old Irish
tarathar borer, Welsh taraw to strike).    Not the usual Old English word for to throw (weorpan,
related to warp (v.) was common in this sense). The sense evolution may be via the notion of
whirling a missile before throwing it. The sense of put by force (as in throw in jail) is first
recorded 1550s; that of confuse, flabbergast is from 1844; that of lose deliberately is from 1868.
To throw the book at (someone) is 1932, from notion of judge sentencing a criminal from a law book
full of possible punishments. To throw (one's) hat in the ring issue a challenge, especially to
announce one's candidacy, first recorded 1917. To throw up vomit is first recorded 1732. To throw
(someone) off confuse by a false scent is from 1891.


throw (n.)

act of throwing, 1520s, from throw (v.). Wrestling sense is first attested 1819.


throwaway (adj.)

also throw-away, 1901 in reference to very low prices; by 1903 in reference to printed material
meant to be read once then tossed, and to wasted votes; with reference to disposable consumer goods,
attested from 1969. From the verbal phrase, attested from late 14c. in the sense reject, cast from
oneself, from throw (v.) + away (adv.). More literal meaning of dispose of as useless, release from
one's possession as unneeded is first recorded 1520s. Throw-away society attested from 1967.


throwback (n.)

also throw-back, reversion to an ancestral type or character, 1888, from throw (v.) + back (adv.);
earlier it meant a reverse in a course or progress, a relapse (1856).


thrown

past participle of throw (v.).


thru (prep.)

by 1839, altered spelling of through; at first often in representations of dialect (Scottish,
Yankee), by 1880s in standard use as a simplified spelling.


thrum (v.)

play a stringed instrument, 1590s, from the noun (1550s), of imitative origin. Related: Thrummed;
thrumming.


thruout

contraction of throughout.


thrush (n.1)

type of songbird, Old English &thorn;r&#230;sce, variant of &thorn;rysce, from Proto-Germanic
*thruskjon (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;r&ouml;str, Norwegian trost, Old High German drosca), from
PIE *trozdo- (cognates: Latin turdus, Lithuainian strazdas thrush, Middle Irish truid, Welsh drudwy
starling, Old Church Slavonic drozgu, Russian drozdu).


thrush (n.2)

throat disease, 1660s, probably from a Scandinavian source (such as Norwegian, Danish tr&oslash;ske,
Swedish torsk), but its roots and original meaning are unclear.


thrust (v.)

late 12c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse &thorn;rysta to thrust, force, press, from
Proto-Germanic *thrustijanan, perhaps from PIE *treud- push, press (see threat), but OED finds this
derivation doubtful. Related: Thrusting.


thrust (n.)

1510s, act of pressing, from thrust (v.). Meaning act of thrusting (in the modern sense) is from
1580s. Meaning propulsive force is from 1708. Figurative sense of principal theme, aim, point,
purpose is recorded from 1968.


thruster (n.)

type of rocket engine, 1962, agent noun; see thrust (n.).


thud (v.)

Old English &thorn;yddan to strike, stab, thrust, press, of imitative origin. Sense of hit with a
dull sound first recorded 1796. Related: Thudded; thudding. The noun is attested from 1510s as blast
of wind; 1530s as loud sound.


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


thuggery (n.)

1839, from thug + -ery. Also thugee, from the native Hindi name for the system of religious
assassination practiced by the thugs.


thuggish (adj.)

ruffianly, brutal and forceful, 1870, from thug + -ish. Related: Thuggishly; thuggishness.


Thule

region or island at northernmost part of the world, Old English, from Latin, from Greek Thyle land
six days' sail north of Britain (Strabo, quoting a lost portion of a work by Polybius, itself based
on a lost account of a voyage to the north by 4c. B.C.E. geographer Pytheas). The identity of the
place and the source of the name have sparked much speculation; Polybius doubted the whole thing,
and since Roman times the name has been used in a transferred sense of extreme limits of travel
(Ultima Thule).    The barbarians showed us where the sun set. For it happened in those places that
the night was extremely short, lasting only two or three hours; and the sun sunk under the horizon,
after a short interval reappeared at his rising. [Pytheas]    The name was given to a trading post
in Greenland in 1910, site of a U.S. air base in World War II.


thulium (n.)

1879, Modern Latin, from thulia (thulite), name of an earth found in Scandinavia, from which the
element was identified in 1879 by Swedish geologist Per Tedor Cleve (1840-1905), from Thule, which
sometimes was identified as Scandinavia.


thumb (n.)

Old English &thorn;uma, from Proto-Germanic *thumon- (cognates: Old Frisian thuma, Old Saxon, Old
High German thumo, German Daumen, Dutch duim thumb, Old Norse &thorn;umall thumb of a glove),
literally the stout or thick (finger), from PIE *tum- swell, from root *teue- (2) to swell (see
thigh). For spelling with -b (attested from late 13c.), see limb.    To be under (someone's) thumb
be totally controlled by that person is recorded from 1580s. Thumbs up (1887) and thumbs down (1906)
were said to be from expressions of approval or the opposite in ancient amphitheaters, especially
gladiator shows, where the gesture decided whether a defeated combatant was spared or slain. But the
Roman gesture was merely one of hiding the thumb in the hand or extending it. Perhaps the modern
gesture is from the usual coachmen's way of greeting while the hands are occupied with the reins.


thumb (v.)

to go through (especially of printed material), 1930, from thumb (n.), though the related sense of
soil or wear by handling dates from 1640s. Earlier as a verb it meant to play (a musical instrument)
with the thumb (1590s). Meaning to hitchhike is 1939; originally the thumb pointed in the direction
one wished to travel. Related: Thumbed; thumbing. To thumb (one's) nose as an expression of derision
is recorded from 1903.


thumbnail (n.)

c.1600, from thumb (n.) + nail (n.). Meaning drawing or sketch of a small size (though usually not
literally the size of a thumbnail) is from 1852.


thumbtack (n.)

tack with a broad, flat head which may be driven by pressure from the thumb, 1884, from thumb (n.) +
tack (n.1).


thump (v.)

1530s, to strike hard, probably imitative of the sound made by hitting with a heavy object (compare
East Frisian dump a knock, Swedish dialectal dumpa to make a noise). Related: Thumped; thumping.


thump (n.)

1550s, dull, heavy sound, from thump (v.). As a hard blow from 1620s.


thumping (adj.)

exceptionally large, colloquial, 1570s, present participle adjective from thump (v.).


thunder (n.)

mid-13c., from Old English &thorn;unor thunder, thunderclap; the god Thor, from Proto-Germanic
*thunraz (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;orr, Old Frisian thuner, Middle Dutch donre, Dutch donder, Old
High German donar, German Donner thunder), from PIE *(s)tene- to resound, thunder (cognates:
Sanskrit tanayitnuh thundering, Persian tundar thunder, Latin tonare to thunder). Swedish
tord&ouml;n is literally Thor's din. The intrusive -d- also is found in Dutch and Icelandic versions
of the word. Thunder-stick, imagined word used by primitive peoples for gun, attested from 1904.


thunder (v.)

13c., from Old English &thorn;unrian, from the source of thunder (n.). Figurative sense of to speak
loudly, threateningly, or bombastically is recorded from mid-14c. Related: Thundered; thundering.
Compare Dutch donderen, German donnern.


thunderbird (n.)

legendary cause of thunder in many Native American cultures, 1848, a translation of native words,
such as Ojibwa (Algonquian) aninikii, Lakotah (Siouan) wakiya, Klamath /lmelmnis/. See thunder (n.)
+ bird (n.1). In Lakhota, the thunderbirds call is the usual expression for thunder [Bright].


thunderbolt (n.)

mid-15c., from thunder (n.) + bolt (n.) arrow, projectile.


thunderclap (n.)

also thunder-clap, late 14c., from thunder (n.) + clap (n.1).


thunderhead (n.)

high-piled cumulus cloud, one likely to develop into a thunderstorm, 1861, from thunder (n.) + head
(n.).


thunderous (adj.)

1580s, from thunder (n.) + -ous. Related: Thunderously.


thunderstorm (n.)

also thunder-storm, 1560s, from thunder (n.) + storm (n.).


thunderstruck (adj.)

1610s, from thunder (n.) + struck. Originally figurative; the literal sense (1630s) always has been
rare. Thunder-strike (v.), is a back-formation.


thunk (n.)

sound of impact, attested from 1952, echoic.


thunk (v.)

dialectal or jocular past tense or past participle of think, by 1876. Not historical, but by analogy
of drink/drunk, sink/sunk, etc.


Thuringia

region in Germany, German Th&#252;ringen, named for the ancient Thoringi people.


Thursday (n.)

fifth day of the week, Old English &thorn;urresd&aelig;g, a contraction (perhaps influenced by Old
Norse &thorn;orsdagr) of &thorn;unresd&aelig;g, literally Thor's day, from &THORN;unre, genitive of
&THORN;unor Thor (see thunder (n.)); from Proto-Germanic *thonaras daga (cognates: Old Frisian
thunresdei, Middle Dutch donresdach, Dutch donderdag, Old High German Donares tag, German
Donnerstag, Danish and Swedish Torsdag Thursday), a loan-translation of Latin Jovis dies day of
Jupiter.    Roman Jupiter was identified with the Germanic Thor. The Latin word is the source of
Italian giovedi, Old French juesdi, French jeudi, Spanish jueves, and is itself a loan-translation
of Greek dios hemera the day of Zeus.


thus (adv.)

Old English &thorn;us in this way, as follows, related to &thorn;&aelig;t that and this; from Proto-
Germanic *thus- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian thus, Middle Dutch and Dutch dus), from PIE
*to-.


thusly (adv.)

1865 (in an Artemus Ward dialect humor piece), from thus + -ly (2). A double adverb. Perhaps
originally a humorous or mocking over-correction of thus; it has gained some currency but earns
frowns for the user.


thwack (v.)

to hit hard with a stick, 1520s, of echoic origin. Related: Thwacked; thwacking. The noun is
recorded from 1580s.


thwaite (n.)

cleared land, 1620s, from Old Norse or Old Danish &thorn;veit a clearing, meadow, paddock, literally
a cutting, cut-piece (related to Old English &thorn;witan to cut, cut off; see whittle). Always a
rare word and now obsolete, but frequently encountered in place names, but It is unclear whether the
base meaning was 'something cut off, detached piece of land,' or 'something cut down, felled tree'
... [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names].


thwart (adv.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source, probably Old Norse &thorn;vert across, originally neuter of
thverr (adj.) transverse, across, cognate with Old English &thorn;weorh transverse, perverse, angry,
cross, from Proto-Germanic *thwerh- twisted, oblique (cognates: Middle Dutch dwers, Dutch dwars
cross-grained, contrary, Old High German twerh, German quer, Gothic &thorn;wairhs angry), altered
(by influence of *thwer- to turn) from *therkh-, from PIE *terkw- to twist (cognates: Latin torquere
to twist, Sanskrit tarkuh spindle, Old Church Slavonic traku band, girdle, Old High German drahsil
turner, German drechseln to turn on a lathe), possibly a variant of *twerk- to cut. From mid-13c. as
an adjective.


thwart (v.)

oppose, hinder, mid-13c., from thwart (adv.). Related: Thwarted; thwarting.


thy (pron.)

possessive pronoun of 2nd person singular, late 12c., reduced form of &thorn;in (see thine), until
15c. used only before consonants except -h-. Compare my/mine, a/an.


thyme (n.)

plant of the mint family, late 14c., from Old French thym, tym (13c.) and directly from Latin
thymum, from Greek thymon, from PIE *dheu- (1), base of words meaning to rise in a cloud (see fume
(n.)); thus thyme might be the plant having a strong odor, or it might be related to thyein burn as
a sacrifice, which would indicate the plant was used as incense. Related: Thymic.


thymine (n.)

nitrogenous base, 1894, from German (Kossel and Neumann, 1893), from thymic acid, from which it was
isolated, the acid so called because obtained from the thymus gland. With chemical suffix -ine (2).


thymus (n.)

gland near the base of the neck, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek thymos a warty excrescence, used of
the gland by Galen, literally thyme, probably so called because of a fancied resemblance to a bud of
thyme (see thyme). Related: Thymic.


thyroid (adj.)

1690s (in reference to both the cartilage and the gland), from Greek thyreoiedes shield-shaped (in
khondros thyreoiedes shield-shaped cartilage, used by Galen to describe the Adam's apple in the
throat), from thyreos oblong, door-shaped shield (from thyra door, from PIE *dhwer-; see door) +
-eides form, shape (see -oid). The noun, short for thyroid gland, is recorded from 1849.


thyroxine (n.)

active principle of the thyroid gland, 1915, from thyro-, comb. form of thyroid, + oxy- (apparently
a reference to the oxygen atom present in it, but OED has it as a shortening of oxy-indol) +
chemical suffix -ine (2), denoting an amino acid.


thyrsus (n.)

1590s, from Latinized form of Greek thyrsos, literally stalk or stem of a plant, a non-Greek word of
unknown origin. The staff or spear, tipped with an ornament like a pine cone and sometimes wreathed
in ivy and vine branches, borne by Dionysus and his votaries.


thyself (pron.)

Middle English &thorn;i-self, from Old English &thorn;e self; see thy + self. One word from 16c. A
pronoun used reflexively for emphasis after (or in place of) thou.


ti

seventh note of the musical scale, 1842, earlier te (1839), replacing si to avoid confusion with so,
sol (see gamut).


Tia Maria (n.)

coffee-flavored, rum-based liqueur, originally made in the West Indies, 1948, Spanish, literally
Aunt Mary.


tiara (n.)

1550s, headdress of the Persian kings (also worn by men of rank), from Latin tiara, from Greek
tiara, of unknown origin. Earlier in anglicized form tiar (1510s). As a richly jeweled headband in
Western wear, 1650s (tiar; 1718 as tiara). Related: Tiaraed.


Tib

1530s, typical name for an English woman of the lower class, hence girl, lass, sweetheart, sometimes
also strumpet, from the pet form of Isabel. Often paired with Tom, as Jill was with Jack. Colloquial
St. Tibb's Eve (1785) was the evening of the last day, the Day of Judgement, hence never.


Tiber

river through Rome, likely from Celtic dubro river (compare Dover). Related: Tiburtine.


Tibert

name of the cat in Reynard the Fox (late 15c.), hence used as a proper name for any cat, from
Flemish and Dutch Tybert, Old French Tibert. Identified with masc. proper name Tibalt, which is from
Old French Thibauld, from Germanic *Theobald (see Theobald).


Tibet

said to be a corruption in Chinese or Arabic of Bod, indigenous name, of unknown origin. As an
adjective in English, Tibetian is older (1747) but Tibetan (1822) is now the usual word. With comb.
form Tibeto-.


tibia (n.)

lower leg bone, 1726, from Latin tibia shinbone, also pipe, flute (originally one of bone), in which
sense it originally came into English (1540s). Of unknown origin. The Latin plural is tibi&aelig;.
Related: Tibial.


tic (n.)

twitching of a facial muscle, 1822, often a shortening of tic douloureux severe facial neuralgia,
literally painful twitch (1798), from French tic a twitching disease of horses (17c.), of unknown
origin. Klein suggests an imitative origin; Diez compare it to Italian ticchio whim, caprice,
ridiculous habit, itself of unknown origin.


tic douloureux (n.)

1798, French, literally painful twitching; see tic.


tick (n.1)

parasitic blood-sucking arachnid animal, Old English ticia, from West Germanic *tik- (cognates:
Middle Dutch teke, Dutch teek, Old High German zecho, German Zecke tick), of unknown origin, perhaps
from PIE *deigh- insect. French tique (mid-15c.), Italian zecca are Germanic loan-words.


tick (n.2)

mid-15c., light touch or tap, probably from tick (v.) and cognate with Dutch tik, Middle High German
zic, and perhaps echoic. Meaning sound made by a clock is probably first recorded 1540s; tick-tock
as the sound of a clock is recorded from 1845.


tick (v.)

early 13c., to touch or pat, perhaps from an Old English verb corresponding to tick (n.2), and
perhaps ultimately echoic. Compare Old High German zeckon to pluck, Dutch tikken to pat, Norwegian
tikke touch lightly. Meaning make a ticking sound is from 1721. Related: Ticked; ticking.    To tick
(someone) off is from 1915, originally to reprimand, scold. The verbal phrase tick off was in use in
several senses at the time: as what a telegraph instrument does when it types out a message (1873),
as what a clock does in marking the passage of time (1777), to enumerate on one's fingers (1899),
and in accountancy, etc., make a mark beside an item on a sheet with a pencil, etc., often
indicating a sale (by 1881, from tick (n.2) in sense small mark or dot). This last might be the
direct source of the phrase, perhaps via World War I military bureaucratic sense of being marked off
from a list as dismissed or ineligible. Meaning to annoy is recorded by 1971.


tick (n.3)

credit, 1640s, shortening of ticket (n.).


tick-tack-toe (n.)

children's three-in-a-row game with Xs and Os, so called by 1892, earlier tit-tat-toe (by 1852, in
reminiscences of earlier years), also called noughts and crosses (1852). Probably from the sound of
the pencil on the slate with which it originally was played by schoolboys. Also the name of a
children's counting rhyme played on slate (also originally tit-tat-toe, by 1842), and compare tick-
tack (1580s), a form of backgammon, possibly from Middle French trictrac, perhaps imitative of the
sound of tiles on the board.


ticker (n.)

1821, something that ticks, agent noun from tick (v.); slang meaning heart first recorded 1930.
Ticker tape (1891) is from ticker telegraphic device for recording stock market quotations, etc.
(1883).


ticket (n.)

1520s, short note or document, from a shortened form of Middle French etiquet label, note, from Old
French estiquette a little note (late 14c.), especially one affixed to a gate or wall as a public
notice, literally something stuck (up or on), from estiquer to affix, stick on, attach, from
Frankish *stikkan, cognate with Old English stician to pierce, from Proto-Germanic *stikken to be
stuck, stative form from PIE *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick (v.)).    Meaning card or piece of
paper that gives its holder a right or privilege is first recorded 1670s, probably developing from
the sense of certificate, license, permit. The political sense of list of candidates put forward by
a faction has been used in American English since 1711. Meaning official notification of offense is
from 1930. Big ticket item is from 1953. Slang the ticket just the thing, what is expected is
recorded from 1838, perhaps with notion of a winning lottery ticket.


ticket (v.)

1610s, attach a ticket to, put a label on, from ticket (n.). Meaning issue a (parking) ticket to is
from 1955. Related: Ticketed; ticketing.


ticking (n.)

cloth covering (usually of strong cotton or linen) for mattresses or pillows, 1640s, from tyke
(modern tick) with the same meaning (mid-14c.), probably from Middle Dutch tike, from a West
Germanic borrowing of Latin theca case, from Greek theke a case, box, cover, sheath (see theco-).


tickle (v.)

early 14c. (intransitive) to be thrilled or tingling, of uncertain origin, possibly a frequentative
form of tick (v.) in its older sense of to touch. The Old English form was tinclian. Some suggest a
metathesis of kittle (Middle English kytyllen), from Dutch kietelen, from a common North Sea
Germanic word for to tickle (compare Old Norse kitla, Old High German kizzilon, German kitzeln).
Meaning to excite agreeably (late 14c.) is a translation of Latin titillare. Meaning to touch
lightly so as to cause a peculiar and uneasy sensation in the nerves is recorded from late 14c.;
that of to poke or touch so as to excite laughter is from early 15c.; figurative sense of to excite,
amuse is attested from 1680s. Related: Tickled; tickling. The noun is recorded from 1801. To tickle
(one's) fancy is from 1640s.


tickled (adj.)

pleased, happy, 1580s, past participle adjective from tickle (v.). To be tickled pink is from 1909.


ticklish (adj.)

easily tickled, 1590s, from tickle + -ish. Literal sense is attested later than the figurative sense
easy to upset (1580s). An earlier word for this was tickly (1520s). Meaning difficult to do,
dubious, requiring great care is from 1590s. Related: Ticklishly; ticklishness.


ticky-tacky (n.)

inferior, cheap material, 1962 (in song Little Boxes by U.S. political folk-singer Malvina Reynolds,
1900-1978), reduplication of tacky. As an adjective by 1967.


Ticonderoga

place in New York state, from Mohawk (Iroquoian) tekotaro:ke branching (or confluence) of waters,
with -otar- large river, lake.


tidal (adj.)

1807, a hybrid formation from tide (n.) + Latin-derived suffix -al (1). A tidal wave (1819) properly
is high water caused by movements of the tides; erroneous use for tsunami, great ocean wave caused
by an earthquake, etc. is recorded from 1868.


tidbit (n.)

1630s, probably from dialectal tid fond, solicitous, tender (perhaps by influence of tit (n.2)) +
bit (n.1) morsel.


tiddlywinks (n.)

children's tile-flipping game, 1857, probably an arbitrary formation from baby talk, but perhaps
from slang tiddly-wink unlicensed drink shop (1844), from slang tiddly a drink, drunk.


tide (n.)

Old English tid point or portion of time, due time, period, season; feast-day, canonical hour, from
Proto-Germanic *tidiz division of time (cognates: Old Saxon tid, Dutch tijd, Old High German zit,
German Zeit time), from PIE *di-ti- division, division of time, suffixed form of root *da- to
divide, cut up (cognates: Sanskrit dati cuts, divides; Greek demos people, land, perhaps literally
division of society, daiesthai to divide; Old Irish dam troop, company).    Meaning rise and fall of
the sea (mid-14c.) probably is via notion of fixed time, specifically time of high water; either a
native evolution or from Middle Low German getide (compare Middle Dutch tijd, Dutch tij, German
Gezeiten flood tide, tide of the sea). Old English seems to have had no specific word for this,
using flod and ebba to refer to the rise and fall. Old English heahtid high tide meant festival,
high day.


tide (v.)

to carry (as the tide does), 1620s, from tide (n.). Usually with over. Earlier it meant to happen
(Old English; see tidings). Related: Tided; tiding.


tidewater (n.)

also tide-water, 1772, water affected by the normal ebb and flow of the tide, from tide (n.) + water
(n.1). In reference to the lowland regions of the Virginia shore of the western Chesapeake Bay,
1832.


tidings (n.)

announcement of an event, c.1200, from late Old English tidung event, occurrence, piece of news,
verbal noun from Old English tidan to happen, or in part from Old Norse ti&eth;endi (plural) events,
news, from ti&eth;r (adj.) occurring, from PIE *di-ti- (see tide (n.)). Similar formation in
Norwegian tidende tidings, news, Dutch tijding, German Zeitung newspaper.


tidy (v.)

to make neat, set in order, 1821, from tidy (adj.). Related: Tidied; tidying.


tidy (adj.)

mid-13c., in good condition, healthy, probably originally in season, timely, opportune, excellent
(though this sense is not attested until mid-14c.), from tide (n.) in the sense of season, time + -y
(2). Of persons, of neat and orderly habits, from 1706. Similar formation in Old High German zitig,
German zeitig, Dutch tijdig, Danish tidig timely, Old English tidlic temporal, also timely,
seasonable.


tie (n.)

Old English teag, cord, band, thong, fetter, literally that with which anything is tied, from Proto-
Germanic *taugo (cognates: Old Norse taug tie, tygill string), from PIE *deuk- to pull, to lead
(cognates: Old English teon to draw, pull, drag; see duke (n.)).    Figurative sense is recorded
from 1550s.  Sense of cravat, necktie (usually a simple one knotted in front) first recorded 1761.
The railway sense of cross-beam between and beneath rails to keep them in place is from 1857,
American English. Meaning equality between competitors is first found 1670s, from notion of a
connecting link. Tie-breaker is recorded from 1938.


tie (v.)

Old English tigan, tiegan to tie, bind, join, connect, from the source of tie (n.). Meaning to
finish equal to a competitor is from 1888. Related: Tied; tying. To tie the knot in the figurative
sense form a union is from 1707. Tie one on get drunk is recorded from 1944.


tie-dye (v.)

1904, from tie (v.) + dye (v.) in reference to the method. Related: Tie-dyed.


tie-in (n.)

connection, 1934, from verbal phrase (attested by 1793), from tie (v.) + in (adv.).


tier (n.)

row, rank, range, mid-15c., from Middle French tire, from Old French tire (13c.) rank, sequence,
order, kind, also likeness, image; state, condition, probably from tirer to draw, draw out (see
tirade).


tierce (n.)

old unit of liquid measure equal to one-third of a pipe (42 gallons), 1530s, from Anglo-French ters,
Old French tierce (11c.). used in the sense one-third in various ways, from Latin tertia, fem. of
tertius a third, from PIE *tri-tyo-, from root *trei- (see three). Also used in Middle English for a
third part (late 15c.), the third hour of the canonical day (ending at 9 a.m.), late 14c., and, in
astronomy and geometry, sixtieth part of a second of an arc.


tiff (n.)

1727, outburst of temper, later petty quarrel (1754), of uncertain origin; OED suggests imitative,
from the sound of a slight puff of air or gas.


tiffany (n.)

type of thin, transparent fabric, c.1600; earlier a common name for the festival of the Epiphany
(early 14c.; in Anglo-French from late 13c.), from Old French Tifinie, Tiphanie Epiphany (c.1200),
from Late Latin Theophania Theophany, another name for the Epiphany, from Greek theophania the
manifestation of a god (see theophany).    Also popular in Old French and Middle English as a name
given to girls born on Epiphany Day. The fabric sense is found only in English and is of obscure
origin and uncertain relation to the other meanings, unless holiday silk or as a fanciful or playful
allusion to manifestation:    The invention of that fine silke, Tiffanie, Sarcenet, and Cypres,
which instead of apparell to cover and hide, shew women naked through them. [Holland's Pliny, 1601]
The fashionable N.Y. jewelry firm Tiffany &amp; Co. (1895) is named for its founder, goldsmith
Charles L. Tiffany (1812-1902) and his son, Louis C. Tiffany (1848-1933), who was the art nouveau
decorator noted for his glassware. The surname is attested in English from 1206.


tig (n.)

child's game, 1816, earlier tick (1620s), variant of tag (n.2).


tiger (n.)

Old English tigras (plural), also in part from Old French tigre tiger (mid-12c.), both from Latin
tigris tiger, from Greek tigris, possibly from an Iranian source akin to Old Persian tigra- sharp,
pointed, Avestan tighri- arrow, in reference to its springing on its prey, but no application of
either word, or any derivative, to the tiger is known in Zend. [OED]. Of tiger-like persons from
c.1500. The meaning shriek or howl at the end of a cheer is recorded from 1845, American English,
and is variously explained. Tiger's-eye yellowish-brown quartz is recorded from 1886.


tight (adj.)

c.1400, tyght dense, close, compact, from Middle English thight, from Old Norse &thorn;ettr
watertight, close in texture, solid, and also from Old English -&thorn;iht (compare second element
in mete&thorn;iht stout from eating), both from Proto-Germanic *thinhta- (cognates: Middle High
German dihte dense, thick, German dicht dense, tight, Old High German gidigan, German gediegen
genuine, solid, worthy), from PIE root *tenk- (2) to become firm, curdle, thicken (cognates: Irish
techt curdled, coagulated, Lithuanian tankus close, tight, Persian tang tight, Sanskrit tanakti
draws together, contracts).    Sense of drawn, stretched is from 1570s; meaning fitting closely (as
of garments) is from 1779; that of evenly matched (of a contest, bargain, etc.) is from 1828,
American English; that of drunk is from 1830. Of persons, close, intimate, sympathetic from 1956.
From 1670s as an adverb; to sit tight is from 1738. Related: Tightly; tightness. Tight-assed
unwilling to relax is attested from 1903. Tight-laced is recorded from 1741 in both the literal and
figurative senses. Tight-lipped is first attested 1872.


tighten (v.)

to make tight, 1727; the earlier verb was simply tight, from Old English tyhtan, from the root of
tight. Related: Tightened; tightening.


tightrope (n.)

1801, from tight (adj.) + rope (n.). So called for being tensely stretched.


tights (n.)

1827, tight-fitting breeches, from tight. Meaning skin-tights worn by dancers, acrobats, etc. is
attested from 1836.


tightwad (n.)

parsimonious person, 1900, from tight in the figurative sense of close-fisted (1805) + wad (n.). The
notions of stringency and avarice also combine in Modern Greek sphiktos greedy, literally tight.


tigress (n.)

1610s, from tiger + -ess.


Tigris

river in Turkey and Iraq, from an Iranian source akin to words for arrow, probably in reference to
the swiftness of its current. Compare Old Persian tigra- sharp, pointed, Avestan tighri- arrow.


Tijuana

from the name of a Diegue&ntilde;o (Yuman) village, written Tiajuan in 1829; deformed by folk-
etymology association with Spanish Tia Juana Aunt Jane.


Tiki (n.)

large wooden image of the creator-ancestor of Maoris and Polynesians, 1777, from Eastern Polynesian
tiki image. Tiki torch is first recorded 1973.


til

variant of till (prep.) or short for until.


tilapia (n.)

1849, formed in Modern Latin, perhaps from Greek tilon, name of a fish in Aristotle, + apios
distant.


tilde (n.)

1864, from Spanish, metathesis of Catalan title, from vernacular form of Medieval Latin titulus
stroke over an abridged word to indicate missing letters, a specialized sense of Latin titulus,
literally inscription, heading (see title (n.)). The mark itself represents an -n- and was used in
Medieval Latin manuscripts in an abridged word over a preceding letter to indicate a missing -n- and
save space.


tile (n.)

early 14c., from Old English tigele roofing shingle, from Proto-Germanic *tegala (Old Saxon tiegla,
Old High German ziagal, German ziegel, Dutch tegel, Old Norse tigl), a borrowing from Latin tegula
roof-tile (source also of Italian tegola, French tuile), from tegere roof, to cover (see
stegosaurus). Also used in Old English and early Middle English for brick, before that word came
into use.


tile (v.)

to cover with tiles, late 14c., from tile (n.). Related: Tiled; tiling.


till (prep.)

until, Old English til (Northumbrian) to, from Old Norse til to, until, from Proto-Germanic *tilan
(cognates: Danish til, Old Frisian til to, till, Gothic tils convenient, German Ziel limit, end,
goal). A common preposition in Scandinavian, serving in the place of English to, probably originally
the accusative case of a noun now lost except for Icelandic tili scope, the noun used to express
aim, direction, purpose (as in aldrtili death, literally end of life). Also compare German Ziel end,
limit, point aimed at, goal, and till (v.).


till (v.)

cultivate (land) early 13c.; plow, late 14c., from Old English tilian cultivate, tend, work at, get
by labor, originally strive after, aim at, aspire to, related to till fixed point, goal, and til
good, useful, suitable, from Proto-Germanic *tilojan (cognates: Old Frisian tilia to get, cultivate,
Old Saxon tilian to obtain, Middle Dutch, Dutch telen to breed, raise, cultivate, cause, Old High
German zilon to strive, German zielen to aim, strive), from source of till (prep.).    For sense
development, compare expression work the land, Old Norse yrkja work, but especially cultivate (and
also to make verses); Old Church Slavonic delati work, also cultivate.  Related: Tilled; tilling.


till (n.)

cashbox, mid-15c., from Anglo-French tylle compartment, Old French tille compartment, shelter on a
ship, probably from Old Norse &thorn;ilja plank, floorboard, from Proto-Germanic *theljon. The other
theory [Klein, Century Dictionary] is that the word is from Middle English tillen to draw, from Old
English -tyllan (see toll (v.)), with a sense evolution as in drawer (see draw (v.)).


tillage (n.)

late 15c., from till (v.) + -age.


tiller (n.1)

mid-14c., stock of a crossbow, from Old French telier stock of a crossbow (c.1200), originally
weaver's beam, from Medieval Latin telarium, from Latin tela web; loom, from PIE *teks-la-, from
root *teks- to weave (see texture). Meaning bar to turn the rudder of a boat first recorded 1620s.


tiller (n.2)

one who tills, mid-13c., from till (v.).


tilt (v.1)

Old English *tyltan to be unsteady, from tealt unsteady, from Proto-Germanic *taltaz (cognates: Old
Norse tyllast to trip, Swedish tulta to waddle, Norwegian tylta to walk on tip-toe, Middle Dutch
touteren to swing). Meaning to cause to lean, tip, slope (1590s) is from sense of push or fall over.
Intransitive sense to lean, tip first recorded 1620s. Related: Tilted; tilting.


tilt (n.1)

a joust, a combat, 1510s, perhaps from tilt (v.1) on the notion of to lean into an attack, but the
word originally seems to have been the name of the barrier which separated the combatants, which
suggests connection with tilt in an earlier meaning covering of coarse cloth, an awning (mid-15c.).
This is perhaps from tilt (v.1), or related to or influenced by tent. Watkins derives it from Old
English teld awning, tent, related to beteldan to cover, from Proto-Germanic *teldam thing spread
out. Hence, also full tilt (c.1600). Pinball machine sense is from 1934.


tilt (n.2)

condition of being tilted, 1837, from tilt (v.1).


tilt (v.2)

to joust, 1590s, from tilt (n.1). Related: Tilted; tilting. The figurative sense of tilting at
windmills is suggested in English by 1798; the image is from Don Quixote, who mistook them for
giants.    So saying, and heartily recommending himself to his lady Dulcinea, whom he implored to
succour him in this emergency, bracing on his target, and setting his lance in the rest, he put his
Rozinante to full speed, and assaulting the nearest windmill, thrust it into one of the sails, which
was drove about by the wind with so much fury, that the lance was shivered to pieces, and both
knight and steed whirled aloft, and overthrown in very bad plight upon the plain. [Smollett
translation, 1755]


tilth (n.)

labor, work (especially in agriculture), Old English til&thorn; labor, husbandry, from tilian to
till (see till (v.)) + -th (2).


timber (n.)

Old English timber building, structure, in late Old English building material, trees suitable for
building, and trees or woods in general, from Proto-Germanic *timran (cognates: Old Saxon timbar a
building, room, Old Frisian timber wood, building, Old High German zimbar timber, wooden dwelling,
room, Old Norse timbr timber, German Zimmer room), from PIE *deme- to build, possibly from root
*dem- house, household (source of Greek domos, Latin domus; see domestic (adj.)).    The related Old
English verb timbran, timbrian was the chief word for to build (compare Dutch timmeren, German
zimmern). As a call of warning when a cut tree is about to fall, it is attested from 1912 in
Canadian English. Timbers in the nautical slang sense (see shiver (v.2)) is from the specialized
meaning pieces of wood composing the frames of a ship's hull (1748).    The timber-wolf (1846) of
the U.S. West is the gray wolf, not confined to forests but so-called to distinguish it from the
prairie-wolf (coyote).


timberline (n.)

1867, from timber + line (n.).


timbre (n.)

characteristic quality of a musical sound, 1849, from French timbre quality of a sound, earlier
sound of a bell, from Old French, bell without a clapper, originally small drum, probably via
Medieval Greek *timbanon, from Greek tympanon kettledrum (see tympanum). Timbre was used in Old
French (13c.) and Middle English (14c.) to render Latin tympanum in Ps. 150.


timbrel (n.)

percussive Middle Eastern instrument, c.1500, diminutive of timbre (14c.), from Old French timbre in
its older sense of drum (see timbre). Used in Bible translations, chiefly to render Hebrew toph,
cognate with Arabic duff drum, of imitative origin.


Timbuktu

city on the southern edge of the Sahara desert, older spelling Timbuctoo, used allusively in English
for most distant place imaginable from at least 1863. The name is from Songhai, literally hollow, in
reference to the depression in which it stands.


time (n.)

Old English tima limited space of time, from Proto-Germanic *timon- time (cognates: Old Norse timi
time, proper time, Swedish timme an hour), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- cut up,
divide (see tide (n.)).    Abstract sense of time as an indefinite continuous duration is recorded
from late 14c. Personified since at least 1509 as an aged bald man (but with a forelock) carrying a
scythe and an hour-glass. In English, a single word encompasses time as extent and point (French
temps/fois, German zeit/mal) as well as hour (as in what time is it? compare French heure, German
Uhr). Extended senses such as occasion, the right time, leisure, or times (v.) multiplied by
developed in Old and Middle English, probably as a natural outgrowth of such phrases as He commends
her a hundred times to God (Old French La comande a Deu cent foiz).  to have a good time ( = a time
of enjoyment) was common in Eng. from c 1520 to c 1688; it was app. retained in America, whence
readopted in Britain in 19th c. [OED]   Time of day (now mainly preserved in negation, i.e. what
someone won't give you if he doesn't like you) was a popular 17c. salutation (as in Good time of day
vnto your Royall Grace, Richard III, I.iii.18). The times the current age is from 1590s. Behind the
times old-fashioned is recorded from 1831. Times as the name of a newspaper dates from 1788.   Time
warp first attested 1954; time-traveling in the science fiction sense first recorded 1895 in H.G.
Wells' The Time Machine. Time capsule first recorded 1938, in reference to the one deemed capable of
resisting the effects of time for five thousand years preserving an account of universal
achievements embedded in the grounds of the New York World's fair.    Jones [archaeologist of A.D.
5139] potters about for a while in the region which we have come to regard as New York, finds
countless ruins, but little of interest to the historian except a calcified direction sheet to
something called a Time Capsule. Jones finds the capsule but cannot open it, and decides, after
considerable prying at the lid, that it is merely evidence of an archaic tribal ceremony called a
publicity gag of which he has already found many examples. [Princeton Alumni Weekly, April 14, 1939]
To do time serve a prison sentence is from 1865. Time frame is attested by 1964; time-limit is from
1880. About time, ironically for long past due time, is recorded from 1920.


time (v.)

Old English getimian to happen, befall, from time (n.). Meaning to appoint a time (of an action,
etc.) is attested from c.1300; sense of to measure or record the time of (a race, event, etc.) is
first attested 1660s. Related: Timed; timing.


time zone (n.)

by 1885, from time (n.) + zone (n.). As in Britain and France, the movement to regulate time
nationally came from the railroads.    Previous to 1883 the methods of measuring time in the United
States were so varied and so numerous as to be ludicrous. There were 50 different standards used in
the United States, and on one road between New York and Boston, whose actual difference is 12
minutes, there were three distinct standards of time. Even small towns had two different standards
one known as town or local time and the other railroad time.     ... At noon on November 18, 1883,
there was a general resetting of watches and clocks all over the United States and Canada, and the
four great time zones, one hour apart, into which the country was divided came into being. So
smoothly did the plan work that the general readjustment was accomplished without great difficulty
and it has worked satisfactorily ever since. [Railroad Trainman, 1909]


time-honored (adj.)

also time-honoured, 1590s; from time (n.) + past participle of honor (v.).


time-keeper (n.)

also timekeeper, 1680s, from time (n.) + keeper.


time-line (n.)

also timeline, 1876, from time (n.) + line (n.).


time-out (n.)

also time out, 1896 in sports, 1939 in other occupations; from 1980 as the name of a strategy in
child discipline; from time + out.


time-server (n.)

one who adapts his manners and opinions to the times, 1580s, from expression serve the time shape
one's views to what is in favor (1550s), translating Latin tempori servire. See time (n.) + serve
(v.).


time-sharing (n.)

1953, as a computing term, from time (n.) + verbal noun from share (v.). In real estate, as an
arrangement in property use, it is recorded from 1976.


time-span (n.)

also timespan, 1897, from time (n.) + span (n.1).


time-stamp (n.)

1888, from time (n.) + stamp (n.). As a verb by 1906. Related: Time-stamped.


time-worn (adj.)

1729, from time (n.) + worn (adj.).


timeless (adj.)

eternal, 1620s, from time (n.) + -less. Earlier it meant ill-timed (1550s). Related: Timelessly;
timelessness.


timely (adv.)

late Old English timlic quickly, soon; see time (n.) + -ly (2). As an adjective meaning occurring at
a suitable time it is attested from c.1200.


timeous (adj.)

timely, late 15c., from time (n.) + -ous. Related: Timeously.


timepiece (n.)

1765, from time (n.) + piece (n.).


timer (n.)

1908 as a mechanical device, agent noun from time (v.).


timetable (n.)

1838, originally of railway trains, from time (n.) + table (n.).


timewise (adv.)

also time-wise, 1898, from time (n.) + wise (n.).


timid (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French timide easily frightened, shy (16c.) and directly from Latin timidus
fearful, afraid, cowardly, from timere to fear, of uncertain origin. Related: Timidly; timidness.


timidity (n.)

1590s, from Latin timiditas fearfulness, faint-heartedness, cowardice, from timidus fearful, afraid
(see timid).


timing (n.)

mid-13c., a happening, verbal noun from time (v.). From 1590s as the noting or recording of time;
1915 as coordination of moving parts in a machinery.


timocracy (n.)

1580s, from Middle French tymocracie, from Medieval Latin timocratia (13c.), from Greek timokratia,
from time honor, worth (related to tiein to place a value on, to honor, from PIE *kwi-ma-, suffixed
form of root *kweie- (1) to value, honor) + -kratia rule (see -cracy). In Plato's philosophy, a form
of government in which ambition for honor and glory motivates the rulers (as in Sparta). In
Aristotle, a form of government in which political power is in direct proportion to property
ownership. Related: Timocratic; timocratical.


Timon (n.)

misanthrope, from Timon, name of a misanthrope who lived in Athens during the Peloponnesian War
(431-404 B.C.E.), hero of Shakespeare's Timon of Athens (c.1605).


Timor

island in the East Indies, Malay timur east (in reference to Java and Sumatra). Related: Timorese.


timorous (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French timoureus (14c.), from Medieval Latin timorosus fearful, from Latin
timor fear, dread, apprehension, anxiety; religious awe, reverence, from timere to fear, be afraid,
dread, of unknown origin. Some early senses in English seem to show confusion with Middle English
temerous rash (see temerity). Related: Timorously; timorousness.


Timothy

masc. proper name, from French Timoth&eacute;e, from Latin Timotheus, from Greek Timotheos,
literally honoring God, from time honor, respect (see timocracy) + theos god (see theo-).


timothy (n.)

1747, short for timothy grass (1736), American English name for cat-tail grass (Phleum pratense), a
native British grass introduced to the American colonies and cultivated there from c.1720. Said
since 1765 to be so called for a certain Timothy Hanson, who is said to have promoted it in the
Carolinas as an agricultural plant.


timpani (n.)

1876, plural of timpano (1740), from Italian timpani drums, from Latin tympanum drum (see tympanum).
Related: Timpanist.


tin (n.)

Old English tin, from Proto-Germanic *tinom (cognates: Middle Dutch and Dutch tin, Old High German
zin, German Zinn, Old Norse tin), of unknown origin, not found outside Germanic.    Other Indo-
European languages often have separate words for tin as a raw metal and tin plate; such as French
&eacute;tain, fer-blanc. Pliny refers to tin as plumbum album white lead, and for centuries it was
regarded as a form of silver debased by lead; hence its figurative use for mean, petty, worthless.
The chemical symbol Sn is from Late Latin stannum (see stannic).    Meaning container made of tin is
from 1795. Tin-can is from 1770; as naval slang for destroyer, by 1937. Tin-type in photography is
from 1864. Tin ear lack of musical discernment is from 1909. Tin Lizzie early Ford, especially a
Model T, first recorded 1915.


Tin Pan Alley (n.)

hit song writing business, 1907, from tin pan, slang for a decrepit piano (1882). The original one
was that little section of Twenty-eighth Street, Manhattan, that lies between Broadway and Sixth
Avenue, home to many music publishing houses.


Tina

fem. proper name, short for Cristina, etc.


tinct (n.)

color, tint, c.1600, from Latin tinctus a dyeing, from tingere to dye (see tincture).


tincture (n.)

c.1400, a coloring, dye, from Latin tinctura act of dyeing or tingeing, from tinctus dye, past
participle of tingere to tinge, dye, soak in color, originally merely to moisten, wet, soak, from
PIE root *teng- to soak (cognates: Old High German dunkon to soak, Greek tengein to moisten).
Meaning solution of medicine in a mixture of alcohol is first recorded 1640s. The verb is recorded
from 1610s. Related: Tinctured.


tinder (n.)

dry, inflammable substance, Old English tynder, from or related to tendan to kindle, from Proto-
Germanic *tund- ignite, kindle (cognates: Gothic tandjan, Swedish t&auml;nda, German z&uuml;nden to
kindle).


tinderbox (n.)

also tinder-box, box in which tinder and flint are kept, 1520s, from tinder + box (n.); figurative
sense of  'inflammable' person or thing is attested from 1590s.


tine (n.)

mid-14c., from Old English tind spike, beak, prong, tooth of a fork, a general Germanic word
(compare Old High German zint sharp point, spike, Old Norse tindr tine, point, top, summit, German
Zinne pinnacle), of unknown origin (see zinc).


tinea (n.)

late 14c., ringworm, from Latin tinea a gnawing worm, moth, bookworm, of uncertain origin. From
1650s as a type of moth (the larvae of which eat clothes, papers, etc.).


tinfoil (n.)

also tin-foil, late 15c., from tin (n.) + foil (n.).


tinge (v.)

late 15c., to dye, color slightly, from Latin tingere to dye, color (see tincture). Related: Tinged.
The noun is first recorded 1752.


tingle (v.)

late 14c., to have a ringing sensation when hearing something, also to have a stinging or thrilling
feeling, variation of tinkelen (see tinkle). Related: Tingled; tingling. The noun is first recorded
1700 in reference to sound, 1848 in reference to sensation.


tingly (adj.)

1898, from tingle + -y (2). Related: Tingliness.


tinhorn (adj.)

petty but flashy, 1857, from tin + horn (n.); originally of low-class gamblers, from the tin cans
they used for shaking dice.


tink

late 14c. (v.); c.1600 (n.), echoic.


tinker (n.)

mender of kettles, pots, pans, etc., late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), of uncertain origin. Some
connect the word with the sound made by light hammering on metal. Tinker's damn something slight and
worthless is from 1824, probably preserving tinkers' reputation for free and casual use of
profanity; the plain and simple etymology is not good enough for some writers, and since 1877 an
ingeniously elaborate but baseless derivation has been circulated claiming the second word is really
dam.


tinker (v.)

1590s, to work as a tinker, from tinker (n.). Meaning work imperfectly, keep busy in a useless way,
is first found 1650s. Related: Tinkered; tinkering.


tinkle (v.)

to make a gentle ringing sound, late 14c., possibly a frequentative form of tinken to ring, jingle,
perhaps of imitative origin. Meaning to urinate is recorded from 1960, from childish talk. Related:
Tinkled; tinkling. As a noun from 1680s.


tinman (n.)

tinsmith, 1610s, from tin (n.) + man (n.).


tinnitus (n.)

1843, from Latin tinnitus a ringing, jingling, from tinnire to ring, tinkle (see tintinnabulation).


tinny (adj.)

1550s, of tin, from tin + -y (2). Used figuratively (of sounds, etc.) since 1877.


tinsel (n.)

mid-15c., a kind of cloth made with interwoven gold or silver thread, from Middle French estincelle
spark, spangle (see stencil (n.)). In 14-15th c. Fr., the s of es- had long been mute [OED]. Meaning
very thin sheets or strips of shiny metal is recorded from 1590s. Figurative sense of anything showy
with little real worth is from 1650s, suggested from at least 1590s. First recorded use of
Tinseltown for Hollywood is from 1972.


tinsmith (n.)

1785, from tin + smith (n.).


tint (n.)

color, 1717, alteration of tinct (c.1600), from Latin tinctus a dyeing, from tingere to dye (see
tincture); influenced by Italian tinta tint, hue, from Latin tinctus.


tint (v.)

1756 (implied in tinted), from tint (n.). Related: Tinting.


tintinnabulation (n.)

the ringing of bells, 1823, from Latin tintinnabulum bell, from tintinnare to ring, jingle
(reduplicated form of tinnire to ring, from an imitative base) + instrumental suffix -bulum. Earlier
forms in English were adjectives tintinnabulary (1787), tintinnabulatory (1827), and noun
tintinnabulum small bell (late 14c.).


tiny (adj.)

1590s, from tyne very small (c.1400, perhaps from tine) + -y (2).


Tioga

place in New York state, from Mohawk (Iroquoian) teyo:ke junction, fork.


tip (v.1)

c.1300, to knock down, overturn, topple, knock askew (transitive), of uncertain origin, possibly
from Scandinavian (compare Swedish tippa to tip, dump), or from a special use of tip (n.).
Intransitive sense of to fall over, be overturned is from mid-15c. Related: Tipped; tipping. To tip
the scales at weigh (so much is from 1879. Tipping point attested by 1972. To tip (one's) hand
reveal one's intentions is from 1907, an image from poker-playing.


tip (n.1)

c.1400, extreme end of something, top of something round or pointed, metal attachment to the end of
something, from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch tip utmost point, extremity, tip (compare German
zipfel, a diminutive formation); or from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse typpi).


tip (v.2)

give a small present of money to, c.1600, originally to give, hand, pass, thieves' cant, perhaps
from tip (v.3) to tap. The meaning give a gratuity to is first attested 1706. The noun in this sense
is from 1755; the noun meaning piece of confidential information is from 1845; and the verb in the
sense give private information to is from 1883.    The word's supposed origin as an acronym is
highly unlikely and the story seems to be no older than an editorial in Life magazine from July 15,
1946, claiming the restaurant server's word tip probably comes from a London coffeehouse custom of
two centuries ago when the words 'To Insure Promptness' were written on notes to the waiter, with
coins attached. Later just the initials T.I.P. were used. There is no historical evidence for this.
Also <b>see here</b>.


tip (v.3)

c.1200, to strike, occur suddenly, of uncertain origin, possibly from Low German tippen to poke,
touch lightly, related to Middle Low German tip end, point, and thus connected to tip (n.); or else
related to tap (v.1). Meaning strike sharply but lightly is from 1560s. Sports sense is from 1816,
originally in cricket. Related: Tipped; tipping.


tip (n.2)

a light, sharp blow or tap, mid-15c., from tip (v.3).


tip (v.4)

put a tip on, adorn with a tip, late 14c., from tip (n.) or Old Norse typpa. Related: Tipped;
tipping.


tip-off (n.)

1901 in reference to information, from tip (v.2) + off (adv.). From 1924 in basketball, from tip
(v.3).


tip-top (n.)

extreme top, 1702, from tip (n.1) + top (n.1). Hence, most excellent.


Tipperary

place in Ireland, from Irish Tiobraid Arann well of the Ara (river).


tippet (n.)

c.1300, of unknown origin; perhaps from Old English t&aelig;ppet carpet, hanging.


tipple (v.)

c.1500 (implied in tippling), sell alcoholic liquor by retail, of unknown origin, possibly from a
Scandinavian source (such as Norwegian dialectal tipla to drink slowly or in small quantities).
Meaning drink (alcoholic beverage) too much is first attested 1550s. Related: Tippled.


tippler (n.)

late 14c., seller of alcoholic liquors, of uncertain origin (see tipple). In the sense of habitual
drinker it dates from 1570s.


tipstaff (n.)

1540s, tipped staff (truncheon with a tip or cap of metal) carried as an emblem of office, from tip
(n.) + staff (n.). As the name of an official who carries one (especially a sheriff's officer,
bailiff, constable, court crier, etc.) it is recorded from 1560s.


tipster (n.)

one who provides private information, 1862, from tip (v.2) + -ster.


tipsy (adj.)

1570s, from tip (v.1); compare drowsy, flimsy, tricksy. Later associated with tipple. Tipsy-cake
(1806) was stale cake saturated with wine or liquor.


tiptoe (n.)

late 14c., from tip (n.1) + toe (n.). As an adverb from 1590s; as a verb from 1630s. Related:
Tiptoes (late 14c.), also tiptoon; tip-toed. Tippy-toes is from 1820.


tirade (n.)

a long, vehement speech, a 'volley of words,'  1801, from French tirade a volley, a shot; a pull; a
long speech or passage; a drawing out (16c.), from tirer draw out, endure, suffer, or the French
noun is perhaps from or influenced by cognate Italian tirata a volley, from past participle of
tirare to draw. The whole Romanic word group is of uncertain origin. Barnhart suggests it is a
shortening of the source of Old French martirer endure martyrdom (see martyr).


tire (v.1)

to weary, also to become weary, Old English teorian (Kentish tiorian) to fail, cease; become weary;
make weary, exhaust, of uncertain origin, not found outside English. Related: Tired; tiring.


tire (n.)

late 15c., iron plates forming a rim of a carriage wheel, probably from tire equipment, dress,
covering (c.1300), a shortened form of attire (n.). The notion is of the tire as the dressing of the
wheel. The original spelling was tyre, which had shifted to tire in 17c.-18c., but since early 19c.
tyre has been revived in Great Britain and become standard there. Rubber ones, for bicycles (later
automobiles) are from 1877. A tire-iron originally was one of the iron plates; as a device for
separating a tire from a wheel, by 1909.


tire (v.2)

furnish with a tire, 1899, from tire (n.).


tired (adj.)

exhausted, fatigued, weary, early 15c., past participle adjective from tire (v.).


tiredness (n.)

1550s, from tired + -ness.


tireless (adj.)

1590s, indefatigable, from tire (v.) + -less. From 1862 in the sense without a tire, from tire (n.).
Related: Tirelessly.


tiresome (adj.)

tedious, c.1500, from tire (v.) + -some (1). Related: Tiresomely; tiresomeness.


Tironian

of or pertaining to Marcus Tullius Tiro, Cicero's scribe and namesake, 1828, especially in reference
to the Tironian Notes (Latin not&aelig; Tironian&aelig;), a system of shorthand said to have been
invented by him (see ampersand).    Although involving long training and considerable strain on the
memory, this system seems to have practically answered all the purposes of modern stenography. It
was still in familiar use as late as the ninth century. [Century Dictionary]


tisane (n.)

medicinal tea, 1931, from French tisane; earlier ptisan (14c.), from Latin ptisana, from Greek
ptisane crushed barley, related to ptissein to winnow, crush, peel (see pestle).


tissue (n.)

mid-14c., band or belt of rich material, from Old French tissu a ribbon, headband, belt of woven
material (c.1200), noun use of tissu woven, interlaced, past participle of tistre to weave, from
Latin texere to weave, to make (see texture (n.)). The biological sense is first recorded 1831, from
French, introduced c.1800 by French anatomist Marie-Fran&ccedil;ois-Xavier Bichal (1771-1802).
Meaning piece of absorbent paper used as a handkerchief is from 1929. Tissue-paper is from 1777,
supposedly so called because it was made to be placed between tissues to protect them.


tit (n.1)

breast, Old English titt teat, nipple, breast (a variant of teat). But the modern slang tits
(plural), attested from 1928, seems to be a recent reinvention, used without awareness of the
original form, from teat or from dialectal and nursery diminutive variant titties (pl.).


tit (n.2)

1540s, a word used for any small animal or object (as in compound forms such as titmouse, tomtit,
etc.); also used of small horses. Similar words in related senses are found in Scandinavian
(Icelandic tittr, Norwegian tita a little bird), but the connection and origin are obscure; perhaps,
as OED suggests, the word is merely suggestive of something small. Used figuratively of persons
after 1734, but earlier for a girl or young woman (1590s), often in deprecatory sense of a hussy,
minx.


tit for tat

1550s, possibly an alteration of tip for tap blow for blow, from tip (v.3) tap + tap touch lightly.
Perhaps influenced by tit (n.2).


titan (n.)

early 15c., from Latin titan, from Greek titan, member of a mythological race of giants who
attempted to scale heaven by piling Mount Pelion on Mount Ossa but were overthrown by Zeus and the
other gods. They descended from Titan, elder brother (or grandson) of Kronos. The name is perhaps
from tito sun, day, which probably is a loan-word from a language of Asia Minor. Sense of person or
thing of enormous size or ability first recorded 1828. Applied to planet Saturn's largest satellite
in 1831; it was discovered 1655 by Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens, who named it Saturni Luna
moon of Saturn. Related: Titaness; titanian.


titanic (adj.)

gigantic, colossal, 1709, from titan + -ic. The British passenger liner R.M.S. Titanic sank April
15, 1912, and the name became symbolic of the destruction of supposedly indestructible.


titanium (n.)

metallic element, 1796, Modern Latin, named in 1795 by German chemist and mineralogist Martin
Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817) from Latin Titan (see titan) as sons of the earth. He previously had
named uranium. A pure specimen was not isolated until 1887.


tithe (n.)

a tenth part (originally of produce) due as support of the clergy, c.1200, from Old English
teogo&thorn;a (Anglian), teo&thorn;a (West Saxon) tenth, from Proto-Germanic *teguntha, from PIE
*dekmto-, from *dekm ten (see ten). Retained in ecclesiastical sense while the form was replaced in
ordinal use by tenth.


tithe (v.)

Old English teo&thorn;ian to pay one-tenth, from the root of tithe (n.). As to impose a payment of a
tenth, late 14c. Related: Tithed; tithing.


tither (n.)

late 14c., one who pays a tithe, agent noun from tithe (v.). As one who exacts a tithe, 1590s.


titi (n.)

type of small South American monkey, 1832, from native name in Tupi, probably imitative.


Titian (n.)

1824, a painting by Venetian painter Tiziano Vecellio (c.1490-1576), from Anglicized form of his
name. Often also in reference to the tint of bright auburn hair favored by him in his work.


titillate (v.)

1610s, back-formation from titillation. Related: Titillated; titillating.


titillation (n.)

early 15c., pleasing excitement, from Latin titillationem (nominative titillatio) a tickling, noun
of action from past participle stem of titillare to tickle, imitative of giggling.


titivate (v.)

1805, perhaps from tidy, with a quasi-Latin ending [OED] as in cultivate.


title (n.)

c.1300, inscription, heading, from Old French title title or chapter of a book; position; legal
permit (12c., Modern French titre, by dissimilation), and in part from Old English titul, both from
Latin titulus inscription, label, ticket, placard, heading; honorable appellation, title of honor,
of unknown origin. Meaning name of a book, play, etc. first recorded mid-14c. The sense of name
showing a person's rank in English is first attested 1580s. Sports championship sense attested from
1913 (originally in lawn tennis), hence titlist (1913).


title (v.)

to furnish with a title, early 14c., from title (n.). Related: Titled; titling.


titmouse (n.)

small, active bird, early 14c., titmose, from tit (n.2), expressing something small, + Old English
mase titmouse, from Proto-Germanic *maison (cognates: Dutch mees, German meise), from adj. *maisa-
little, tiny. Spelling influenced 16c. by unrelated mouse, when mose had long been obsolete as an
independent word [OED]. The proper plural is titmouses.


titrate (v.)

1854, with -ate (2) + French titrer, from titre standard, title, also fineness of alloyed gold (see
title (n.)).


titration (n.)

in chemistry, the establishment of a standard strength or degree of concentration of a solution,
1864, noun of action from titrate (v.).


titter (v.)

1610s, giggle in a suppressed or nervous way, probably of imitative origin. Related: Tittered;
tittering. The noun is first recorded 1728.


titties (n.)

1746, tetties (plural), a nursery or dialect diminutive variant of teats (see teat).   Margery.
Come, be quite;--be quite, es zey, a grabbling o' wone's Tetties.---Es wont ha' ma Tetties a
grabbled zo ; ner es wont be mullad and foulad.---Stand azide; come, gi' o'er. [Exmoor Courtship,
or, A Suitoring Discourse, in the Devonshire Dialect and Mode, near the forest of Exmoor, 1746]


tittle (n.)

late 14c., small stroke or point in writing (Wyclif, in Matt. v:18), translating Latin apex in Late
Latin sense of accent mark over a vowel, which itself translates Greek keraia (literally a little
horn), used by the Greek grammarians of the accents and diacritical points, in this case a Biblical
translation of Hebrew qots, literally thorn, prick, used of the little lines and projections by
which the Hebrew letters of similar form differ from one another.    Wyclif's word is borrowed from
a specialized sense of Latin titulus (see title (n.)), which was used in Medieval Latin (and in
Middle English and Old French) to indicate a stroke over an abridged word to indicate letters
missing (and compare Proven&ccedil;al titule the dot over -i-).    As apex was used by the Latin
grammarians for the accent or mark over a long vowel, titulus and apex became to some extent
synonymous; hence Wyclif's use of titil, titel to render L. apex [OED]    Compare tilde, which is
the Spanish form of the same word.


titular (adj.)

1590s, from or based on Middle French titulaire (16c.), from Latin titulus (see title) + -ar.
Related: Titulary.


tix (n.)

short for tickets, by 1944 in Billboard headlines.


tizzy (n.)

1922, American English colloquial, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to slang tizzy sixpence
piece (1804), a corruption of tester, a name for the coin (see tester (n.2)).


TLC (n.)

by 1953 as an abbreviation of tender loving care.


Tlingit (n.)

Indian group in southwestern Alaska and adjacent parts of Canada, 1865, the people's word for
themselves, literally human beings.


tmesis (n.)

1580s, from Greek tmesis a cutting, related to temnein to cut, tome a cutting (see tome). The
separation of the elements of a compound word by the interposition of another word or words (such as
a whole nother).


TNT

1915, abbreviation of trinitrotoluene (1908), from trinitro- indicating three nitro- groups in place
of three hydrogen atoms in a compound, + toluene.


to (prep.)

Old English to in the direction of, for the purpose of, furthermore, from West Germanic *to
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian to, Dutch too, Old High German zuo, German zu to), from PIE
pronomial base *do- to, toward, upward (cognates: Latin donec as long as, Old Church Slavonic do as
far as, to, Greek suffix -de to, toward, Old Irish do, Lithuanian da-), from demonstrative *de-.
Not found in Scandinavian, where the equivalent of till (prep.) is used. In Old English, the
preposition (go to town) leveled with the adverb (the door slammed to) except where the adverb
retained its stress (tired and hungry too); there it came to be written with -oo (see too).    The
nearly universal use of to with infinitives (to sleep, to dream, etc.) arose in Middle English out
of the Old English dative use of to, and it helped drive out the Old English inflectional endings
(though in this use to itself is a mere sign, without meaning).    Commonly used as a prefix in
Middle English (to-hear listen to, etc.), but few of these survive (to-do, together, and time
references such as today, tonight, tomorrow -- Chaucer also has to-yeere). To and fro side to side
is attested from mid-14c. Phrase what's it to you how does that concern you? (1819) is a modern form
of an old question:    Hu&aelig;d is &eth;ec &eth;&aelig;s?  [John xxi:22, in Lindisfarne Gospel,
c.950]


to-

particle expressing separation, putting asunder, from West Germanic *ti- (cognates: Old Frisian ti-,
Old High German zi-, German zer-), from Proto-Germanic *tiz-, cognate with Latin-derived dis-.
According to OED, some 125 compound verbs with this element are recorded in Old English; their
number declined rapidly in Middle English and disappeared by c.1500 except as conscious archaisms
(such as to-shiver break to pieces; all to-brast).


to-do (n.)

1570s, from the verb phrase to do, from Old English to don proper or necessary to be done (see to +
do). Meaning disturbance, fuss is first recorded 1827. Similar formation in French affaire, from
&agrave; to + faire do.


toad (n.)

c.1300, from late Old English tadige, tadie, of unknown origin and according to OED with no known
cognates outside English. Applied to loathsome persons from 1560s. Toad-strangler heavy rain is from
1919, U.S. Southern dialectal.


toadstone (n.)

stone or stone-like object, supposedly magical (with healing or protective power) and found in the
heads of certain toads, 1550s, from toad + stone (n.). Translating Greek batrakhites, Medieval Latin
bufonites; compare also French crapaudine (13c.), German kr&ouml;tenstein.    The Crapadine or
Toadstone, we speak of before, you shall prove to be a true one, if the Toad lift himself so up
against it, when it is shew'd or held to him, as if he would come at it, and leap to catch it away:
he doth so much envy that Man should have that stone. [Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art &amp;
Nature, 1661]


toadstool (n.)

late 14c., apparently just what it looks like: a fanciful name from Middle English tadde toad (see
toad) + stole stool (see stool). Toads themselves were regarded as highly poisonous, and this word
is popularly restricted to poisonous or inedible fungi, as distinct from edible mushrooms [OED].
Compare toad-cheese, a poisonous fungi; toad's meat (1886), a rustic term for toadstool.


toady (n.)

servile parasite, 1826, apparently shortened from toad-eater fawning flatterer (1742), originally
(1620s) the assistant of a charlatan, who ate a toad (believed to be poisonous) to enable his master
to display his skill in expelling the poison. The verb is recorded from 1827. Related: Toadied;
toadying.


toast (v.1)

to brown with heat, late 14c., from Old French toster to toast, to grill, roast, burn (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *tostare (source of Italian tostare, Spanish tostar), frequentative of Latin torrere
(past participle tostus) to parch (see terrain). Related: Toasted; toasting.


toast (v.2)

to propose or drink a toast, 1700, from toast (n.1). This probably is the source of the Jamaican and
U.S. black word meaning extemporaneous narrative poem or rap (1962). Related: Toasted; toasting.


toast (n.1)

a call to drink to someone's health, 1700 (but said by Steele, 1709, to date to the reign of Charles
II), originally referring to the beautiful or popular woman whose health is proposed and drunk. The
custom apparently has its origin in the use of spiced toast (n.2) to flavor drink, the lady being
regarded as figuratively adding piquancy to the wine in which her health was drunk. Steele's story
[Tatler, No. 24] is that an (unnamed) beauty of the day was taking the cold waters at Bath, when a
gentleman dipped his cup in the water and drank it to her health; another in his company wittily (or
drunkenly) replied that, while he did not care for the drink, he would gladly enjoy the toast.
Meaning one whose health is proposed and drunk to is from 1746. Toast-master attested from 1749.


toast (n.2)

piece of bread browned by fire or dry heat, early 15c., from toast (v.1); originally as something
added to wine, ale, etc. From 17c. in the modern sense as something eaten on its own with a spread.
Slang meaning a goner, person or thing already doomed or destroyed is recorded by 1987, perhaps from
notion of computer circuits being fried, and with unconscious echoes of earlier figurative phrase to
be had on toast (1886) to be served up for eating.


toaster (n.)

1580s, agent noun from toast (v.1). Electrical type is from 1913. In reference to a person who
proposes or pledges a drinking toast, from 1704 (from toast (v.2)). Toaster-oven attested from 1957.


toasty (adj.)

warm and comfortable, 1882, from toast (n.2) + -y (2). Related: Toastiness.


tobacco (n.)

1580s, from Spanish tabaco, in part from an Arawakan language of the Caribbean (probably Taino),
said to mean a roll of tobacco leaves (according to Las Casas, 1552) or a kind of pipe for smoking
tobacco (according to Oviedo, 1535). Scholars of Caribbean languages lean toward Las Casas'
explanation. But Spanish tabaco (also Italian tabacco) was a name of medicinal herbs from early
15c., from Arabic tabbaq, attested since 9c. as the name of various herbs. So the word may be in
part a European one transferred to an American plant. The West Indian island of Tobago was said to
have been named by Columbus in 1498 from Haitian tambaku pipe, in reference to the native custom of
smoking dried tobacco leaves [Room].    Cultivation in France began 1556 with an importation of seed
by Andre Thevet; introduced in Spain 1558 by Francisco Fernandes. Tobacco Road as a mythical place
representative of rural Southern U.S. poverty is from the title of Erskine Caldwell's 1932 novel.
Early German and Portuguese accounts of Brazil also record another name for tobacco, bittin or
betum, evidently a native word in South America, which made its way into 17c. Spanish, French, and
English as petun, petumin, etc., and which is preserved in petunia and butun, the Breton word for
tobacco.  Many haue giuen it [tobacco] the name, Petum, whiche is in deede the proper name of the
Hearbe, as they whiche haue traueiled that countrey can tell. [John Frampton, translation of
Nicol&aacute;s Monardes' Joyful Newes Oute of the Newe Founde Worlde, 1577]


tobacconist (n.)

dealer in tobacco, 1650s, from tobacco + -ist + abnormal inserted consonant; earlier meaning was
person addicted to tobacco (1590s).


Tobias

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Tobias, from Greek Tobias, from Hebrew Tobhiyyah, literally the
Lord is my Good, from Hebrew tobh good. Toby is a short form.


toboggan (n.)

long, flat-bottomed sled, 1829, from Canadian French tabagane, from an Algonquian language, such as
Maleseet /thapaken/. The verb is recorded from 1846. As American English colloquial for a type of
long woolen cap, it is recorded from 1929 (earlier toboggan cap, 1928), presumably because one wore
such a cap while tobogganing.


Toby

familiar form of masc. proper name Tobias, in various colloquial usages, such as jug (1840),
drinking mug in the form of a stout old man; as a type of collar (1882) it refers to that worn by
the dog Toby in 19c. Punch and Judy shows. Also in Toby show (by 1942, American English) comedy act
based on the stock character of a boisterous, blundering yokel.


toc

word used for the letter T in radio communication, 1898.


toccata (n.)

1724, from Italian toccata, from toccare to touch, from Vulgar Latin *toccare (see touch (v.)). A
composition for a keyboard instrument, intended to exhibit the touch and technique of the performer,
and having the air of an improvisation [OED].


Tocharian

in reference to an extinct people and Indo-European language of Chinese Turkestan, 1927, from French
tocharien, from Greek Tokharoi (Strabo), name of an Asiatic people who lived in the Oxus valley in
ancient times. Earlier Tocharish (1910), from German tocharisch. The identification of this culture
with the people named by Strabo was suggested in 1907 by F.W.K. M&uuml;ller and is obviously
erroneous (Klein).


tocsin (n.)

alarm bell, 1580s, from Middle French toquassen an alarm bell, the ringing of an alarm bell (late
14c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al tocasenh, from tocar to strike (from Vulgar Latin *toccare strike a
bell; see touch (v.)) + senh bell, bell note, from Late Latin signum bell, ringing of a bell, in
Latin mark, signal (see sign (n.)). The current English spelling is from 1794, adopted from modern
French.


today (adv.)

Old English tod&aelig;ge, to d&aelig;ge on (this) day, from to at, on (see to) + d&aelig;ge, dative
of d&aelig;g day (see day). Meaning in modern times is from c.1300. As a noun from 1530s. Generally
written as two words until 16c., after which it usually was written to-day until early 20c.
Similar constructions exist in other Germanic languages, such as Dutch van daag from-day, Danish and
Swedish i dag in day. German heute is from Old High German hiutu, from Proto-Germanic *hiu tagu on
(this) day, with first element from PIE pronomial stem *ki-, represented by Latin cis on this side.


Todd

masc. proper name, also a surname (late 12c.), from Middle English todde fox, a Northern English
word of unknown origin.


toddle (v.)

to run or walk with short, unsteady steps, c.1600, Scottish and northern British, of uncertain
origin, possibly related to totter (1530s); an earlier sense of to toy, play is found c.1500.
Related: Toddled; toddling.


toddler (n.)

1793, agent noun from toddle. Toddlekins is from 1839.


toddy (n.)

1610s, alteration of taddy (1610s), tarrie (c.1600) beverage made from fermented palm sap, from
Hindi tari palm sap (in which the -r- sounds close to an English -d-), from tar palm tree, from
Sanskrit tala-s, probably from a Dravidian language (compare Kannada tar, Telugu tadu). Meaning
beverage made of alcoholic liquor with hot water, sugar, and spices first recorded 1786.


toe (n.)

Old English ta toe (plural tan), contraction of *tahe (Mercian tah&aelig;), from Proto-Germanic
*taihwo (cognates: Old Norse ta, Old Frisian tane, Middle Dutch te, Dutch teen (perhaps originally a
plural), Old High German zecha, German Zehe toe). Perhaps originally meaning fingers as well (many
PIE languages still use one word to mean both fingers and toes), and thus from PIE root *deik- to
show (see diction).    &#222;o stode hii I-armed fram heued to &#254;e ton. [Robert of Gloucester,
Chronicle, c.1300]    The old plural survived regionally into Middle English as tan, ton. To be on
(one's) toes alert, eager is recorded from 1921. To step on (someone's) toes in the figurative sense
give offense is from late 14c. Toe-hold support for the toe of a boot in climbing is from 1880.


toe (v.)

touch or reach with the toes, 1813, from toe (n.). First recorded in expression toe the mark, which
seems to be nautical in origin.The chief mate ... marked a line on the deck, brought the two boys up
to it, making them toe the mark. [R.H. Dana, Two Years Before the Mast, 1840]  Related: Toed;
toeing.


toenail (n.)

also toe-nail, 1690s, from toe (n.) + nail (n.).


toff (n.)

lower-class London slang for stylish dresser, man of the smart set, 1851, said by OED to be probably
an alteration of tuft, formerly an Oxford University term for a nobleman or gentleman-commoner
(1755), in reference to the gold ornamental tassel worn on the caps of undergraduates at Oxford and
Cambridge whose fathers were peers with votes in the House of Lords.


toffee (n.)

1825, tuffy, toughy, southern British dialectal variant of taffy. Modern spelling recorded by 1843.


toft (n.)

homestead, site of a house, late Old English, from Old Norse topt homestead, from Proto-Germanic
*tumfto, from PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic).


tofu (n.)

soy bean curd, 1876, from Japanese tofu, from Chinese doufu, from dou beans + fu rotten.


tog (n.)

1708, outer garment, shortened from togman cloak, loose coat (1560s), thieves' cant word, formed
from French togue cloak, from Latin toga (see toga). Middle English toge toga (14c.) also was a cant
word for a coat.


toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


together (adv.)

Old English tog&aelig;dere so as to be present in one place, in a group, in an accumulated mass,
from to (see to) + g&aelig;dere together (adv.), apparently a variant of the adverb geador together,
from Proto-Germanic *gaduri- in a body, from PIE *ghedh- to unite, join, fit (see good, and compare
gather).    In reference to single things, so as to be unified or integrated, from c.1300. Adjective
meaning self-assured, free of emotional difficulties is first recorded 1966. German cognate zusammen
has as second element the Old High German verbal cognate of English same (Old English also had
tosamne together).


togetherness (n.)

1650s, state of being together, from together + -ness. Sense of fellowship, fellow-feeling, is from
1930.


toggery (n.)

clothes collectively, 1812, from tog + -ery.


toggle (n.)

1769, pin passed through the eye of a rope, strap, or bolt to hold it in place, a nautical word of
uncertain origin, perhaps a frequentative form of tog tug. As a kind of wall fastener it is recorded
from 1934. Toggle bolt is from 1794; toggle switch, the up-and-down sort, first attested 1938. In
computing by 1979, in reference to a key which alternates the function between on and off when
struck.


toggle (v.)

1836, make secure with a toggle, from toggle (n.). Meaning alternate back and forth between opposite
actions is by 1982. Related: Toggled; toggling.


togs (n.)

clothes, 1779, plural of tog (q.v.).


toil (v.)

early 14c., toilen, pull at, tug, from Anglo-French toiller, Old French toellier pull or drag about
(see toil (n.1)). Intransitive meaning struggle, work hard, labor for considerable time is from late
14c., perhaps by influence of till (v.). Related: Toiled; toiling.


toil (n.1)

hard work, c.1300, originally turmoil, contention, dispute, from Anglo-French toil (13c.), from
toiler agitate, stir up, entangle, writhe about, from Old French toeillier drag about, make dirty
(12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare crush with a small hammer, from tudicula mill for
crushing olives, instrument for crushing, from Latin tudes hammer, from PIE *tud-, variant of
*(s)teu- to push, stroke, knock, beat (see obtuse). Sense of hard work, labor (1590s) is from the
related verb (see toil (v.)).


toil (n.2)

net, snare, 1520s, from Middle French toile hunting net, cloth, web (compare toile d'araign&eacute;e
cobweb), from Old French toile cloth (11c.), from Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric, from PIE
*teks- to weave (see texture (n.)). Now used largely in plural (as in caught in the toils of the
law).


toile (n.)

type of heavy, coarse cloth, c.1400, from Old French toile linen cloth, canvas (see toil (n.2)). As
a type of dress material, from 1794.


toilet (n.)

1530s, cover or bag for clothes, from Middle French toilette a cloth, bag for clothes, diminutive of
toile cloth, net (see toil (n.2)). Sense evolution in English (mostly following French uses) is to
act or process of dressing (1680s); then a dressing room (1819), especially one with a lavatory
attached; then lavatory or porcelain plumbing fixture (1895), an American euphemistic use. Toilet
paper is attested from 1884 (the Middle English equivalent was arse-wisp). Toilet training is
recorded from 1940.


toiletries (n.)

odds and ends used in grooming, 1924, from toiletry (1892); see toilet + -ry.


toilsome (adj.)

1580s, from toil (v.) + -some (1). An earlier word was toilous (early 15c.). The opposite, toilless
(c.1600) is much less common.


tokay (n.)

1710, rich sweet wine from the region of Tokay (Hungarian Tokaj) a town in Hungary. The name is
perhaps Slavic, from tok current, or Hungarian, from a Turkic personal name.


toke (n.)

inhalation of a marijuana cigarette or pipe smoke, 1968, U.S. slang, from earlier verb meaning to
smoke a marijuana cigarette (1952), perhaps from Spanish tocar in sense of touch, tap, hit or get a
shave or part. In 19c. the same word in British slang meant small piece of poor-quality bread, but
probably this is not related.


token (n.)

Old English tacen sign, symbol, evidence (related to verb t&aelig;can show, explain, teach), from
Proto-Germanic *taiknam (cognates: Old Saxon tekan, Old Norse teikn zodiac sign, omen, token, Old
Frisian tekan, Middle Dutch teken, Dutch teken, Old High German zeihhan, German zeichen, Gothic
taikn sign, token), from PIE root *deik- to show (see teach).    Meaning coin-like piece of stamped
metal is first recorded 1590s. Older sense of evidence is retained in by the same token (mid-15c.),
originally introducing a corroborating circumstance [OED].


token (adj.)

nominal, 1915, from token (n.). In integration sense, first recorded 1960.


tokenism (n.)

1962, from token (adj.) in the integration sense + -ism.


Tokyo

so named 1868, from Japanese to east + kyo capital; its earlier name was Edo, literally estuary.


told

past tense and past participle of tell (v.), from Old English tealde, past tense of tellan.


tole (n.)

ornamented and painted sheet iron, 1946, from French t&ocirc;le sheet iron, from dialectal taule
table, from Latin tabula a flat board (see table (n.)).


Toledo

city in Spain, famous from 16c. for its sword-blades of fine temper; the place name is Celtic, from
tol hill.


tolerable (adj.)

early 15c., bearable, from Middle French tolerable (14c.) and directly from Latin tolerabilis that
may be endured, supportable, passable, from tolerare to tolerate (see toleration). Meaning moderate,
middling, not bad is recorded from 1540s. Related: Tolerably.


tolerance (n.)

early 15c., endurance, fortitude (in the face of pain, hardship, etc.), from Old French tolerance
(14c.), from Latin tolerantia a bearing, supporting, endurance, from tolerans, present participle of
tolerare to bear, endure, tolerate (see toleration). Of individuals, with the sense tendency to be
free from bigotry or severity in judging other, from 1765. Meaning allowable amount of variation
dates from 1868; and physiological sense of ability to take large doses first recorded 1875.


tolerant (adj.)

1784, free from bigotry or severity in judging others, from French tol&#233;rant (16c.), and
directly from Latin tolerantem (nom. tolerans), present participle of tolerare to bear, endure,
tolerate (see toleration). Meaning able to bear (something) without being affected is from 1879.
Related: Tolerantly.


tolerate (v.)

1530s, of authorities, to allow without interference, from Latin toleratus, past participle of
tolerare (see toleration). Related: Tolerated; tolerating.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


toll (n.)

tax, fee, Old English toll impost, tribute, passage-money, rent, variant of toln, cognate with Old
Norse tollr, Old Frisian tolen, Old High German zol, German Zoll, probably representing an early
Germanic borrowing from Late Latin tolonium custom house, from Latin telonium tollhouse, from Greek
teloneion tollhouse, from telones tax-collector, from telos tax (see tele-; for sense, compare
finance). On the other theory it is native Germanic and related to tell (v.) on the notion of that
which is counted. Originally in a general sense of payment exacted by an authority; meaning charge
for right of passage along a road is from late 15c.


toll (v.)

to sound with slow single strokes (intransitive), mid-15c., probably a special use of tollen to
draw, lure, early 13c. variant of Old English -tyllan in betyllan to lure, decoy, and fortyllan draw
away, seduce, of obscure origin. The notion is perhaps of luring people to church with the sound of
the bells, or of drawing on the bell rope. Transitive sense from late 15c. Related: Tolled; tolling.
The noun meaning a stroke of a bell is from mid-15c.


tollbooth (n.)

early 14c., originally a tax collector's booth, from toll (n.) + booth.


Toltec (adj.)

1787, in reference to an ancient people of Mexico, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) tolteca, literally people
of the tules (cat-tail reeds).


toluene (n.)

colorless liquid hydrocarbon, 1855, from German toluin (Berzelius, 1842), from Tolu, place in
Colombia (now Santiago de Tolu) from which balsam of Tolu was obtained from the bark of certain
trees, which were known in Europe by the name of the port. The chemical so called because it was
first distilled (1841) from balsam of Tolu. The place name is of unknown origin.


Tom

familiar shortening of masc. proper name Thomas, used by late 14c. as a type of a nickname for a
common man (as in Tom, Dick, and Harry, 1734). Applied 17c. as a nickname for several exceptionally
large bells. Short for Uncle Tom in the sense of black man regarded as too servile to whites is
recorded from 1959. Tom Walker, U.S. Southern colloquial for the devil is recorded from 1833. Tom
and Jerry is first attested 1828 and later used in many extended senses, originally were the names
of the two chief characters (Corinthian Tom and Jerry Hawthorn) in Pierce Egan's Life in London
(1821); the U.S. cat and mouse cartoon characters debuted 1940 in Puss Gets the Boot. Tom Thumb
(1570s) was a miniature man in popular tradition before P.T. Barnum took the name for a dwarf he
exhibited. Tom-tit titmouse is from 1709. Compare tomcat.


tom-fool (n.)

also tom-fool, buffoon, clown, 1640s, from Middle English Thom Foole, personification of a mentally
deficient man (mid-14c.), see Tom + fool (n.).


tom-tom (n.)

1690s, drum (originally used in India), from Hindi tam-tam, probably of imitative origin (compare
Sinhalese tamat tama and Malay tong-tong). Related: Tom-toms.


tomahawk (n.)

1610s, tamahaac, from Virginia Algonquian (probably Powhatan) tamahaac a hatchet, what is used in
cutting, from tamaham he cuts. Cognate with Mohegan tummahegan, Delaware tamoihecan, Micmac
tumeegun.


tomato (n.)

1753, earlier tomate (c.1600), from Spanish tomate (mid-16c.) from Nahuatl (Aztecan) tomatl a
tomato, said to mean literally the swelling fruit, from tomana to swell. Spelling probably
influenced by potato (1565). Slang meaning an attractive girl is recorded from 1929, on notion of
juicy plumpness.    A member of the nightshade family, all of which contain poisonous alkaloids.
Introduced in Europe from the New World, by 1550 they regularly were consumed in Italy but grown
only as ornamental plants in England and not eaten there or in the U.S. at first. An encyclopedia of
1753 describes it as a fruit eaten either stewed or raw by the Spaniards and Italians and by the Jew
families of England. Introduced in U.S. 1789 as part of a program by then-Secretary of State Thomas
Jefferson, but not commonly eaten until after c.1830.    Alternative name love apple and alleged
aphrodisiac qualities have not been satisfactorily explained; perhaps from Italian name pomodoro,
taken as from adorare to adore, but probably rather from d'or of gold (in reference to color) or de
Moro of the Moors.


tomb (n.)

c.1200, tumbe, early 14c. tomb, from Anglo-French tumbe and directly from Old French tombe tomb,
monument, tombstone (12c.), from Late Latin tumba (also source of Italian tomba, Spanish tumba),
from Greek tymbos burial mound, cairn, generally grave, tomb, perhaps from PIE root *teue- (2) to
swell (see thigh). The final -b began to be silent about the time of the spelling shift (compare
lamb, dumb). Modern French tombeau is from Vulgar Latin diminutive *tumbellus. The Tombs, slang for
New York City prison is recorded from 1840.


tombola (n.)

Italian lotto-style lottery, 1880, from Italian tombola, apparently from tombolare to tumble, fall
upside down, from a Germanic source (see tumble (v.)).


tombolo (n.)

sand-bar joining an island to the mainland, 1899, from Italian tombolo sand dune, from Latin tumulus
hillock, mound, heap of earth, from PIE root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh).


tomboy (n.)

1550s, rude, boisterous boy, from Tom + boy; meaning wild, romping girl, girl who acts like a
spirited boy is first recorded 1590s. It also could mean strumpet, bold or immodest woman (1570s).
Compare tomrig rude, wild girl. Related: Tomboyish.


tombstone (n.)

1560s, originally the flat stone atop a grave (or the lid of a stone coffin); from tomb + stone
(n.). Meaning gravestone, headstone is attested from 1711. The city in Arizona, U.S., said to have
been named by prospector Ed Schieffelin, who found silver there in 1877 after being told all he
would find there was his tombstone.


tomcat (n.)

1809, from Tom + cat (n.); probably influenced by Tom the Cat in the popular children's book The
Life and Adventures of a Cat (1760); replaced earlier Gib-cat, from diminutive of Gilbert, though
Tom was applied to male kittens c.1300. The name also is used of the males of other beasts and birds
since at least 1791 (such as tom-turkey, by 1846). Also see Tibert. The verb meaning to pursue women
promiscuously for sexual gratification is recorded from 1927. Related: Tom-catting.


tome (n.)

1510s, a single volume of a multi-volume work, from Middle French tome (16c.), from Latin tomus
section of a book, tome, from Greek tomos volume, section of a book, originally a section, piece cut
off, from temnein to cut, from PIE *tem- to cut (cognates: second element in Latin aestimare to
value, appraise, Old Church Slavonic tina to cleave, split, Middle Irish tamnaim I cut off, Welsh
tam morsel). Sense of a large book is attested from 1570s.


tomfoolery (n.)

foolish trifling, 1812, from tomfool + -ery.


Tommy

British soldier, 1884, from Thomas Atkins, since 1815 the typical sample name for filling in army
forms. Tommy gun (1929) is short for Thompson gun (see Thompson). Soon extended to other types of
sub-machine gun, especially those favored by the mob.


tommyrot

1884, from tommy in sense of a simpleton (1829), diminutive of Tom (as in tomfool) + rot (n.).


tomography (n.)

1935, from comb. form of Greek tomos slice, section (see tome) + -graphy.


tomorrow (adv.)

mid-13c.,  to morewe, from Old English to morgenne on (the) morrow, from to at, on (see to) +
morgenne, dative of morgen morning (see morn, also morrow). As a noun from late 14c. Written as two
words until 16c., then as to-morrow until early 20c.


ton (n.1)

measure of weight, late 14c. The quantity necessary to fill a tun or cask of wine, thus identical to
tun (q.v.). The spelling difference became firmly established 18c. Ton of bricks in the colloquial
figurative sense of what you come down on someone like is from 1884.


ton (n.2)

prevailing mode, style, fashionable ways, 1769, from French ton (see tone (n.)).


tonal (adj.)

1776; from tone (n.) in the musical sense + -al (1), or from Medieval Latin tonalis.


tonality (n.)

1824, from tonal + -ity.


tone (n.)

mid-14c., musical sound or note, from Old French ton musical sound, speech, words (13c.) and
directly from Latin tonus a sound, tone, accent, literally stretching (in Medieval Latin, a term
peculiar to music), from Greek tonos vocal pitch, raising of voice, accent, key in music, originally
a stretching, tightening, taut string, related to teinein to stretch (see tenet). Sense of manner of
speaking is from c.1600. First reference to firmness of body is from 1660s. As prevailing state of
manners from 1735; as style in speaking or writing which reveals attitude from 1765. Tone-deaf is
from 1880; tone-poem from 1845.


tone (v.)

to impart tone to, 1811, from tone (n.). Related: Toned; toning. To tone (something) down originally
was in painting (1831); general sense of reduce, moderate is by 1847.


toner (n.)

1888, agent noun from tone (v.). As a photography chemical, from 1920; in xerography, from 1954.


Tong (n.)

Chinese secret society, 1883, from Cantonese t'ong assembly hall.


tongs (n.)

Old English tange, tang tongs, pincers, foreceps, instrument for holding and lifting, from Proto-
Germanic *tango (cognates: Old Saxon tanga, Old Norse t&ouml;ng, Swedish t&#229;ng, Old Frisian
tange, Middle Dutch tanghe, Dutch tang, Old High German zanga, German Zange tongs), literally that
which bites, from PIE root *denk- to bite (cognates: Sanskrit dasati biter; Greek daknein to bite,
dax biting). For sense evolution, compare French mordache tongs, from mordre to bite.


tongue (n.)

Old English tunge tongue, organ of speech; speech, a people's language, from Proto-Germanic *tungon
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Norse tunga, Old Frisian tunge, Middle Dutch tonghe, Dutch tong, Old
High German zunga, German Zunge, Gothic tuggo), from PIE *dnghwa- (cognates: Latin lingua tongue,
speech, language, from Old Latin dingua; Old Irish tenge, Welsh tafod, Lithuanian liezuvis, Old
Church Slavonic jezyku).    For substitution of -o- for -u-, see come. The spelling of the ending of
the word apparently is a 14c. attempt to indicate proper pronunciation, but the result is neither
etymological nor phonetic, and is only in a very small degree historical [OED]. In the knowledge of
a foreign language sense in the Pentecostal miracle, from 1520s. Tongue-tied is first recorded
1520s. To hold (one's) tongue refrain from speaking was in Old English. Johnson has tonguepad A
great talker.


tongue (v.)

to touch with the tongue, lick, 1680s, from tongue (n.). Earlier as a verb it meant drive out by
order or reproach (late 14c.). Related: Tongued; tonguing.


tongue-in-cheek (adv.)

1856, from phrase to speak with one's tongue in one's cheek to speak insincerely (1748), suggestive
of sly irony or humorous insincerity, perhaps a stage trick to convey irony to the audience.    Hem!
Pray, Sir, said he to the Bard, after thrusting his Tongue into a Corner of his Cheek, and rolling
his Eyes at Miss Willis, (Tricks which he had caught by endeavouring to take off a celebrated
Comedian) were these fine Tragedies of yours ever acted? [anonymous, Emily, or the History of a
Natural Daughter, 1761]   <hr />   This arietta, however, she no sooner began to perform, than he
and the justice fell asleep ; but the moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and
exclaimed,--'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your Pargolesi and your
Corelli ?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the
doctor and me, who sat on his left hand--He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he
could command at all times extempore. [Smollett, The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker, 1771]


tongue-lash (v.)

scold, abuse with words, 1857, from tongue (n.) + lash (v.). Related: Tongue-lashing.


tongue-twister (n.)

1875, in reference to an awkward sentence, 1892 of a deliberately difficult-to-say phrase, from
tongue (n.) + agent noun from twist (v.). The first one called by the name is Miss Smith's fish-
sauce shop.


tongued (adj.)

speaking (in a certain manner), late 14c., in compounds and combinations, from tongue (n.).


tongueless (adj.)

late 14c., having no tongue; early 15c. as speechless, silent, from tongue (n.) + -less. Related:
Tonguelessly; tonguelessness.


tonic (n.1)

a tonic medicine, 1799, from tonic (adj.). From 1873 (in gin and tonic) as short for tonic water
(1861 as a commercial product, water infused with quinine), so called because held to aid digestion
and stimulate appetite.


tonic (adj.)

1640s, relating to or characterized by muscular tension, from Greek tonikos of stretching, from
tonos a stretching (see tenet). The meaning maintaining the healthy firmness of tissues is recorded
from 1680s, first extended 1756 to having the property of restoring to health. Related: Tonical
(1580s).


tonic (n.2)

in the musical sense, 1760, short for tonic note, from tone (n.) in the musical sense + -ic.
Related: Tonicity.


tonify (v.)

1786, from ton (n.2) + -ify. Related: Tonified; tonifying.


tonight (adv.)

Old English toniht in the coming night, from to at, on (see to) + niht (see night). As a noun, in
the night after the present day, early 14c. Written as two words until 18c., after which it was to-
night until early 20c.


tonite (adv.)

colloquial shortening of tonight, attested by 1918.    Present-day student notices on bulletin
boards, etc., read oftener than not, Party Friday Nite, Meeting Tonite, Kum Tonite, etc. [Louise
Pound, Spelling-Manipulation and Present-Day Advertising, Dialect Notes, 1923]


tonite (n.)

explosive used in blasting, 1881, from Latin tonare to thunder (see thunder (n.)) + -ite (2).


tonnage (n.)

early 15c., tax or duty on wine imported in tuns, from ton (n.1) + -age, and from Old French tonnage
duty levied on wine in casks (c.1300). Meaning carrying capacity of a ship is from 1718.


tonne (n.)

1877, French form of ton (n.1), adopted for English use to denote a metric ton (1,000 kg.).


tonneau (n.)

1901, rear part of an automobile, from French tonneau, literally cask, tun (see tun).


tonsil (n.)

c.1600, from Latin tonsillae, tosillae (plural) tonsils, diminutive of toles goiter, which is
perhaps of Gaulish origin. Related: Tonsils.


tonsillectomy (n.)

1899, from comb. form of tonsil + -ectomy. A hybrid with a Latin front end and a Greek ending. A
correct formation all from Greek would be amygdalectomy.


tonsillitis (n.)

also tonsilitis, inflammation of the tonsils, 1801, from comb. form of tonsil + -itis.


tonsillolith (n.)

1894, from tonsillo-, comb. form of tonsil + -lith stone.


tonsorial (adj.)

pertaining to barbers, 1765, from -al (1) + Latin tonsorius of or pertaining to shearing or shaving,
from tonsor a shaver, barber, shearer, clipper, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear,
shave (see tonsure). Generally used in an attempt at humor. Tonsorious in the same sense is attested
from 1650s.


tonsure (n.)

late 14c., shaving of the head or part of it, especially as a religious rite, from Anglo-French
tonsure (mid-14c.), Old French tonsure ecclesiastical tonsure; sheep-shearing (14c.), from Latin
tonsura a shearing, clipping, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear, shave, clip, crop,
from PIE *tend-, from root *tem- to cut (see tome). The verb is attested from 1706 (implied in
tonsured). Related: Tonsuring.


tontine (n.)

1765, from French tontine, named for Lorenzo Tonti, Neapolitan banker in Paris who in 1653 first
proposed this method of raising money in France.


Tonto

former term for the Western Apaches, from Spanish, literally foolish; probably a translation of a
name given to the people by other branches of the Apache, such as Chiricahua Apache
/bini:'&eacute;din&eacute;/, Mescalero Apache /bini:'&eacute;dinend&eacute;/, both literally people
without minds, and used to designate the Western Apaches. Spanish tonto is said to be originally a
nursery word, used for its sound.


tony (adj.)

of a high tone, affecting social elegance, 1877, American English slang, from tone (n.) + -y (2). It
was the name of a reddish-brown fashion color in the 1920s.


Tony

1947, awards given by American Theatre Wing (New York), from nickname of U.S. actress, manager, and
producer Antoinette Perry (1888-1946).


Tony

masc. proper name, short for Anthony. Tony Curtis, style of men's haircut (usually with a D.A. at
the back), is from 1956, from screen name of U.S. film star Bernard Schwarz (1925-2010).


too (adv.)

in addition, in excess, late Old English, stressed variant of Old English preposition to in the
direction of, furthermore (see to). The spelling with -oo is from late 16c. Use after a verb, for
emphasis (as in did, too!) is attested from 1914. German zu unites the senses of English to and too.
Slang too-too excessive in social elegance first recorded 1881. Too much is from 1530s as more than
can be endured; sense of excellent first recorded 1937 in jazz slang.


toodle-oo

colloquial good-bye word, 1904, said in early uses to be cockney, of unknown origin; variant
tooraloo is recorded from c.1921.


took

past tense of take (v.), from late Old English toc, past tense of tacan.


tool (n.)

Old English tol instrument, implement used by a craftsman or laborer, weapon, from Proto-Germanic
*to(w)lam implement (cognates: Old Norse tol), from a verb stem represented by Old English tawian
prepare (see taw). The ending is the instrumental suffix -el (as in handle (n.)). Figurative sense
of person used by another for his own ends is recorded from 1660s. Slang meaning penis first
recorded 1550s.


tool (v.)

to drive a vehicle, 1812, probably from tool (n.) as if to manage skillfully. The meaning to work or
shape with a tool is recorded from 1815; that of equip (a factory) with machine tools is from 1927.
Related: Tooled; tooling.


toolbar (n.)

1960 as a frame fitted to a tractor to hold tools; from tool (n.) + bar (n.1). Computer sense is
attested from 1991.    Among 100-odd new features in Excel 3.0 is a row of buttons on the screen
called the Toolbar. Located under the pull-down menus, the Toolbar provides rapid access to
frequently used commands. [Popular Science, April 1991.]


toolbox (n.)

also tool-box, 1801, from tool (n.) + box (n.1).


toolkit (n.)

also tool-kit, 1908, from tool (n.) + kit (n.1).


toon (n.)

colloquial shortening of cartoon (n.), attested by 1985.


toot (v.)

c.1500, of horns, ultimately imitative, also found in Middle Low German and Low German tuten blow a
horn. Related: Tooted; tooting. Tooting as a strong affirmative (as in you're damned tootin') is
attested from 1932, American English.


toot (n.)

1640s, from toot (v.); meaning cocaine is attested by 1977.


toot sweet (adv.)

right away, promptly, 1917, American English, representing U.S. soldiers' mangled adaptation of
French tout de suite.


tooth (n.)

Old English to&eth; (plural te&eth;), from Proto-Germanic *tan-thuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Danish,
Swedish, Dutch tand, Old Norse t&ouml;nn, Old Frisian toth, Old High German zand, German Zahn,
Gothic tun&thorn;us), from PIE *dent- tooth (cognates: Sanskrit danta, Greek odontos, Latin dens,
Lithuanian dantis, Old Irish det, Welsh dent). Plural form teeth is an instance of i-mutation.
Application to tooth-like parts of other objects (saws, combs, etc.) first recorded 1520s. Tooth and
nail as weapons is from 1530s. The tooth-fairy is attested from 1964.


tooth-ache (n.)

also toothache, Old English to&#240;ece; see tooth + ache (n.).


toothbrush (n.)

also tooth-brush, 1650s, from tooth + brush (n.1).


toothless (adj.)

Old English to&eth;leas, in the literal sense; see tooth + -less. Figurative sense of dull is
recorded from 1590s; that of lacking enforcement powers is first recorded 1961. Related:
Toothlessly; toothlessness.


toothpaste (n.)

also tooth-paste, 1832, from tooth + paste (n.). Earlier substances were tooth-powder (1540s);
tooth-soap (c.1600).


toothpick (n.)

also tooth-pick, late 15c., from tooth + pick (n.). Old English had to&eth;sticca.


toothsome (adj.)

pleasant to the taste, 1560s, from -some (1) + tooth in a figurative sense of appetite, taste,
liking attested from late 14c. (compare sweet tooth, also figurative use of palate). The extended
sense of attractive (1550s) is attested earlier. Related: Toothsomely; toothsomeness.


tootle (v.)

1820, frequentative of toot (v.). Related: Tootled; tootling.


toots (n.)

slang familiar form of address to a woman or girl, 1936, American English, short for tootsie,
tootsy, from tootsy-wootsy (1895), a familiar form of address to a sweetheart, originally a playful
or nursery name for a small foot, from childish pronunciation of foot (n.); compare tootsy.


tootsy (n.)

also tootsie, 1854, baby-talk substitution for foot (n.). Candy bar Tootsie Roll patent claims use
from 1908.


top (n.1)

highest point, Old English top summit, crest, tuft, from Proto-Germanic *tuppaz (cognates: Old Norse
toppr tuft of hair, Old Frisian top tuft, Old Dutch topp, Dutch top, Old High German zopf end, tip,
tuft of hair, German Zopf tuft of hair); no certain connections outside Germanic except a few
Romanic words probably borrowed from Germanic.    Few Indo-European languages have a word so
generic, which can be used of the upper part or surface of just about anything. More typical is
German, which has Spitze for sharp peaks (mountains), oberfl&auml;che for the upper surface of flat
things (such as a table). Meaning highest position is from 1620s; meaning best part is from 1660s.
To go over the top is World War I slang for start an attack, in reference to the top of the
trenches; as beyond reasonable limits, too far it is recorded from 1968. Top of the world as
position of greatest eminence is from 1670s. Top-of-the-line (adj.) is by 1950.


top (n.2)

toy that spins on a point, late Old English top, probably a special use of top (n.1), but the modern
word is perhaps via Old French topet, which is from or influenced by a Germanic source akin to the
root of English top (n.1). As a type of seashell, first recorded 1680s.


top (v.)

put a top on, 1580s, perhaps mid-15c., from top (n.1). Earlier cut the top off, shave the head
(c.1300). The meaning be higher or greater than also is first recorded 1580s. Meaning strike (a
ball) towards its top is from 1881. Related: Topped; topping. To top off to finish is colloquial
from 1836; in sense fill up, add more to to bring to fullness it is from 1917.


top (adj.)

being at the top, 1590s, from top (n.1). Top dollar high price is from 1942. Top-drawer (1920) is
from British expression out of the top drawer upper-class. Top ten in popular music is from 1945
(Billboard). The top dog is the one uppermost in a fight, from 1868 in figurative use, opposed to
the underdog.    But if the under dog in the social fight runs away with a bone in violation of
superior force, the top dog runs after him bellowing, Thou shalt not steal, and all the other top
dogs unite in bellowing, This is divine law and not dog law; the verdict of the top dog so far as
law, religion, and other forms of brute force are concerned settles the question. [Van Buren
Denslow, Modern Thinkers: What They Think and Why, 1880]


top-hamper (n.)

1791, originally the upper masts, sails, and rigging of a sailing ship, from top (n.1) + hamper (n.)
in the nautical sense of things necessary but often in the way.


top-hat (n.)

also tophat, 1875, from top (n.1) + hat.


top-heavy (adj.)

1530s, from top (n.1) + heavy.


top-notch (adj.)

also top notch, 1848, from top (adj.) + notch (n.). Figurative of the highest point of something,
but the exact mechanical image is uncertain.


top-sider (n.)

kind of casual shoe, 1937, from topside in nautical sense of upper deck of a ship, where the rubber
soles would provide good grip; from top (n.1) + side (n.).


topaz (n.)

colored crystalline gem, late 13c., from Old French topace (11c.), from Latin topazus (source also
of Spanish topacio, Italian topazio), from Greek topazos, topazion, of obscure origin. Pliny says it
was named for a remote island in the Red or Arabian Sea, where it was mined, the island so named for
being hard to find (from Greek topazein to divine, to try to locate); but this might be folk
etymology, and instead the word might be from the root of Sanskrit tapas heat, fire. In the Middle
Ages used for almost any yellow stone. To the Greeks and Romans, possibly yellow olivine or yellow
sapphire. In modern science, fluo-silicate of aluminum. As a color name from 1908.


tope (v.)

to drink heavily, 1650s, of unknown origin, perhaps ultimately from Italian toppa done! a word
signifying acceptance of a bet.


Topeka

city in Kansas, U.S.A., from Kansa (Siouan), literally a good place to dig potatoes;from /do/ wild
potato + /ppi/ good + /ke/ to dig.


toper (n.)

heavy drinker, 1670s, agent noun from tope (v.).


Tophet

place near Jerusalem, where, according to the Old Testament, idolatrous Jews made human sacrifice to
strange gods; later symbolic of the torments of Hell.


topiary (adj.)

1590s, from Latin topiarius of or pertaining to ornamental gardening, as a noun, ornamental
gardening, landscape gardening, also an ornamental gardener, from topia ornamental gardening, from
Greek topia, plural of topion, originally a field, diminutive of topos place (see topos). The noun
is first recorded 1906, from the adjective.


topic (n.)

1630s, a class of considerations from which probable arguments can be drawn, singular form of Topics
(1560s), the name of a work by Aristotle on logical and rhetorical generalities, from Latin Topica,
from Greek Ta Topika, literally matters concerning topoi, commonplaces, neuter plural of noun use of
topikos pertaining to a common place, of a place, local, from topos place (see topos). The meaning
matter treated in speech or writing, subject, theme is first recorded 1720.


topical (adj.)

1580s, pertaining to a place; see topic + -al (1). Medical sense applied to a particular part of the
body is from c.1600. Meaning of or pertaining to topics of the day is from 1873. Related: Topically.


topknot (n.)

1680s, a bow; 1700, tuft of hair on the head, from top (adj.) + knot (n.).


topless (adj.)

of women, bare-breasted, 1966, from top (n.1) + -less. Earlier it was used of men's bathing suits
(1937) and women's (1964). Earliest sense is without a visible summit; immeasurably high (1580s).


topography (n.)

early 15c., description of a place, from Late Latin topographia, from Greek topographia a
description of a place, from topos place (see topos) + -graphia (see -graphy). Meaning collective
features of a region is from 1847. Related: Topographic; topographical; topographically.


topology (n.)

1650s, study of the locations where plants are found, from topo-, comb. form of Greek topos place
(see topos) + -logy. Related: Topological.


toponym (n.)

1939, place name, from comb. form of Greek topos place (see topos) + -onym name (see name (n.)).
Toponymy study of place names is from 1876. Related: Toponymic; toponymics.


topos (n.)

literary theme, 1948, from Greek topos, literally place.


topper (n.)

the best (of anything), 1709, originally slang, agent noun from top (v.).


topping (n.)

an act of putting a top on, c.1500, verbal noun from top (v.). Meaning an act of cutting the top off
is from 1510s. Meaning top layer of a food is from 1839,


topple (v.)

1580s, tumble down, fall headfirst, earlier tumble or roll about (1540s), from top (v.) to tip +
frequentative suffix -le. Transitive sense also is from 1590s. Related: Toppled; toppling.


tops (n.)

the best, 1935, American English colloquial, from top (n.1).


topsoil (n.)

also top-soil, 1789, from top (adj.) + soil (n.).


Topsy

slave-girl character in Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852), immortal in cliche for her response to a question
about her origin put to her by the pious Northern abolitionist Miss Ophelia:    Have you ever heard
anything about God, Topsy?  The child looked bewildered, but grinned, as usual.  Do you know who
made you?  Nobody as I knows on, said the child, with a short laugh.  The idea appeared to amuse her
considerably; for her eyes twinkled, and she added--  I spect I grow'd. Don't think nobody never
made me.    In addition to being often misquoted by the addition of a just (or jes'), the line is
sometimes used inappropriately in 20c. writing to indicate something that got large without anyone
intending it to.


topsy-turvy (adv.)

1520s, but prob. in popular use from an earlier period [OED]; compare top over terve to fall over
(mid-15c.); likely from tops, plural of top (n.1) highest point + obsolete terve turn upside down,
topple over, from Old English tearflian to roll over, overturn, from Proto-Germanic *terbanan
(cognates: Old High German zerben to turn round). Century Dictionary calls it A word which, owing to
its popular nature, its alliterative type, and to ignorance of its origin, leading to various
perversions made to suggest some plausible origin, has undergone, besides the usual variations of
spelling, extraordinary modifications of form. It lists 31 variations. As an adjective from 1610s.


toque (n.)

kind of round hat, c.1500, from Middle French toque (15c.), from Spanish toca woman's headdress,
possibly from Arabic *taqa, from Old Persian taq veil, shawl.


tor (n.)

high, rocky hill, Old English torr rock, crag; said to be a different word than torr tower.
Obviously cognate with Gaelic torr lofty hill, mound, Old Welsh twrr heap, pile; and perhaps
ultimately with Latin turris high structure (see tower (n.)). But sources disagree on whether the
Celts borrowed it from the Anglo-Saxons or the other way round.


Torah (n.)

the Pentateuch, 1570s, from Hebrew torah, literally instruction, law, verbal noun from horah he
taught, showed.


torch (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French torche torch, also handful of straw (for wiping or cleaning, hence French
torcher to wipe, wipe down), originally twisted thing, then torch formed of twisted tow dipped in
wax, probably from Vulgar Latin *torca, alteration of Late Latin torqua, from Latin torquere to
twist (see torque (n.)).    In Britain, also applied to the battery-driven version (in U.S., a
flashlight). To pass the torch is an ancient metaphor from the Greek torch-races (lampadedromia)
where the goal was to reach the finish line with the torch still burning. Torch-bearer leader of a
cause is from 1530s. Torch song is 1927 (My Melancholy Baby, performed by Tommy Lyman, is said to
have been the first so called), from carry a torch suffer an unrequited love (also 1927), Broadway
slang, but the sense is obscure.


torch (v.)

1819, illuminate with a torch, from torch (n.). Meaning set fire to is from 1931. Related: Torched;
torching.


torcher (n.)

torch-carrier, c.1600; see torch (n.). Meaning torch singer attested by 1940.


torchiere (n.)

also torchere, large, decorated candelabrum, 1910, from French torch&egrave;re, from torche (see
torch (n.)).


torchlight (n.)

early 15c., from torch (n.) + light (n.).


toreador (n.)

bullfighter on horseback (as opposed to a torero, who kills on foot), 1610s, from Spanish toreador,
from torear to participate in a bullfight, from toro bull, from Latin taurus (see Taurus).    A
toreador is, or rather was, a gentleman who killed bulls for his own amusement on horseback and with
the spear. He was a sportsman, and his sport was as manly and respectable as pig-sticking. A
professional fighter who performs in a ring and for money is a torero. [Saturday Review, Jan. 22,
1887]


Tori

fem. proper name, originally short for Victoria.


toric (adj.)

1888, from torus + -ic.


torii (n.)

singular and plural, gateway to a Shinto temple, Japanese, according to OED from tori bird + i to
sit, to perch.


torment (n.)

c.1300, the inflicting of torture, also state of great suffering, pain, distress, from Old French
torment torture, pain, anguish, suffering distress (11c., Modern French tourment), from Latin
tormentum twisted cord, sling; clothes-press; instrument for hurling stones, also instrument of
torture, a rack, figuratively anguish, pain, torment, from torquere to twist (see torque (n.)).


torment (v.)

c.1300, inflict torture on, distress, from Old French tormenter torture, torment, oppress, agitate
(12c.), from Medieval Latin tormentare to torment, to twist, from Latin tormentum (see torment
(n.)). Related: Tormented; tormenting.


tormentor (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French tormentour, Old French tormenteor torturer, agent noun from tormenter to
torture (see torment (v.)).


torn

past participle of tear (v.); from Old English getoren.


tornado (n.)

1550s, ternado, navigator's word for violent windy thunderstorm in the tropical Atlantic, probably a
mangled borrowing from Spanish tronada thunderstorm, from tronar to thunder, from Latin tonare to
thunder (see thunder (n.)). Also in 17c. spelled tornatho, tornathe, turnado; modern spelling by
1620s. Metathesis of -o- and -r- in modern spelling influenced by Spanish tornar to twist, turn,
from Latin tornare to turn. Meaning extremely violent whirlwind is first found 1620s; specifically
destructive rotary funnel cloud (especially in the U.S. Midwest) from 1849. Related: Tornadic.


toro (n.)

bull, 1650s, from Spanish toro bull, from Latin taurus (see steer (n.)).


Toronto

city in Ontario, Canada, founded 1793 as York, renamed 1834 for a native village that appears on a
1656 map as Tarantou, from an Iroquoian source, original form and sense unknown; perhaps taron-to-
hen wood in the water, or Huron deondo meeting place.


torpedo (n.)

1520s, electric ray (flat fish that produces an electric charge to stun prey or for defense), from
Latin torpedo electric ray, originally numbness, sluggishness (the fish so called from the effect of
being jolted by the ray's electric discharges), from torpere be numb (see torpor).    Torpedo. A
fish which while alive, if touched even with a long stick, benumbs the hand that so touches it, but
when dead is eaten safely. [Johnson]    The sense of explosive device used to blow up enemy ships is
first recorded 1776, as a floating mine; the self-propelled version is from c.1900. Related:
Torpedic.


torpedo (v.)

destroy or sink (a ship) by a torpedo, 1874, from torpedo (n.). Also used late 19c. of blowing open
oil wells. Figurative sense attested from 1895. Related: Torpedoed; torpedoing.


torpid (adj.)

1610s, benumbed, without feeling or power, from Latin torpidus benumbed, stupefied, from torpere be
numb or stiff (see torpor). Figurative sense of sluggish, dull, apathetic is from 1650s. Related:
Torpidly; torpidness.


torpidity (n.)

1610s; see torpid + -ity.


torpor (n.)

lethargy, listlessness, c.1600, from Latin torpor numbness, sluggishness, from torpere be numb, be
inactive, be dull, from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic trupeti, Lithuanian tirpstu to become rigid; Greek stereos solid; Old English steorfan to
die; see stereo-).


torque (n.)

rotating force, 1882, from Latin torquere to twist, turn, turn about, twist awry, distort, torture,
from PIE *torkw-eyo-, causative of *terkw- to twist (see thwart (adv.)). The word also is used
(since 1834) by antiquarians and others as a term for the twisted metal necklace worn anciently by
Gauls, Britons, Germans, etc., from Latin torques collar of twisted metal, from torquere. Earlier it
had been called in English torques (1690s). Torque-wrench is from 1941.


torque (v.)

1570s (implied in torqued twisted), from torque (n.).


torr (n.)

unit of pressure, 1949, named for Italian physicist Evangelista Torricelli (1608-1647), inventor of
the barometer.


torrent (n.)

rapid stream, c.1600, from Middle French torrent (16c.) and directly from Latin torrentem
(nominative torrens) rushing, roaring (of streams), also a rushing stream, originally as an
adjective roaring, boiling, burning, parching, hot, inflamed, present participle of torrere to parch
(see terrain). Extension to any onrush (of words, feelings, etc.) first recorded 1640s.


torrential (adj.)

1849; see torrent + -ial. Perhaps by influence of French torrentiel. Related: Torrentially.


torrid (adj.)

1580s, in torrid zone region of the earth between the tropics, from Medieval Latin torrida zona,
from fem. of torridus dried with heat, scorching hot, from torrere to parch, from PIE root *ters- to
dry (see terrain). Sense of very hot is first attested 1610s. Figurative sense from 1630s.


torsion (n.)

early 15c., wringing pain in the bowels, from Old French torsion colic (early 14c.), from Late Latin
torsionem (nominative torsio) a wringing or gripping, from Latin tortionem (nominative tortio)
torture, torment, noun of action from past participle stem of torquere to twist, distort, torture
(see torque (n.)). Meaning act or effect of twisting as by opposing forces is first recorded 1540s.


torso (n.)

1797, from Italian torso trunk of a statue, originally stalk, stump, from Vulgar Latin *tursus, from
Latin thyrsus stalk, stem, from Greek thyrsos (see thyrsus).


tort (n.)

mid-13c., injury, wrong, from Old French tort wrong, injustice, crime (11c.), from Medieval Latin
tortum injustice, noun use of neuter of tortus wrung, twisted, past participle of Latin torquere
turn, turn awry, twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Legal sense of breach of a duty, whereby
someone acquires a right of action for damages is first recorded 1580s.


torte (n.)

sweet cake, tart, 1748, from German Torte; earlier sense of round cake, round bread (1550s) is from
Middle French torte; both are from Late Latin torta flat cake, also round loaf of bread (also source
of Italian torte, Spanish torta), probably related to tart (n.1). Not considered to be from the
source of tort.


tortellini (n.)

1937, from Italian, plural of tortellino, diminutive of tortello cake, fritter, itself a diminutive
of torta (see torte).


tortfeasor (n.)

1650s, from Old French tortfesor, from tort wrong, evil (see tort) + -fesor doer, from Latin facere
to make (see factitious).


torticollis (n.)

wryneck, 1811, Modern Latin, from Latin tortus crooked, twisted, from torquere to twist (see torque
(n.)) + collum neck (see collar (n.)).


tortilla (n.)

1690s, from American Spanish tortilla, from Spanish, a tart, literally a little cake, diminutive of
torta cake, from Late Latin torta flat cake (see torte).


tortious (adj.)

late 14c., wrongful, illegal, from Anglo-French torcious (14c.), from stem of torcion, literally a
twisting, from Late Latin tortionem (see torsion, and compare tort). Meaning pertaining to a tort is
from 1540s.


tortoise (n.)

1550s, altered (perhaps by influence of porpoise) from Middle English tortuse (late 15c.), tortuce
(mid-15c.), tortuge (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin tortuca (mid-13c.), perhaps from Late Latin
tartaruchus of the underworld (see Tartarus). Others propose a source in Latin tortus twisted, based
on the shape of the feet. The classical Latin word was testudo, from testa shell. First record of
tortoise shell as a pattern of markings is from 1782.


tortuous (adj.)

late 14c., full of twists and turns, from Anglo-French tortuous (12c.), Old French tortuos, from
Latin tortuosus full of twists, winding, from tortus a twisting, winding, from stem of torquere to
twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Related: Tortuously; tortuousness.


torture (n.)

early 15c., contortion, twisting, distortion; a disorder characterized by contortion, from Old
French torture infliction of great pain; great pain, agony (12c.), and directly from Late Latin
tortura a twisting, writhing, in Medieval Latin pain inflicted by judicial or ecclesiastical
authority as a means of punishment or persuasion, from stem of Latin torquere to twist, turn, wind,
wring, distort (see torque (n.)). The meaning infliction of severe bodily pain as a means of
punishment or persuasion in English is from 1550s. The theory behind judicial torture was that a
guilty person could be made to confess, but an innocent one could not, by this means. Macaulay
writes that it was last inflicted in England in May 1640.


torture (v.)

1580s, from torture (n.). Related: Tortured; torturing.


torturous (adj.)

pertaining to or characterized by torture, late 15c., from Anglo-French torturous, from Old French
tortureus, from Latin tortura (see torture (n.)).


torus (n.)

1560s, in architecture, large, rounded molding at the base of a column, from Latin torus a swelling,
bulge, knot; cushion, couch.


Tory (n.)

1566, an outlaw, specifically one of a class of Irish robbers noted for outrages and savage cruelty,
from Irish toruighe plunderer, originally pursuer, searcher, from Old Irish toirighim I pursue, from
toir pursuit, from Celtic *to-wo-ret- a running up to, from PIE root *ret- to run, roll (see
rotary).    About 1646, it emerged as a derogatory term for Irish Catholics dispossessed of their
land (some of whom subsequently turned to outlawry); c.1680 applied by Exclusioners to supporters of
the Catholic Duke of York (later James II) in his succession to the throne of England. After 1689,
Tory was the name of a British political party at first composed of Yorkist Tories of 1680.
Superseded c.1830 by Conservative, though it continues to be used colloquially. In American history,
Tory was the name given after 1769 to colonists who remained loyal to George III of England; it
represents their relative position in the pre-revolutionary English political order in the colonies.
As an adjective from 1680s.


tosh (adj.)

neat, clean, trim, 1776, Scottish, of unknown origin.


tosh (n.)

valuables collected from drains, 1852, London slang, of unknown origin.


toss (v.)

mid-15c., to lift or throw with a sudden movement, of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian
source (compare dialectal Norwegian tossa to strew, spread). Food preparation sense (with reference
to salad, etc.) is recorded from 1723. Intransitive sense be restless; throw oneself about is from
1550s. Related: Tossed; tossing.


toss (n.)

an act of throwing, 1630s, from toss (v.). Meaning a coin toss is from 1798.


toss-up (n.)

even matter, 1809, from earlier sense of a flipping of a coin to arrive at a decision (c.1700), from
verbal phrase, from toss (v.) + up (adv.).


tosser (n.)

term of contempt in British slang, by 1977, probably from slang toss off act of masturbation (1735).
Agent noun from toss (v.). Compare jerk (n.).


tosspot (n.)

heavy drinker, 1560s, from toss (v.) + pot (n.1).


tostada (n.)

1945, from Mexican Spanish, from past participle of Spanish tostar to toast (see toast (v.1)).


tot (n.)

little child, 1725, Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps a shortened form of totter, or related to
Old Norse tottr, nickname of a dwarf (compare Swedish tutte little child, Danish tommel-tot little
child, in which the first element means thumb). Tot-lot play ground for young children is recorded
from 1944.


tot (v.)

to reckon up, 1760, from tot (n.) total of an addition, first recorded 1680s, short for total (n.).
Hence, to mark (an account or a name) with the word 'tot.'


total (v.)

1716, bring to a total, from total (n.). Intransitive sense reach a total of is from 1859. Meaning
to destroy one's car first recorded 1954. Related: Totaled; totaling.


total (n.)

whole amount, sum, 1550s, from total (adj.).


total (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French total (14c.), from Medieval Latin totalis entire, total (as in summa
totalis sum total), from Latin totus all, all at once, the whole, entire, altogether, of unknown
origin. Total war is attested from 1937 (William Shirer), in reference to a concept developed in
Germany.


totalitarian (adj.)

1926, first in reference to Italian fascism, formed in English on model of Italian totalitario
complete, absolute, totalitarian, from total (adj.) + ending from authoritarian. The noun is
recorded from 1938.


totalitarianism (n.)

1926, first recorded in reference to Italian fascism, from totalitarian + -ism.


totality (n.)

1590s, from total (adj.) + -ity, or from or based on Middle French totalit&#233;, Medieval Latin
totalitas. In the eclipse sense, time of total obscuration, from 1842.


totally (adv.)

c.1500, from total (adj.) + -ly (2).


tote (v.)

to carry, 1670s, of unknown origin; originally attested in Virginia, but OED discounts the popular
theory of its origin in a West African language (such as Kikongo tota pick up, Kimbundu tuta carry,
load, related to Swahili tuta pile up, carry). Related: Toted; toting. Tote bag is first recorded
1900.


totem (n.)

animal or natural object considered as the emblem of a family or clan, 1760, from Algonquian
(probably Ojibwa) -doodem, in odoodeman his sibling kin, his group or family, hence, his family
mark; also attested in French c.1600 in form aoutem among the Micmacs or other Indians of Nova
Scotia. Totem pole is 1808, in reference to west coast Canadian Indians.


totemic (adj.)

1846, from totem + -ic.


tother (prep.)

the other, early 13c., &thorn;e to&thorn;er, from faulty separation of &thorn;et o&thorn;er that
other; simple use of tother in place of the other is attested by 1580s. Often written t'other as
though a contraction of the other.


totipotent (adj.)

1896, from Latin toti-, comb. form of totus whole (see total (adj.)) + potent. Perhaps immediately
from German totipotent, which is attested by 1893. Related: Totipotency.


toto

Latin ablative singular (masc. and neuter) of totus whole, entire (see total (adj.)).


toto caelo

Latin, literally by the whole heaven.


totter (v.)

c.1200, swing to and fro, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal
Norwegian totra to quiver, shake). Meaning stand or walk with shaky, unsteady steps is from c.1600.
Related: Tottered; tottering.


tottery (adj.)

trembling, unsteady, 1861, from totter + -y (2).


toucan

bright-colored bird of South America, 1560s, from French toucan (1550s) and Spanish tucan; from Tupi
(Brazil) tuka, tukana, said to be probably imitative of its call.


touch (v.)

late 13c., make deliberate physical contact with, from Old French tochier to touch, hit, knock;
mention, deal with (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare to knock, strike as a
bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative origin. Related: Touched;
touching.    From c.1300 in transitive sense bring into physical contact, also pertain to. Other
senses attested from 14c. are perceive by physical contact, examine by sense of touch, also be or
come into physical contact with; come to rest on; border on, be contiguous with; also use the sense
of touch, and mention, describe. From early 14c. as affect or move mentally or emotionally, with
notion of to touch the heart or mind. Also from early 14c. as have sexual contact with. Meaning to
get or borrow money first recorded 1760. Touch-and-go (adj.) is recorded from 1812, apparently from
the name of a tag-like game, first recorded 1650s. Touch football is first attested 1933. Touch-me-
not (1590s) translates Latin noli-me-tangere.


touch (n.)

c.1300, from Old French toche touch, a touching; a blow, attack; a test (Modern French touche), from
tocher to touch (see touch (v.)). Meaning slight attack (of an illness, etc.) is recorded from
1660s. Sense of communication (to be in or out of touch) is from 1884. Sense of skill or aptitude in
some topic is first recorded 1927, probably from music or the arts. Soft touch person easily
manipulated is recorded from 1940.


touch-screen (n.)

1974, from touch + screen (n.).


touch-up (n.)

act of improvement requiring modest effort, 1872, from verbal phrase touch up improve or finish (as
a painting or drawing) with light strokes (1715), from touch (v.) + up (adv.).


touchdown (n.)

1864, originally in rugby, where the ball is literally touched down on the other side of the goal,
from verbal phrase (by 1859 in sports), from touch (v.) + down (adv.). As landing of an aircraft
from 1935.


touche

exclamation acknowledging a hit in fencing, 1902, from French touch&eacute;, past participle of
toucher to hit, from Old French touchier to hit (see touch (v.)). Extended (non-fencing) use by
1907.


touched (adj.)

stirred emotionally, mid-14c., past participle adjective from touch (v.).


touching (adj.)

affecting the emotions, c.1600, present participle adjective from touch (v.).


touching (prep.)

concerning, regarding, late 14c., from touch (v.), on model of French touchant.


touchpoint (n.)

c.1600, from touch + point (n.).


touchstone (n.)

late 15c., from touch (v.) in the Middle English sense to test (metal) + stone (n.). Fine-grained
black quartz, used for testing the quality of gold and silver alloys by the color of the streak made
by rubbing them on it. Also see basalt. Figurative sense is from 1530s.


touchwood (n.)

1570s, from touch (v.) + wood, probably from the notion of being set alight at the touch of a spark.


touchy (adj.)

apt to take offense at slight provocation, c.1600, perhaps an alteration of tetchy (q.v.) influenced
by touch (v.). Related: Touchiness.


tough (adj.)

Old English toh strong and firm in texture, tenacious, sticky, from Proto-Germanic *tanhu-
(cognates: Middle Low German tege, Middle Dutch taey, Dutch taai, Old High German zach, German
z&auml;h), which Watkins suggests is from PIE *denk- to bite, from the notion of holding fast. See
rough for spelling change.    From c.1200 as strong, powerful; c.1300 as not tender or fragile;
early 14c. as difficult to chew, also hard to endure. Figurative sense of steadfast is mid-14c.;
that of hard to do, trying, laborious is from 1610s. Verb tough it endure the experience is first
recorded 1830, American English. Tough guy attested from 1901. Tough-minded first recorded 1907 in
William James. Tough luck first recorded 1912; tough shit, dismissive retort to a complaint, is from
1946.


tough (n.)

street ruffian, 1866, American English, from tough (adj.).


toughen (v.)

1580s, from tough (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Toughened; toughening.


toughness (n.)

mid-15c., from tough (adj.) + -ness.


toupee (n.)

1727, from French toupet tuft of hair, forelock, diminutive formed from Old French top tuft,
forelock, topknot (12c.), from Frankish *top or another Germanic source related to top (n.1) highest
point. Originally an artificial curl or lock on the top of the head; a style, not necessarily a
compensation for baldness. In 18c., also sometimes used of a person who wears a toupee. Slang short
form toup is recorded from 1959.


tour (n.)

c.1300, a turn, a shift on duty, from Old French tor, tourn, tourn a turn, trick, round, circuit,
circumference, from torner, tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). Sense of a continued ramble or
excursion is from 1640s. Tour de France as a bicycle race is recorded in English from 1916 (Tour de
France Cycliste), distinguished from a motorcar race of the same name. The Grand Tour, a journey
through France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy formerly was the finishing touch in the education of
a gentleman.


tour (v.)

1746, make a tour, travel about, from tour (n.). Related: Toured; touring.


tour de force (n.)

feat of strength, 1802, French; see tour (n.) + force (n.).


tourism (n.)

1811, from tour (n.) + -ism.


tourist (n.)

1772, one who makes a journey for pleasure, stopping here and there (originally especially a travel-
writer), from tour (n.) + -ist. Tourist trap attested from 1939, in Graham Greene. Related:
Touristic.


tourmaline (n.)

complete silicate of aluminum and boron, 1759, from French or German, ultimately from Sinhalese
toramalli, a general name for cornelian.


tournament (n.)

medieval martial arts contest, c.1200 (figurative), c.1300 (literal), from Old French tornement
contest between groups of knights on horseback (12c.), from tornoier to joust, tilt, take part in
tournaments (see tourney). Modern use, in reference to games of skill, is recorded from 1761.


tournedos (n.)

fillet of steak dish, 1877, from French, from tourner to turn (see turn (v.)) + dos back. According
to French etymologists, so called because the dish is traditionally not placed on the table but is
passed behind the backs of the guests [OED]. But there are other theories.


tourney (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French turneier, Old French tornoier to joust, tilt, literally turn around, from
Vulgar Latin *tornizare, from Latin tornare to turn (see turn (v.)). Related: Tourneying.


tourney (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French turnei, Old French tornei contest of armed men (12c., Modern French
tournoi), from tornoier to joust, tilt (see tourney (v.)).


tourniquet (n.)

1690s, from French tourniquet surgical tourniquet, also turnstile (16c.), diminutive of torner to
turn, from Old French torner (see turn (v.)).


tousle (v.)

pull roughly, disorder, dishevel, mid-15c., frequentative of -tousen handle or push about roughly,
probably from an unrecorded Old English *tusian, from Proto-Germanic *tus- (cognates: Frisian tusen,
Old High German erzusen, German zausen to tug, pull, dishevel); related to tease (v.). Related:
Tousled; tousling.


Toussaint (n.)

French, literally feast of All Saints (Nov. 1), from tous, plural of tout all + saint saint.


tout (v.)

1700, thieves' cant, to act as a lookout, spy on, from Middle English tuten to peep, peer, probably
from a variant of Old English totian to stick out, peep, peer, from Proto-Germanic *tut- project
(cognates: Dutch tuit sprout, snout, Middle Dutch tute nipple, pap, Middle Low German tute horn,
funnel, Old Norse tota teat, toe of a shoe). The sense developed to look out for jobs, votes,
customers, etc., to try to get them (1731), then praise highly in an attempt to sell (1920).
Related: Touted; touting.


tow (v.)

pull with a rope, Old English togian to drag, pull, from Proto-Germanic *tugojanan (cognates: Old
English teon to draw, Old Frisian togia to pull about, Old Norse toga, Old High German zogon, German
ziehen to draw, pull, drag), from PIE root *deuk- to pull, draw (cognates: Latin ducere to lead; see
duke (n.)). Related: Towed; towing.


tow (n.1)

the coarse, broken fibers of flax, hemp, etc., separated from the finer parts, late 14c., probably
from Old English tow- spinning (in towlic fit for spinning, tow-hus spinning-room), perhaps cognate
with Gothic taujan to do, make, Middle Dutch touwen to knit, weave, from Proto-Germanic *taw- to
manufacture (see taw (v.)).


tow (n.2)

c.1600, rope used in towing, from tow (v.). Meaning act or fact of being towed is from 1620s.


tow-truck (n.)

1920, from tow (v.) + truck (n.).


toward (prep.)

Old English toweard in the direction of, prepositional use of toweard (adj.) coming, facing,
approaching, from to (see to) + -ward.


towards (adv.)

Old English toweards, from toweard (adj.) coming, facing, approaching (see toward) + adverbial
genitive ending.


towaway (adj.)

also tow-away, 1956 in reference to parking zones, from verbal phrase, from tow (v.) + away (adv.).


towel (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French toaille (12c.), from Frankish *thwahlja, from Proto-Germanic *thwahlijan
(cognates: Old Saxon thwahila, Middle Dutch dwale towel, Dutch dwaal altar cloth, Old High German
dwehila towel, German dialectal Zwehle napkin); related to German zwagen, Old English &thorn;wean to
wash. Spanish toalla, Italian tovaglia are Germanic loan-words. To throw in the towel admit defeat
(1915) is from boxing.


towel (v.)

1836 (transitive); 1861 (intransitive), from towel (n.). Related: Towelled; towelling.


towelette (n.)

1896, originally a trade name, from towel (n.) + -ette.


tower (v.)

c.1400, rise high (implied in towered); see tower (n.). Also, of hawks, to fly high so as to swoop
down on prey (1590s). Related: Towering.


tower (n.1)

Old English torr tower, watchtower, from Latin turris a tower, citadel, high structure (also source
of Old French tor, 11c.; Spanish, Italian torre tower), possibly from a pre-Indo-European
Mediterranean language. Meaning lofty pile or mass is recorded from mid-14c. Also borrowed
separately 13c. as tour, from Old French tur; the modern spelling (1520s) represents a merger of the
two forms.


tower (n.2)

one who tows, 1610s, agent noun from tow (v.).


towhead (n.)

also tow-head, in reference to tousled blond hair, 1830, from tow (n.1) + head (n.). Related:
Towheaded.


towhee (n.)

marsh-robin, 1730, so called for the note of its cry.


town (n.)

Old English tun enclosure, garden, field, yard; farm, manor; homestead, dwelling house, mansion;
later group of houses, village, farm, from Proto-Germanic *tunaz, *tunan fortified place (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian tun fence, hedge, Middle Dutch tuun fence, Dutch tuin garden, Old
High German zun, German Zaun fence, hedge), an early borrowing from Celtic *dunon hill, hill-fort
(cognates: Old Irish dun, Welsh din fortress, fortified place, camp, dinas city, Gaulish-Latin
-dunum in place names), from PIE *dhu-no- enclosed, fortified place, hill-fort, from root *dheue- to
close, finish, come full circle (see down (n.2)).    Meaning inhabited place larger than a village
(mid-12c.) arose after the Norman conquest from the use of this word to correspond to French ville.
The modern word is partially a generic term, applicable to cities of great size as well as places
intermediate between a city and a village; such use is unusual, the only parallel is perhaps Latin
oppidium, which occasionally was applied even to Rome or Athens (each of which was more properly an
urbs).    First record of town hall is from late 15c. Town ball, version of baseball, is recorded
from 1852. Town car (1907) originally was a motor car with an enclosed passenger compartment and
open driver's seat. On the town living the high life is from 1712. Go to town do (something)
energetically is first recorded 1933. Man about town one constantly seen at public and private
functions is attested from 1734.


townhouse (n.)

1825, a residence in a town, from town + house (n.) from a time when well-off families had country
houses as well. As a type of suburban attached housing, c.1968, American English.


townie (n.)

also townee townsman, one raised in a town, 1827, often opposed to the university students or circus
workers who were just passing through, from town + -ie.


township (n.)

Old English tunscipe inhabitants or population of a town; see town + -ship. Applied in Middle
English to manor, parish, or other division of a hundred. Specific sense of local division or
district in a parish, each with a village or small town and its own church is from 1530s; as a local
municipal division of a county in U.S. and Canada, first recorded 1685. In South Africa, area set
aside for non-whites from 1934.


townspeople (n.)

1640s, from genitive of town + people.


toxemia (n.)

blood-poisoning, also toxaemia, 1848, from toxo- (before vowels tox-, comb. form of Greek toxon (see
toxic)) + Greek haima blood (see -emia).


toxic (adj.)

1660s, from French toxique and directly from Late Latin toxicus poisoned, from Latin toxicum poison,
from Greek toxikon (pharmakon) (poison) for use on arrows, from toxikon, neuter of toxikos
pertaining to arrows or archery, and thus to a bow, from toxon bow, probably from a Scythian word
that also was borrowed into Latin as taxus yew. Watkins suggests a possible source in Iranian
tax&#353;a- bow, from PIE *tekw- to run, flee. As a noun from 1890.


toxicity (n.)

state of being toxic, 1880, from toxic + -ity.


toxicology (n.)

1815, from French toxicologie (1812), from comb. form of Greek toxikon arrow poison (see toxic) +
-logia (see -logy). Related: Toxicological; toxicologist.


toxin (n.)

organic poison, especially one produced by bacteria in an animal body, 1886, from toxic + -in (2).


toxoplasmosis (n.)

1977, from toxoplasma (1926), coined 1909 in French from toxo-, comb. form of Greek toxon (see
toxic) + plasma (see plasma) + -osis.


toy (n.)

c.1300, amorous playing, sport, later piece of fun or entertainment (c.1500), thing of little value,
trifle (1520s), and thing for a child to play with (1580s). Of uncertain origin, and there may be
more than one word here. Compare Middle Dutch toy, Dutch tuig tools, apparatus; stuff, trash, in
speeltuig play-toy, plaything; German Zeug stuff, matter, tools, Spielzeug plaything, toy; Danish
t&oslash;i, Swedish tyg stuff, gear. Applied as an adjective to things of diminutive size,
especially dogs, from 1806. Toy-boy is from 1981.


toy (v.)

deal carelessly (with), trifle, 1520s, from toy (n.) in its older sense.    If he be merie and toy
with any,  His wife will frowne, and words geve manye.  [Song of the Bachelor's Life, 16c.]
Related: Toyed; toying.


toy-box (n.)

also toybox, 1819, from toy (n.) + box (n.).


Toyota

Japanese automaker, begun 1930s as a division of Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, named for the family
name of the founder. There seems to be no one accepted explanation for the change from -d- to -t-.


trace (v.)

late 14c., follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something, also figurative; ponder,
investigate, from Old French tracier look for, follow, pursue (12c., Modern French tracer), from
Vulgar Latin *tractiare delineate, score, trace (source also of Spanish trazar to trace, devise,
plan out, Italian tracciare to follow by foot), a frequentative form from Latin tractus track,
course, literally a drawing out, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract
(n.1)).    Meaning move along, pass over (a path, etc.) is attested from c.1400; that of track down,
follow the trail of is early 15c. Meaning copy a drawing on a transparent sheet laid over it is
recorded from 1762. Related: Traced; tracing.


trace (n.1)

track made by passage of a person or thing, c.1300, from Old French trace mark, imprint, tracks
(12c.), back-formation from tracier (see trace (v.)). Scientific sense of indication of minute
presence in some chemical compound is from 1827. Traces vestiges is from c.1400.


trace (n.2)

straps or chains by which an animal pulls a vehicle, c.1300, from earlier collective plural trays,
from Old French traiz, plural of trait strap for harnessing, act of drawing, from Latin tractus a
drawing, track, from stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Related: Traces.


traceable (adj.)

1748, from trace (v.) + -able. Related: Traceability.


tracer (n.)

c.1500, one who tracks or searches, agent noun from verb form of trace (n.1). Meaning bullet whose
course is made visible is from 1910.


tracery (n.)

mid-15c., a place for drawing, formed in English from trace (v.) + -ery. Architectural sense, in
reference to intersecting rib work in the upper part of a gothic window, is attested from 1660s.
Introduced by Wren, who described it as a masons' term [Weekley].


trachea (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin trachea (13c.), as in trachea arteria, from Late Latin trachia, from
Greek trakheia, in trakheia arteria windpipe, literally rough artery (so called from the rings of
cartilage that form the trachea), from fem. of trakhys rough, from PIE *dhre-gh-, suffixed form of
root *dher- (1). See artery for connection with windpipe in Greek science. Related: Tracheal.


tracheostomy (n.)

1726, from tracheo-, used as a comb. form of trachea + -ostomy artificial opening, from Modern Latin
stoma opening, orifice, from Greek stoma mouth (see stoma).


tracheotomy (n.)

1726, Modern Latin, coined 1718 by German surgeon Lorenz Heister (1683-1758); see trachea + -tomy.


trachoma (n.)

disease of the eyes, 1690s, from Modern Latin trachoma, from Greek trakhoma roughness, from trakhys
rough.


track (n.)

late 15c., footprint, mark left by anything, from Old French trac track of horses, trace (mid-15c.),
possibly from a Germanic source (compare Middle Low German treck, Dutch trek drawing, pulling; see
trek). Meaning lines of rails for drawing trains is from 1805. Meaning branch of athletics involving
a running track is recorded from 1905. Meaning single recorded item is from 1904, originally in
reference to phonograph records. Meaning mark on skin from repeated drug injection is first attested
1964.   Track record (1955) is a figurative use from racing, performance history of an individual
car, runner, horse, etc. (1907, but the phrase was more common in sense fastest speed recorded at a
particular track). To make tracks move quickly is American English colloquial first recorded 1835;
to cover (one's) tracks in the figurative sense first attested 1898; to keep track of  something is
attested from 1883. American English wrong side of the tracks bad part of town is by 1901. Track
lighting attested from 1970.


track (v.)

to follow or trace the footsteps of, 1560s, from track (n.). Meaning leave a footprint trail in
dirt, mud, etc. is from 1838. Of film and TV cameras, 1959. Related: Tracked; tracking.


tracker (n.)

1610s, agent noun from track (v.).


trackless (adj.)

pathless, untrodden, 1650s, from track (n.) + -less.


tract (n.1)

area, mid-15c., period or lapse of time, from Latin tractus track, course, space, duration, lit, a
drawing out or pulling, from stem of trahere to pull, draw, from PIE root *tragh- to draw, drag,
move (cognates: Slovenian trag trace, track, Middle Irish tragud ebb; perhaps with a variant form
*dhragh-; see drag (v.)). The meaning stretch of land or water is first recorded 1550s. Specific
U.S. sense of plot of land for development is recorded from 1912; tract housing attested from 1953.


tract (n.2)

little book, treatise mid-12c., probably a shortened form of Latin tractatus a handling, treatise,
treatment, from tractare to handle (see treat (v.)). Related: Tractarian.


tractable (adj.)

manageable, early 15c., from Latin tractabilis that may be touched or handled, workable, tangible,
manageable, figuratively, pliant, from tractare to handle, manage (see treat (v.)). Related:
Tractability.


traction (n.)

early 15c., a drawing or pulling (originally the pulling of a dislocated limb to reposition it),
from Medieval Latin tractionem (nominative tractio) a drawing (mid-13c.), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Sense of rolling friction of a
vehicle first appears 1825. In modern medical care, a sustained pull to a part of the body to hold
fractured bones in position, 1885.


tractor (n.)

1856, something that pulls, from Modern Latin tractor that which draws, agent noun from past
participle stem of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Earlier used of a quack device
consisting of two metal rods which were supposed to relieve rheumatism (1798, in full Perkins's
metallic tractor); still the main sense in Century Dictionary (1891).    Sense of an engine or
vehicle for pulling wagons or plows is recorded by 1896, from earlier traction engine (1859). The
meaning powerful truck for pulling a freight trailer is first found 1926; tractor-trailer as
combined motor-truck and trailer is from 1914.


trad (adj.)

1956, slang shortening of traditional jazz. Its general slang use for traditional is recorded from
1963.


trade (n.)

late 14c., path, track, course of action, introduced by the Hanse merchants, from Middle Dutch or
Middle Low German trade track, course (probably originally of a ship), cognate with Old English
tredan (see tread (v.)).    Sense of one's habitual business (1540s) developed from the notion of
way, course, manner of life (mid-15c.); sense of buying and selling, exchange of commodities is from
1550s. Meaning act of trading is from 1829. Trade-name is from 1821; trade-route is from 1873;
trade-war is from 1899. Trade union is attested from 1831. Trade wind (1640s) has nothing to do with
commerce, but preserves the obsolete sense of in a habitual or regular course.


trade (v.)

1540s, to tread a path, from trade (n.). Meaning to occupy oneself (in something) is recorded from
c.1600. Meaning to barter is by 1793. The U.S. sports team sense of to exchange one player for
another is attested from 1899. Related: Traded; trading. To trade down is attested from 1942; trade
up from 1959. Trade places exchange situations is from 1917. Trading post is recorded from 1796.
Trading stamp, given by merchants and exchangeable for goods, is from 1897.


trade-in (n.)

1917, in reference to used cars, from verbal phrase, from trade (v.) + in (adv.).


trade-off (n.)

also tradeoff, sacrifice of one benefit for another, 1959, from verbal phrase to trade off; see
trade (v.) + off (adv.).


trademark (n.)

also trade-mark, 1838 (the thing itself attested continuously from 14c., apparently originally the
watermarks on paper), from trade (n.) + mark (n.1). Figurative use by 1869. As a verb, from 1904.
Related: Trademarked; trademarking.


trader (n.)

dealer, trafficker, one engaged in commerce, 1580s, agent noun from trade (v.).


tradesman (n.)

1590s, from genitive of trade (n.) + man (n.).


tradition (n.)

late 14c., statement, belief, or practice handed down from generation to generation, especially
belief or practice based on Mosaic law, from Old French tradicion transmission, presentation,
handing over (late 13c.) and directly from Latin traditionem (nominative traditio) delivery,
surrender, a handing down, a giving up, noun of action from past participle stem of tradere deliver,
hand over, from trans- over (see trans-) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). The word is a doublet of
treason (q.v.). Meaning a long-established custom is from 1590s. The notion is of customs, ways,
beliefs, doctrines, etc. handed down from one generation to the next.    Nobody can make a
tradition; it takes a century to make it. [Hawthorne, Septimius Felton, 1872]


traditional (adj.)

1590s, observing traditions; c.1600, handed down as tradition, from tradition + -al (1). In
reference to jazz, from 1950. Related: Traditionally; traditionalist.


traduce (v.)

1530s, alter, change over, transport, from Latin traducere change over, convert, also lead in
parade, make a show of, dishonor, disgrace, originally lead along or across, bring through, transfer
(source also of French traduire, Spanish traducir, Italian tradurre), from trans- across (see
trans-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sense of defame, slander in English is from 1580s, from
Latin traducere in the sense of scorn or disgrace, a figurative use from the notion of to lead along
as a spectacle. Related: Traduced; traducing.


traducer (n.)

1610s, agent noun from traduce (v.).


Trafalgar

cape in southwestern Spain, from Arabic taraf-al-garb end of the west, or taraf-agarr end of the
column (in reference to the pillars of Hercules). The British naval victory over the French there
was fought Oct. 21, 1805; hence London's Trafalgar Square, named in commemoration of it.


traffic (n.)

c.1500, trade, commerce, from Middle French trafique (15c.), from Italian traffico (14c.), from
trafficare carry on trade, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Vulgar Latin *transfricare to rub
across, from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + fricare to rub (see friction), with the original
sense of the Italian verb being touch repeatedly, handle.    Or the second element may be an
unexplained alteration of Latin facere to make, do. Klein suggests ultimate derivation of the
Italian word from Arabic tafriq distribution. Meaning people and vehicles coming and going first
recorded 1825. Traffic jam is 1917, ousting earlier traffic block (1895). Traffic circle is from
1938.


traffic (v.)

1540s, to buy and sell, from traffic (n.) and preserving the original commercial sense. Related:
Trafficked; trafficking; trafficker. The -k- is inserted to preserve the k sound of -c- before a
suffix beginning in -i-, -y-, or -e- (compare picnic/picnicking, panic/panicky, shellacshellacked).


tragedian (n.)

writer of tragedies, late 14c., from Old French tragediane (Modern French trag&eacute;dien), from
tragedie (see tragedy). Another word for this was tragician (mid-15c.). Meaning actor in tragedies
is from 1590s. French-based fem. form tragedienne is from 1851. In late classical Greek, tragodos
was the actor, tragodopoios the writer.


tragedy (n.)

late 14c., play or other serious literary work with an unhappy ending, from Old French tragedie
(14c.), from Latin tragedia a tragedy, from Greek tragodia a dramatic poem or play in formal
language and having an unhappy resolution, apparently literally goat song, from tragos goat + oide
song (see ode).    The connection may be via satyric drama, from which tragedy later developed, in
which actors or singers were dressed in goatskins to represent satyrs. But many other theories have
been made (including singer who competes for a goat as a prize), and even the goat connection is at
times questioned. Meaning any unhappy event, disaster is from c.1500.


tragi-comedy (n.)

also tragicomedy, characterized by both serious and comic scenes, 1570s, from Middle French
tragicom&eacute;die (1540s), from Italian tragicommedia, from Late Latin tragicomoedia, contraction
of tragicocomoedia (Plautus), from tragicus (see tragic) + comoedia (see comedy).


tragi-comic (adj.)

both serious and tragic, 1680s; see from tragi-comedy + -ic. Related: Tragi-comical (1560s).


tragic (adj.)

1540s, calamitous, disastrous, fatal (resembling the actions in a stage tragedy), shortened from
tragical (late 15c.), modeled on Latin tragicus, from Greek tragikos of or pertaining to tragedy;
stately, majestic; plaintive, literally goatish, of or pertaining to a goat, and perhaps referring
to a satyr impersonated by a goat singer or satyric actor, from tragodia (see tragedy). Tragic flaw
(1913) translates Greek hamartia. Related: Tragically.


tragus (n.)

eminence at the opening of the ear, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek tragos in this sense (Rufus of
Ephesus), properly he-goat; so called for the tuft of hair which grows there, which resembles a
goat's beard.


trail (v.)

c.1300, to hang down loosely and flow behind (of a gown, sleeve, etc.), from Old French trailler to
tow; pick up the scent of a quarry, ultimately from Vulgar Latin *tragulare to drag, from Latin
tragula dragnet, javelin thrown by a strap, probably related to trahere to pull (see tract (n.1)).
Transitive sense of to tow or pull along the ground is from c.1400. The meaning follow the trail of
(an animal, etc.) is first recorded late 14c. Meaning to lag behind is from 1957. Related: Trailed;
trailing.


trail (n.)

early 14c., trailing part of a robe, gown, etc., from trail (v.). The meaning track or smell left by
a person or animal is also from 1580s. Meaning path or track worn in wilderness is attested from
1807. Trail of Tears in reference to the U.S. government's brutally incompetent Cherokee removal of
1838-9 is attested by 1908.


trailblazer (n.)

by 1893, from trail (n.) + agent noun from blaze (v.3).


trailer (n.)

1580s, hound or huntsman that follows a trail, agent noun from trail (v.). From 1610s as Something
that trails. From 1890 as vehicle pulled by another; originally a small carriage drawn along by a
bicycle. Meaning preview of a coming movie first attested 1928. Trailer park mobile home community
recorded by 1936. Trailer trash in use by 1986.


train (n.)

early 14c., a drawing out, delay; late 14c., trailing part of a skirt, gown, or cloak; also retinue,
procession, from Old French train tracks, path, trail (of a rome or gown); act of dragging, from
trainer to pull, drag, draw, from Vulgar Latin *traginare, extended from *tragere to pull, back-
formation from tractus, past participle of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).,
General sense of series, progression, succession, continuous course is from late 15c. Train of
thought first attested 1650s. The railroad sense locomotive and the cars coupled to it is recorded
from 1820 (publication year, dated 1816), from notion of a train of wagons or carriages pulled by a
mechanical engine.


train (v.)

to discipline, teach, bring to a desired state by means of instruction, 1540s, probably from earlier
sense of draw out and manipulate in order to bring to a desired form (late 14c.), specifically of
the growth of branches, vines, etc. from mid-15c.; from train (n.). Sense of point or aim (a
firearm, etc.) is from 1841. Sense of fit oneself for a performance by a regimen or exercise is from
1832. The meaning to travel by railway is recorded from 1856. Related: Trained; training.


train-spotting (n.)

1959 (train spotter attested from 1958), chiefly British English, in reference to the hobby of
recording the numbers of railway locomotives one has observed; from train (n.) in the railroad sense
+ verbal noun from spot (v.).


trainable (adj.)

1540s, from train (v.) + -able.


trainee (n.)

1841, from train (v.) in the instruct sense + -ee.


trainer (n.)

c.1600, one who educates or instructs, agent noun from train (v.). Meaning one who prepares another
for feats requiring physical fitness is from 1823, originally of horse-trainers.


training (n.)

mid-15c., protraction, delay, verbal noun from train (v.). From 1540s as discipline and instruction
to develop powers or skills; 1786 as exercise to improve bodily vigor. Training wheels as an
attachment to a bicycle is from 1953.


traipse (v.)

1590s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French trepasser pass over or beyond, from Old
French trespasser cross, traverse, transgress (see trespass). Or from a source related to Middle
Dutch trappen, dialectal Norwegian trappa to tread, stamp (see trap (n.)). Liberman points out that
it resembles German traben tramp and other similar verbs meaning 'tramp; wander; flee' in several
European languages. They seem to have been part of soldiers' and vagabonds' slang between 1400 and
1700. In all likelihood, they originated as onomatopoeias and spread to neighboring languages from
Low German. Related: Traipsed; traipsing.


trait (n.)

late 15c., shot, missiles; later a stroke in drawing, a short line (1580s), from Middle French trait
line, stroke, feature, tract, from Latin tractus drawing, drawing out, dragging, pulling, later line
drawn, feature, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Sense of
particular feature, distinguishing quality in English is first recorded 1752.


traitor (n.)

c.1200, one who betrays a trust or duty, from Old French traitor, traitre traitor, villain, deceiver
(11c., Modern French tra&#238;tre), from Latin traditor betrayer, literally one who delivers, agent
noun from stem of tradere deliver, surrender (see tradition). Originally usually with a suggestion
of Judas Iscariot; especially of one false to his allegiance to a sovereign, government, or cause
from late 15c.


traitorous (adj.)

late 14c., guilty of treason, apparently from Old French traitros treacherous (13c.), from traitor
(see traitor). Related: Traitorously; traitorousness.


trajectory (n.)

path described by a body moving under the influence of given forces, 1690s, from Modern Latin
trajectorium, from trajectorius of or pertaining to throwing across, from Latin traiectus thrown
over or across, past participle of traicere throw across, shoot across, from Latin trans- across
(see trans-) + icere, combining form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Middle French and Middle
English had trajectorie as end of a funnel, from Latin traiectorium.


tram (n.)

c.1500, beam or shaft of a barrow or sledge, also a barrow or truck body (1510s), Scottish,
originally in reference to the iron trucks used in coal mines, probably from Middle Flemish tram
beam, handle of a barrow, bar, rung, a North Sea Germanic word of unknown origin. The sense of track
for a barrow, tramway is first recorded 1826; that of streetcar is first recorded 1879, short for
tram-car car used on a tramway (1873).


trammel (n.)

mid-14c., net to catch fish (implied in trammeller one who fishes with a trammel net), from Old
French tramail fine-gauged fishnet (13c.), from Late Latin tremaculum, perhaps meaning a net made
from three layers of meshes, from Latin tri- three (see tri-) + macula a mesh (see mail (n.2)).
Meaning anything that hinders is from 1650s, originally a hobble for a horse (c.1500). Italian
tramaglio, Spanish trasmallo are French loan-words.


trammel (v.)

1530s, originally to bind up (a corpse); sense of hinder, restrain is from 1727, from trammel (n.),
a figurative use from the literal sense bind (a horse's legs) with a trammel (c.1600). Related:
Trammeled; trammeling.


tramp (n.)

person who wanders about, idle vagrant, vagabond, 1660s, from tramp (v). Sense of steamship which
takes cargo wherever it can be traded (as opposed to one running a regular line) is attested from
c.1880. The meaning promiscuous woman is from 1922. Sense of a long, toilsome walk is from 1786.


tramp (v.)

late 14c., walk heavily, stamp, from Middle Low German trampen to stamp, from Proto-Germanic *tremp-
(cognates: Danish trampe, Swedish trampa to tramp, stamp, Gothic ana-trimpan to press upon), from
PIE *der- (1) to run, walk, step (see tread (v.)). Related: Tramped; tramping.


trample (v.)

late 14c., to walk heavily, frequentative form of tramp (v.). Transitive sense beat down by
continuously treading on is from mid-15c. Related: Trampled; trampling. As a noun from c.1600.


trampoline (n.)

1798, from Spanish trampolin springboard, and Italian trampolino, from trampoli stilts, from a
Germanic source (compare Low German trampeln trample) related to tramp (v.).


trance (n.)

late 14c., state of extreme dread or suspense, also a half-conscious or insensible condition, state
of insensibility to mundane things, from Old French transe fear of coming evil, originally coma,
passage from life to death (12c.), from transir be numb with fear, originally die, pass on, from
Latin transire cross over (see transient). French trance in its modern sense has been reborrowed
from English.


tranche (n.)

c.1500, from French tranche a cutting, from trancher, trencher to cut, Old French trenchier (see
trench). Economic sense is from 1930.


trannie (n.)

also tranny transsexual person, 1983, from transsexual + -ie. In 1960s and '70s the word was used as
a slang shortening of transistor radio and in car magazines for transmission.


tranquil (adj.)

mid-15c., a back-formation from tranquility or else from Latin tranquillus quiet, calm, still.
Related: Tranquilly.


tranquility (n.)

also tranquillity, late 14c., from Old French tranquilite peace, happiness (12c.), from Latin
tranquillitatem (nominative tranquillitas) quietness, stillness; serenity, from tranquillus quiet,
calm, still, perhaps from trans- over (here in its intensive sense of exceedingly) + a root possibly
related to quies rest (see quiet (n.)).


tranquilize (v.)

1620s, from tranquil + -ize. Related: Tranquilized; tranquilizing; tranquilization.


tranquilizer (n.)

1800, that which tranquilizes; from 1824 as a sedative (first reference is to ground ivy), agent
noun from tranquilize; in reference to one of a large group of anti-anxiety drugs, it is recorded by
1956.


trans-

word-forming element meaning across, beyond, through, on the other side of, to go beyond, from Latin
trans-, from trans (prep.) across, over, beyond, perhaps originally present participle of a verb
*trare-, meaning to cross, from PIE *tra-, variant of root *tere- (2) to cross over (see through).
In chemical use indicating a compound in which two characteristic groups are situated on opposite
sides of an axis of a molecule [Flood].


trans-Atlantic (adj.)

also transatlantic, 1779, from trans- through, across + Atlantic.


trans-oceanic (adj.)

1827, situated across the ocean, from trans- + oceanic. Meaning passing over the sea is recorded
from 1868.


transact (v.)

1580s, back-formation from transaction, or else from Latin transactus, past participle of transigere
to drive through, accomplish, bring to an end, settle. Related: Transacted; transacting.


transaction (n.)

mid-15c., the adjustment of a dispute, a negotiated agreement, management or settlement of an
affair, from Old French transaccion exchange, transaction, from Late Latin transactionem (nominative
transactio) an agreement, accomplishment, noun of action from past participle stem of transigere
stab through; accomplish, perform, drive or carry through, come to a settlement, from trans- through
(see trans-) + agere to drive (see act (v.)). Meaning a piece of business is attested from 1640s.
Related: Transactions; transactional.


transaxle (n.)

1958, from transmission axle.


transceiver (n.)

1934, from a merger of transmitter + receiver.


transcend (v.)

mid-14c., escape inclusion in; lie beyond the scope of, from Old French transcendre transcend,
surpass, and directly from Latin transcendere climb over or beyond, surmount, overstep, from trans-
beyond (see trans-) + scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Meanings be surpassing, outdo, excel;
surmount, move beyond are from early 15c. Related: Transcended; transcending.


transcendence (n.)

c.1600, from from transcendent + -ence, or else from Medieval Latin transcendentia, from Latin
transcendentem. Related: Transcendency.


transcendent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin transcendentem (nominative transcendens) surmounting, rising above, present
participle of transcendere (see transcend). Related: Transcendently.


transcendental (adj.)

1660s, from Medieval Latin transcendentalis, from Latin transcendentem (see transcendent). Related:
Transcendentally. Transcendental meditation attested by 1966.


transcendentalism (n.)

1803, in reference to Kant, later to Schelling; 1842 in reference to the New England religio-
philosophical movement among American followers of Schelling; from transcendental + -ism.


transcendentalist (n.)

1803, from transcendental + -ist.


transcontinental (adj.)

also trans-continental, 1853 (in transcontinental railroad), American English, from trans- +
continental.


transcribe (v.)

1550s, from Latin transcribere to copy, write again in another place, write over, transfer, from
trans- over (see trans-) + scribere write (see script (n.)). To do it poorly is to transcribble
(1746). Related: Transcribed; transcriber; transcribing.


transcript (n.)

written copy of a document, c.1300, from Medieval Latin transcriptum, neuter past participle of
Latin transcribere (see transcribe).


transcriptase (n.)

1963, from transcription + -ase.


transcription (n.)

1590s, from Middle French transcription, from Late Latin transcriptionem (nominative transcriptio),
noun of action from past participle stem of transcribere (see transcribe). Biological sense is from
1961. Related: Transcriptional; transcriptionist.


transduce (v.)

1949, back-formation from transducer. Related: Transduced; transducing.


transducer (n.)

1924, device which converts energy from one form to another, from Latin transducere/traducere lead
across, transfer, carry over, from trans- across (see trans-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)).


transduction (n.)

act of leading or carrying over, 1650s, from Latin transductionem/traducionem (nominative
transductio) a removal, transfer, noun of action from transducere/traducere (see traduce).


transect (v.)

to cut across, 1630s, from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + sectus, past participle of secare to
cut (see section (n.)). Related: Transected; transecting.


transept (n.)

transverse section of a cruciform church, 1530s, from Medieval Latin transeptum, from Latin trans-
across (see trans-) + saeptum fence, partition, enclosure (see septum). Rare before 1700. Related:
Transeptal.


transeunt (adj.)

variant of transient (adj.), usually in a sense of operating beyond or outside itself (opposite of
immanent).


transexual

see transsexual.


transfer (v.)

late 14c., from Old French transferer or directly from Latin transferre bear across, carry over,
bring through; transfer, copy, translate, from trans- across (see trans-) + ferre to carry (see
infer). Related: Transferred; transferring.


transfer (n.)

1670s, conveyance of property, from transfer (v.).


transferable (adj.)

1650s, from transfer (v.) + -able.


transferee (n.)

1736, one to whom a transfer is made; 1890s as one who is transferred; from transfer (v.) + -ee.


transference (n.)

act of transferring, 1680s, from transfer (v.) + -ence. In psychoanalytical sense it is recorded
from 1911, translating German &uuml;bertragung (Freud).


transferor (n.)

1875, legalese form of transferer (1807); agent noun in Latin form from transfer (v.).


transfiguration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin transfigurationem (nominative transfiguratio) a change of form, noun of action
from past participle stem of transfigurare (see transfigure). In English, originally the change in
appearance of Christ before his disciples (Matt. xvii:2; Mark ix:2,3). The non-Christian sense is
first recorded 1540s.


transfigure (v.)

early 13c., from Old French transfigurer change, transform (12c.), and directly from Latin
transfigurare change the shape of, from trans- across (see trans-) + figurare to form, fashion, from
figura to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)). Related: Transfigured;
transfiguring.


transfix (v.)

1580s, pierce through, impale, from Middle French transfixer (15c.), from Latin transfixus impaled,
past participle of transfigere to impale, pierce through, from trans- through (see trans-) + figere
to fix, fasten (see fix (v.)). Figurative sense of make motionless or helpless, as with amazement,
terror, or grief is first recorded 1640s. Related: Transfixed; transfixing.


transfixion (n.)

c.1600, noun of action from transfix.


transform (v.)

mid-14c., change the form of (transitive), from Old French transformer (14c.), from Latin
transformare change in shape, metamorphose, from trans- across (see trans-) + formare to form (see
form (v.)). Intransitive sense undergo a change of form is from 1590s. Related: Transformed;
transforming.


transformation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French transformation and directly from Church Latin transformationem (nominative
transformatio) change of shape, noun of action from past participle stem of transformare (see
transform).


transformational (adj.)

1857, from transformation + -al (1).


transformative (adj.)

1660s, from Latin transformatus, past participle of transformare (see transform) + -ive.


transformer (n.)

c.1600, one who or that which transforms, agent noun from transform (v.). Meaning device to reduce
electrical currents is from 1882.


transfuse (v.)

to transfer by pouring, early 15c., from Latin transfusus, past participle of transfundere pour from
one container to another, from trans- across (see trans-) + fundere to pour (see found (v.2)).
Related: Transfused; transfusing.


transfusion (n.)

1570s, action of pouring liquid from one vessel to another, from Middle French transfusion and
directly from Latin transfusionem (nominative transfusio) a decanting, intermingling, noun of action
from past participle stem of transfundere pour from one container to another (see transfuse). Sense
of transfering of blood from one individual to another first recorded 1640s.


transgender (adj.)

by 1988, from trans- + gender (n.). Related: Transgendered.


transgress (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French transgresser (14c.), from Latin transgressus, past participle of
transgredi to step across, step over (see transgression). Related: Transgressed; transgressing.


transgression (n.)

late 14c., from Old French transgression transgression, particularly that relating to Adam and the
Fall (12c.), from Late Latin transgressionem (nominative transgressio) a transgression of the law,
in classical Latin, a going over, a going across, noun of action from transgressus, past participle
of transgredi step across, step over; climb over, pass, go beyond, from trans- across (see trans-) +
gradi (past participle gressus) to walk, go (see grade (n.)). Geological sense is from 1882.


transgressive (adj.)

1640s, inclined to transgress, from transgress + -ive. Related: Transgressively.


transgressor (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French transgressour, Old French transgressor (14c.), and directly from Latin
transgressor, agent noun from transgredi (see transgression).


transience (n.)

1745, from transient + -ence. Related: Transiency (1650s).


transient (adj.)

c.1600, transitory, not durable, from Latin transientem (nominative transiens) passing over or away,
present participle of transire cross over, go over, pass over, hasten over, pass away, from trans-
across (see trans-) + ire to go (see ion). Meaning passing through a place without staying is from
1680s. The noun is first attested 1650s; specific sense of transient guest or boarder attested from
1857. Related: Transiently.


transistor (n.)

small electronic device, 1948, from transfer + resistor, so called because it transfers an
electrical current across a resistor. Said to have been coined by U.S. electrical engineer John
Robinson Pierce (1910-2002) of Bell Telephone Laboratories, Murray Hill, N.J., where the device was
invented in 1947. It took over many functions of the vacuum tube. Transistor radio is first recorded
1958.


transistorize (v.)

1953, from transistor + -ize. Related: Transistorized.


transit (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin transitus, past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient).
Astronomical sense is from 1680s. Related: Transited; transiting.


transit (n.)

mid-15c., act or fact of passing across or through, from Latin transitus a going over, passing over,
passage, verbal noun from past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient). Meaning a
transit of a planet across the sun is from 1660s. Meaning public transportation is attested from
1873.


transition (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin transitionem (nominative transitio) a going across or over, noun of action from
past participle stem of transire go or cross over (see transient).


transitional (adj.)

1810, from transition + -al (1). Related: Transitionally.


transitive (adj.)

taking a direct object (of verbs), 1570s (implied in transitively), from Late Latin transitivus
(Priscian) transitive, literally passing over (to another person), from transire go or cross over
(see transient). Related: Transitively.


transitory (adj.)

passing without continuing, late 14c., from Old French transitoire ephemeral, transitory (12c.),
from Late Latin transitorius passing, transient, in classical Latin allowing passage through, from
transitus, past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient).


translate (v.)

early 14c., to remove from one place to another, also to turn from one language to another, from Old
French translater and directly from Latin translatus carried over, serving as past participle of
transferre to bring over, carry over (see transfer), from trans- (see trans-) + latus borne, carried
(see oblate (n.)). Related: Translated; translating. A similar notion is behind the Old English word
it replaced, awendan, from wendan to turn, direct (see wend).


translater (n.)

occasional spelling of translator.


translation (n.)

mid-14c., removal of a saint's body or relics to a new place, also rendering of a text from one
language to another, from Old French translacion translation of text, also of the bones of a saint,
etc. (12c.) or directly from Latin translationem (nominative translatio) a carrying across, removal,
transporting; transfer of meaning, noun of action from past participle stem of transferre (see
transfer (v.)).


translator (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French translator (12c.) or directly from Latin translator one who transfers or
interprets, one who carries over, agent noun from transferre (see transfer (v.)).


transliterate (v.)

to write a word in the characters of another alphabet, 1849, from trans- across (see trans-) + Latin
littera (also litera) letter, character (see letter (n.)). Related: Transliterated; transliterating.


transliteration (n.)

rendering of the letters of one alphabet by the equivalents of another, 1835, from trans- across
(see trans-) + Latin littera (also litera) letter, character (see letter (n.)).


translocation (n.)

removal from one place to another, 1620s, from trans- + location.


translucence (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin translucentia, from Latin translucentem (see translucenct). Related:
Translucency.


translucent (adj.)

1590s, from Latin translucentem (nominative translucens), present participle of translucere to shine
through, from trans- through (see trans-) + lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related:
Translucently.


transmigration (n.)

c.1300, from Old French transmigracion exile, diaspora (13c.) and directly from Late Latin
transmigrationem (nominative transmigratio) change of country, noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin transmigrare to wander, move, to migrate, from trans- over (see trans-) + migrare to
migrate (see migration). Originally literal, in reference to the removal of the Jews into the
Babylonian captivity; general sense of passage from one place to another is attested from late 14c.;
sense of passage of the soul after death into another body first recorded 1590s.


transmissible (adj.)

1640s, from Latin transmiss-, stem of transmittere send across, carry over (see transmit) + -ible.
Related: Transmissibility.


transmission (n.)

1610s, conveyance from one place to another, from Latin transmissionem (nominative transmissio) a
sending over or across, passage, noun of action from past participle stem of transmittere send over
or across (see transmit). Meaning part of a motor vehicle that regulates power from the engine to
the axle is first recorded 1894.


transmit (v.)

c.1400, from Latin transmittere send across, cause to go across, transfer, pass on, from trans-
across (see trans-) + mittere to send (see mission). Related: Transmitted; transmitting.


transmittal (n.)

1724, from transmit + -al (2).


transmittance (n.)

1786, from transmit + -ance.


transmitter (n.)

1727, one who transmits, agent noun from transmit. In telegraphy from 1844. Meaning apparatus for
transmitting radio signals is from 1934.


transmogrify (v.)

to change completely, 1650s, apparently a perversion of transmigure, from transmigrate, perhaps
influenced by modify. Related: Transmogrified; transmogrifying.


transmutation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French transmutacion transformation, change, metamorphosis (12c.), from Late
Latin transmutationem (nominative transmutatio) a change, shift, noun of action from Latin
transmutare change from one condition to another, from trans- thoroughly (see trans-) + mutare to
change (see mutable). A word from alchemy.


transmute (v.)

late 14c., transform the appearance of, from Latin transmutare to change (see transmutation).
Related: Transmuted; transmuting.


transnational (adj.)

1921, from trans- + national (adj.). Related: Transnationally.


transnationalism (n.)

1921, from transnational + -ism.


transom (n.)

late 14c., transeyn crossbeam spanning an opening, lintel, probably by dissimilation from Latin
transtrum crossbeam (especially one spanning an opening), from trans- across (see trans-) +
instrumental suffix -trum. Meaning small window over a door or other window is first recorded 1844.


transparency (n.)

1610s, condition of being transparent, from Medieval Latin transparentia, from transparentem (see
transparent). Meaning that which is transparent is from 1590s; of pictures, prints, etc., from 1785;
in photography from 1866. Related: Transparence.


transparent (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin transparentem (nominative transparens), present participle of
transparere show light through, from Latin trans- through (see trans-) + parere come in sight,
appear (see appear). Figurative sense of easily seen through is first attested 1590s. The attempt to
back-form a verb transpare (c.1600) died with the 17c. Related: Transparently.


transpiration (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin transpirationem (nominative transpiratio), noun of action from
transpirare (see transpire).


transpire (v.)

1590s, pass off in the form of a vapor or liquid, from Middle French transpirer (16c.), from Latin
trans- through (see trans-) + spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)). Figurative sense of leak out,
become known is recorded from 1741, and the erroneous meaning take place, happen is almost as old,
being first recorded 1755. Related: Transpired; transpiring.


transplant (v.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin transplantare plant again in a different place, from Latin trans- across
(see trans-) + plantare to plant (see plant (v.)). Extended to people (1550s) and then to organs or
tissue (1786). Related: Transplanted; transplanting.


transplant (n.)

1756, in reference to plants, from transplant (v.); in reference to surgical transplanting of human
organs or tissue it is first recorded 1951, but not in widespread use until Christiaan Barnard
performed the world's first successful heart transplant in 1967 at Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape
Town, South Africa. Meaning person not native to his place of residence is recorded from 1961.


transplantation (n.)

c.1600, from French transplantation, noun of action from transplanter (v.), from Late Latin
transplantare (see transplant (v.)).


transponder (n.)

1945, from trans(mit) + (res)pond + agent noun suffix -er (1).


transpontine (adj.)

1844, in a London context in reference to the area south of the Thames, from Latin trans- (see
trans-) + pontine, from stem of pons bridge (see pons).


transport (v.)

late 14c., convey from one place to another, from Old French transporter carry or convey across;
overwhelm (emotionally) (14c.) or directly from Latin transportare carry over, take across, convey,
remove, from trans- across (see trans-) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Sense of carry away
with strong feelings is first recorded c.1500. Meaning to carry away into banishment is recorded
from 1660s.


transport (n.)

mid-15c., originally mental exaltation; sense of means of transportation, carriage, conveyance is
recorded from 1690s; from transport (v.).


transportable (adj.)

1580s, from transport (v.) + -able.


transportation (n.)

1530s, act of transporting, noun of action from transport (v.). Middle English used verbal noun
transporting (early 15c.). In the sense of means of conveyance it is first recorded 1853.


transpose (v.)

late 14c., from Old French transposer transfer, remove; present, render symbolically (14c.), from
Latin transponere (past participle transpositus) to place over, set over, from trans- over (see
trans-) + ponere to put, place (see position (n.)). Form altered in French on model of poser to put,
place. Sense of put music in a different key is from c.1600. Related: Transposed; transposing.


transposition (n.)

1530s, from Middle French transposition or directly from Medieval Latin transpositionem (nominative
transpositio), noun of action from past participle stem of transponere (see transpose).


transsexual

1957 (adj. and n.), from trans- + sexual, and compare transsexualism.


transsexualism (n.)

intense desire to change one's sexual status, including the anatomical structure, 1953, coined by
U.S. physician Harry Benjamin (1885-1986) from trans- + sexual. Transsexuality is recorded from
1941, but was used at first to mean homosexuality or bisexuality. In the current sense from 1955.


transubstantiation (n.)

late 14c., change of one substance to another, from Medieval Latin trans(s)ubstantiationem
(nominative trans(s)ubstantio), noun of action from trans(s)ubstantiare to change from one substance
into another, from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + substantiare to substantiate, from substania
substance (see substance). Ecclesiastical sense in reference to the Eucharist first recorded 1530s.


transversal (adj.)

running or lying across, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin transversalis (13c.), from transvers-, stem
of transvertere (see transverse). Earlier in the same sense was transversary (c.1400). As a noun,
from 1590s. Related: Transversally.


transverse (adj.)

lying across, early 15c. (earlier transversary, c.1400), from Latin transversus turned or directed
across, past participle of transvertere turn across, from trans- across (see trans-) + vertere to
turn (see versus). The verb transvert is recorded from late 14c.


transvestite (n.)

person with a strong desire to dress in clothing of the opposite sex, 1922, from German Transvestit
(1910), coined from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + vestire to dress, to clothe (see wear (v.)).
As an adjective from 1925. Transvestism is first attested 1928. Also see travesty, which is the same
word, older, and passed through French and Italian; it generally has a figurative use in English,
but has been used in the literal sense of wearing of the clothes of the opposite sex (often as a
means of concealment or disguise) since at least 1823, and travestiment wearing of the dress of the
opposite sex is recorded by 1832.


Transylvania

literally beyond the forest, from Medieval Latin, from trans beyond (see trans-) + sylva (see
sylvan). So called in reference to the wooded mountains that surround it.


trap (v.)

late 14c., ensnare (an animal), catch in a trap; encircle; capture, from trap (n.) or from Old
English betr&aelig;ppan. Figurative use is slightly earlier (late 14c.). Related: Trapped; trapping.


trap (n.)

contrivance for catching unawares, late Old English tr&aelig;ppe, treppe snare, trap, from Proto-
Germanic *trep- (cognates: Middle Dutch trappe trap, snare), related to Germanic words for stair,
step, tread (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe step, stair, English
tread (v.)), and probably literally that on or into which one steps, from PIE *dreb-, extended form
of root *der- (1), an assumed base of words meaning to run, walk, step. Probably akin to Old French
trape, Spanish trampa trap, pit, snare, but the exact relationship is uncertain.    Sense of
deceitful practice, device or contrivance to betray one is first recorded c.1400. Meaning U-shaped
section of a drain pipe is from 1833. Slang meaning mouth is from 1776. Speed trap recorded from
1908. Trap door door in a floor or ceiling (often hidden and leading to a passageway or secret
place) is first attested late 14c.


trapeze (n.)

swing with a cross-bar, used for feats of strength and agility, 1861, from French trap&egrave;ze,
from Late Latin trapezium (see trapezium), probably because the crossbar, the ropes and the ceiling
formed a trapezium.    The French, to whose powers of invention (so long as you do not insist upon
utility) there is no limit, have invented for the world the Trapeze .... [Chambers's Journal, July
6, 1861]


trapezium (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin trapezium, from Greek trapezion irregular quadrilateral, literally a little
table, diminutive of trapeza table, dining table, from tra- four (see four) + peza foot, edge,
related to pous (see foot (n.)). Before 1540s, Latin editions of Euclid used the Arabic-derived word
helmariphe. As the name of a bone in the wrist, it is recorded from 1840.


trapezius (n.)

muscle over the back of the neck, 1704, from Modern Latin trapezius (musculus), masc. adjective from
trapezium (see trapezium). So called from the shape they form.


trapezoid (n.)

1706, a trapezium, from Modern Latin trapezoides, from Late Greek trapezoeides, noun use by Euclid
of Greek trapezoeides trapezium-shaped, from trapeza, literally table (see trapezium), + -oeides
shaped (see -oid). Technically, a plane four-sided figure with no two sides parallel. But in English
since c.1800, often confused with trapezium in its sense of a quadrilateral figure having only sides
parallel and two not.


trapezoidal (adj.)

1796, from trapezoid + -al (1).


trapper (n.)

one who traps animals (for fur, etc.), 1768, agent noun from trap (v.).


trappings (n.)

late 14c., horse-cloth, from Middle English trappe ornamental cloth for a horse (c.1300), later
personal effects (mid-15c.), alteration of Middle French drap cloth (see drape (n.)).


Trappist (n.)

1814, from French trappiste, Cistercian monk of reformed order established 1664 by Armand Jean le
Bouthillier de Ranc&eacute; (1626-1700) of La Trappe in Normandy.


traps (n.1)

expanse of dark igneous rock, 1794, from Swedish trapp (Torbern Bergman, 1766), from trappa stair,
related to Middle Low German trappe staircase (see trap (n.)). So called from the step-like
appearance of the rock.


traps (n.2)

drums, cymbals, bells, etc., 1925, from earlier trap drummer (1903) street musician who plays a drum
and several other instruments at once, perhaps from traps belongings (1813), shortened form of
trappings.


trash (n.)

late 14c., thing of little use or value, waste, refuse, dross, perhaps from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse tros rubbish, fallen leaves and twigs, Norwegian dialectal trask lumber, trash,
baggage, Swedish trasa rags, tatters), of unknown origin. Applied to ill-bred persons or groups from
1604 (Othello), and especially of poor whites in the U.S. South by 1831. Applied to domestic refuse
or garbage from 1906 (American English). Trash-can attested from 1914. To trash-talk someone or
something is by 1989.


trash (v.)

to discard as worthless, 1859, from trash (n.); in the sense of destroy, vandalize it is attested
from 1970; extended to criticize severely in 1975. Related: Trashed; trashing.


trashy (adj.)

worthless, resembling trash, 1610s, from trash (n.) + -y (2). Related: Trashiness.


trattoria (n.)

Italian restaurant, 1832, from Italian trattoria, from trattore host, keeper of an eating house,
from trattare to treat, from Latin tractare, frequentative of trahere (past participle tractus) to
draw (see tract (n.1)).


trauma (n.)

1690s, physical wound, medical Latin, from Greek trauma a wound, a hurt; a defeat, from PIE *trau-,
extended form of root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, with derivatives referring to twisting, piercing,
etc. (see throw (v.)). Sense of psychic wound, unpleasant experience which causes abnormal stress is
from 1894.


traumatic (adj.)

1650s, from French traumatique and directly from Late Latin traumaticus, from Greek traumatikos
pertaining to a wound, from trauma (genitive traumatos; see trauma). Psychological sense is from
1889. Related: Traumatically.


traumatise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of traumatize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Traumatised;
traumatising.


traumatize (v.)

1893, in reference to physical wounds; 1949 in the psychological sense, from Greek traumat-, stem of
trauma (see trauma).


travail (n.)

labor, toil, mid-13c., from Old French travail work, labor, toil, suffering or painful effort,
trouble; arduous journey (12c.), from travailler to toil, labor, originally to trouble, torture,
torment, from Vulgar Latin *tripaliare to torture, from *tripalium (in Late Latin trepalium)
instrument of torture, probably from Latin tripalis having three stakes (from tria three; see three
+ palus stake; see pale (n.)), which sounds ominous, but the exact notion is obscure. The verb is
recorded from late 13c. in English, from the verb in Old French.


trave (n.)

late 14c., from Old French traf crossbeam, from Latin trabem (nominative trabs) beam, from PIE
*treb- dwelling (see tavern).


travel (v.)

late 14c., to journey, from travailen (1300) to make a journey, originally to toil, labor (see
travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of go on a difficult journey, but it
also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced Old English faran.
Related: Traveled; traveling. Traveled (adj.) having made journeys, experienced in travel is from
early 15c. Traveling salesman is attested from 1885.


travel (n.)

late 14c., action of travelling, from travel (v.). Travels accounts of journeys is recorded from
1590s. Travel-agent is from 1925.


traveler (n.)

also traveller, late 14c., agent noun from travel (v.). Traveler's check is from 1891.


travelogue (n.)

a talk on travel, 1903, a hybrid word coined by U.S. traveler Burton Holmes (1870-1958) from travel
+ Greek-derived -logue, abstracted from monologue.


traverse (v.)

early 14c., pass across, over, or through, from Old French traverser to cross, place across (11c.),
from Vulgar Latin *traversare, from Latin transversare to cross, throw across, from Latin
transversus turn across (see transverse). As an adjective from early 15c. Related: Traversed;
traversing.


traverse (n.)

act of passing through a gate, crossing a bridge, etc., mid-14c., from Old French travers, from
traverser (see traverse (v.)). Meaning a passage by which one may traverse is recorded from 1670s.
Military fortification sense of barrier, barricade is recorded from 1590s.


travertine (n.)

1797, from Italian travertino a kind of building stone, from Latin tiburtinus, from Tiburs,
adjective from Tibur (modern Tivoli), in Latium.


travesty (n.)

1670s, literary burlesque of a serious work, from adjective meaning dressed so as to be made
ridiculous, parodied, burlesqued (1660s), from French travesti dressed in disguise, past participle
of travestir to disguise (1590s), from Italian travestire to disguise, from Latin trans- over (see
trans-) + vestire to clothe (see wear (v.)).


Traviata, La

title of an opera by Verdi, Italian, literally the woman led astray, from traviata literally to lead
beyond the way, from tra- across, beyond (from Latin trans-; see trans-) + via way (see via).


Travis

masc. proper name, also a surname (late 12c.), from an Old French word meaning to cross over,
related to traverse (v.). Probably a name for a gatekeeper or the toll collector of a bridge.


travois (n.)

type of American Indian transport, 1847, said to be ultimately from a Canadian Indian pronunciation
of travail.


trawl (v.)

1560s, from Dutch tragelen, from Middle Dutch traghelen to drag, from traghel dragnet, probably from
Latin tragula dragnet. Related: Trawled; trawling.


trawler (n.)

1590s, agent noun from trawl.


tray (n.)

Old English treg, trig flat wooden board with a low rim, from Proto-Germanic *traujam (cognates: Old
Swedish tro, a corn measure), from PIE *drou-, variant of *deru-, forming words refering to objects
made of wood (see tree (n.)). The primary sense may have been wooden vessel.


treacherous (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French trecheros, tricheros deceitful (12c.), from trecheor, tricheor cheat,
deceiver, liar, impostor, trickster, agent noun from trechier, trichier to cheat, trick (see trick
(n.)). Figuratively, of things, from c.1600. Related: Treacherously; treacherousness. Middle English
had treacher deceiver, cheat, traitor.


treachery (n.)

treasonable or perfidious conduct, c.1200, from Old French trecherie, tricherie deceit, cheating,
trickery, lies (12c.), from trechier to cheat, deceive (see trick (n.)).


treacle (n.)

mid-14c., medicinal compound, antidote for poison, from Old French triacle antidote, cure for snake-
bite (c.1200), from Vulgar Latin *triacula, from Latin theriaca, from Greek theriake (antidotos)
antidote for poisonous wild animals, from fem. of theriakos of a wild animal, from therion wild
animal, diminutive of ther (genitive theros) wild animal, from PIE root *ghwer- wild (see fierce).
Sense of molasses is first recorded 1690s (the connection may be from the use of molasses as a
laxative, or its use to disguise the bad taste of medicine); that of anything too sweet or
sentimental is from 1771. Related: Treacly.


tread (v.)

Old English tredan to tread, step on, trample; traverse, pass over (class V strong verb; past tense
tr&aelig;d, past participle treden), from Proto-Germanic *tred- (cognates: Old Saxon tredan, Old
Frisian treda, Middle Dutch treden, Old High German tretan, German treten, Gothic trudan, Old Norse
tro&eth;a), from PIE *der- (1) assumed base of roots meaning 'to run, walk, step' [Watkins].
Related: Trod; treading.


tread (n.)

early 13c., a step or stepping, pressure with the foot, from tread (v.); in reference to automobile
tires, it is recorded from 1906.


treadle (n.)

lever worked by foot, c.1400, from Old English tredel step, stair, sole of the foot, from tredan to
tread (see tread (v.)) + instrumental suffix -el (compare handle (n.)).


treadmill (n.)

invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill
(n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s.    As a corrective
punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the prisoners,
and is not likely to be easily forgotten, while it is an occupation which by no means interferes
with, nor is calculated to lessen the value of, those branches of prison regulation which provide
for the moral and religious improvement of the criminal. [Description of the Tread Mill Invented by
Mr. William Cubitt of Ipswich for the Employment of Prisoners, London, 1822]    By later generations
regarded as a path to physical fitness.


treason (n.)

c.1200, betraying; betrayal of trust; breech of faith, from Anglo-French treson, from Old French
traison treason, treachery (11c.; Modern French trahison), from Latin traditionem (nominative
traditio) a handing over, delivery, surrender (see tradition). Old French form influenced by the
verb trair betray. In old English law, high treason is violation by a subject of his allegiance to
his sovereign or to the state; distinguished from petit treason, treason against a subject, such as
murder of a master by his servant. Constructive treason was a judicial fiction whereby actions
carried out without treasonable intent, but found to have the effect of treason, were punished as
though they were treason itself. The protection against this accounts for the careful wording of the
definition of treason in the U.S. Constitution.


treasonable (adj.)

of or pertaining to treason, late 14c., from treason + -able. Related: Treasonably.


treasonous (adj.)

mid-15c., from treason + -ous. Related: Treasonously.


treasure (n.)

mid-12c., tresor, from Old French tresor treasury, hoard, treasure (11c., Modern French
tr&#233;sor), from Gallo-Roman *tresaurus, from Latin thesaurus treasury, treasure (source also of
Spanish, Italian tesoro), from Greek thesauros store, treasure, treasure house (see thesaurus). In
Middle English also thresur, etc.; modern spelling is from 16c. Replaced Old English goldhord.
General sense of anything valued is recorded from c.1200. Treasure hunt is first recorded 1913. For
treasure trove, see trove.


treasure (v.)

late 14c., to amass treasure; to store up for the future, also figurative, regard as precious,
retain carefully in the mind, from treasure (n.). Related: Treasured; treasuring.


treasurer (n.)

late 13c., from Old North French, Anglo-French tresorer, Old French tresorier, from tresor (see
treasure (n.)). Treasury bill attested from 1797.


treasury (n.)

c.1300, room for treasure, from Old French tresorie treasury (11c.), from tresor (see treasure
(n.)). Meaning department of state that controls public revenue is recorded from late 14c. An Old
English word for room for treasure was ma&eth;m-hus.


treat (v.)

c.1300, negotiate, bargain, deal with, from Old French traitier deal with, act toward; set forth (in
speech or writing) (12c.), from Latin tractare manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward,
originally drag about, tug, haul, pull violently, frequentative of trahere (past participle tractus)
to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning to entertain with food and drink without expense to the
recipient by way of compliment or kindness (or bribery) is recorded from c.1500. Sense of deal with,
handle, or develop in speech or writing (early 14c.) led to the use in medicine to attempt to heal
or cure, to manage in the application of remedies (1781). Related: Treated; treating.


treat (n.)

late 14c., action of discussing terms, from treat (v.). Sense of a treating with food and drink, an
entertainment given as a compliment or expression of regard (1650s) was extended by 1770 to anything
that affords much pleasure.


treatable (adj.)

c.1300, amenable to reason, from Anglo-French tretable, Old French traitable, and in part from treat
(v.) + -able. Of wounds, diseases, etc., receptive to treatment, early 15c.


treatise (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French tretiz (mid-13c.), contracted from Old French traitis treatise,
account, from traitier deal with; set forth in speech or writing (see treat (v.)).


treatment (n.)

1560s, conduct or behavior toward someone or something, from treat (v.) + -ment. In the medical
sense, it is first recorded 1744.


treaty (n.)

late 14c., treatment, discussion, from Anglo-French tret&#233;, Old French traiti&eacute; assembly,
agreement, dealings, from Latin tractatus discussion, handling, management, from tractare to handle,
manage (see treat (v.)). Sense of contract or league between nations or sovereigns is first recorded
early 15c.


treble (adj.)

three times, triple, c.1300, from Old French treble (12c.), from Latin triplus threefold (see
triple). Related: Trebly.


treble (v.)

to multiply by three, early 14c., from Old French trebler, from treble triple (see treble (adj.)).
Related: Trebled; trebling.


treble (n.)

highest part in music, soprano, mid-14c., from Anglo-French treble, Old French treble a third part,
noun use of adjective (see treble (adj.)). In early contrapuntal music, the chief melody was in the
tenor, and the treble was the third part above it (after the alto).


trebuchet (n.)

medieval stone-throwing engine of war, c.1300 (in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French
trebuchet (12c.) stone-throwing siege engine, from trabuchier to overturn, fall to the ground,
overthrow (11c.), from tra- (from Latin trans-, here expressing displacement) + Old French buc
trunk, bulk, from Frankish *buk- trunk of the body, from Proto-Germanic *bheu-, variant of *beu-,
used in forming words loosely associated with swelling (such as German bauch belly; see bull (n.2)).


tree (n.)

Old English  treo, treow tree (also timber, wood, beam, log, stake), from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-
(cognates: Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu tree), from PIE *drew-o-,
from *deru- oak (cognates: Sanskrit dru tree, wood, daru wood, log; Greek drys oak, drymos copse,
thicket, doru beam, shaft of a spear; Old Church Slavonic drievo tree, wood; Serbian drvo tree, drva
wood; Russian drevo tree, wood; Czech drva; Polish drwa wood; Lithuanian derva pine, wood; Old Irish
daur, Welsh derwen oak, Albanian drusk oak). This is from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the root
*deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true), with specialized sense wood, tree and derivatives
referring to objects made of wood.    The line which divides trees from shrubs is largely arbitrary,
and dependent upon habit rather than size, the tree having a single trunk usually unbranched for
some distance above the ground, while a shrub has usually several stems from the same root and each
without a proper trunk. [Century Dictionary]    The widespread use of words originally meaning oak
in the sense tree probably reflects the importance of the oak to ancient Indo-Europeans. In Old
English and Middle English also thing made of wood, especially the cross of the Crucifixion and a
gallows (such as Tyburn tree, famous gallows outside London). Middle English also had plural treen,
adjective treen (Old English treowen of a tree, wooden). For Dutch boom, German Baum, the usual
words for tree, see beam (n.). Meaning framework of a saddle is from 1530s. Meaning representation
of familial relationships in the form of a tree is from c.1300. Tree-hugger, contemptuous for
environmentalist is attested by 1989.    Minc'd Pyes do not grow upon every tree,  But search the
Ovens for them, and there they be.  [Poor Robin, Almanack, 1669]


tree (v.)

to chase up a tree, 1700, from tree (n.). Meaning take a tree-like form is from 1884. Related:
Treed; treeing.


tree-frog (n.)

1738, from tree (n.) + frog (n.1).


tree-house (n.)

1867, from tree (n.) + house (n.).


tree-top (n.)

1520s, from tree (n.) + top (n.).


treeless (adj.)

1742, from tree (n.) + -less.


tref (n.)

Welsh, literally hamlet, home, town, from PIE *treb- dwelling (see tavern).


trefoil (n.)

late 14c., type of clover, from Anglo-French trifoil (13c.), Old French trefueil clover, clover-
leaf, from Latin trifolium three-leaved plant, from tri- three (see tri-) + folium leaf (see folio).
As a type of ornamental figure in medieval architecture, early 15c.


trek

1849 (n.) a stage of a journey by ox wagon; 1850 (v.), to travel or migrate by ox wagon, from
Afrikaans trek, from Dutch trekken to march, journey, originally to draw, pull, from Middle Dutch
trecken (cognate with Middle Low German trecken, Old High German trechan to draw). Especially in
reference to the Groot Trek (1835 and after) of more than 10,000 Boers, who, discontented with the
English colonial authorities, left Cape Colony and went north and north-east. In general use as a
noun by 1941. Related: Trekked; trekking.


trekker (n.)

one who treks, 1851, agent noun from trek (v.).


trekkie (n.)

1888, South African, party of trekkers (see trek). Meaning fan of the television program 'Star Trek'
attested by 1976.


trellis (n.)

late 14c., lattice, grating, from Old French trelis, trellis trellis, fence, originally sackcloth,
from Vulgar Latin *trilicius, from Latin trilicis, genitive of trilix having three threads, triple-
twilled, from tri- (see tri-) + licium thread.    Sense extended in Old French to things woven of
iron, etc., which brought on influence of Old French treille vine trellis, perhaps from Latin
trichila bower, arbor, which is apparently from Latin triclinium couch extending round three sides
of a table (for reclining on at meals). Meaning lattice used to support growing vines is from 1510s.
As a verb, c.1400. Related: Trellised.


tremble (v.)

c.1300, shake from fear, cold, etc., from Old French trembler tremble, fear (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *tremulare (source also of Italian tremolare, Spanish temblar), from Latin tremulus trembling,
shaking, quaking, from tremere to tremble, shiver, quake, from PIE *trem- to tremble (cognates:
Greek tremein to shiver, tremble, to quake, to fear, Lithuanian trimu to chase away, Old Church
Slavonic treso to shake, Gothic &thorn;ramstei grasshopper). A native word for this was Old English
bifian. Related: Trembled; trembling. The noun is recorded from c.1600.


tremblor (n.)

earthquake, 1913, alteration of temblor, by influence of trembler, agent noun of tremble (v.).


tremendous (adj.)

1630s, awful, dreadful, terrible, from Latin tremendus fearful, to be dreaded, terrible, literally
to be trembled at, gerundive form of tremere to tremble (see tremble (v.)). Hyperbolic or intensive
sense of extraordinarily great or good, immense is attested from 1812, paralleling semantic changes
in terrific, terrible, dreadful, awful, etc. Related: Tremendously.


tremolo (n.)

tremulous effect in music, 1801, from Italian tremolo, from Latin tremulus trembling (see
tremulous).


tremor (n.)

late 14c., terror, from Old French tremor fear, terror, quaking (13c.), from Latin tremorem
(nominative tremor) a trembling, terror, from tremere (see tremble (v.)). Sense of an involuntary
shaking first recorded 1610s and probably represents a re-introduction from Latin.


tremulous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin tremulus shaking, quivering, from tremere to shake, quake, quiver (see tremble
(v.)). Related: Tremulously; tremulousness.


trench (n.)

late 14c., track cut through a wood, later long, narrow ditch (late 15c.), from Old French trenche a
slice, cut, gash, slash; defensive ditch (13c., Modern French tranche), from trenchier to cut,
carve, slice, possibly from Vulgar Latin *trincare, from Latin truncare to cut or lop off (see
truncate). Trenches for military protection are first so called c.1500. Trench warfare first
attested 1918. Trench-coat first recorded 1916, a type of coat worn by British officers in the
trenches during World War I.


trenchant (adj.)

early 14c., cutting, sharp, from Old French trenchant cutting, sharp (literal and figurative),
present participle of trenchier to cut (see trench). Figurative sense in English is from c.1600.


trencher (n.)

wooden platter on which to cut meat, c.1300, from Anglo-French trenchour, Old North French trencheor
a trencher, literally a cutting place, from Old French trenchier to cut, carve, slice (see trench).


trend (v.)

1590s, to run or bend in a certain direction (of rivers, coasts, etc.), from Middle English trenden
to roll about, turn, revolve, from Old English trendan turn round, revolve, roll, from Proto-
Germanic *trandijan (cognates: Old English trinde round lump, ball, Old Frisian trind, Middle Low
German trint round, Middle Low German trent ring, boundary, Dutch trent circumference, Danish trind
round); origin and connections outside Germanic uncertain. Sense of have a general tendency (used of
events, opinions, etc.) is first recorded 1863, from the nautical sense. Related: Trended; trending.


trend (n.)

the way something bends (coastline, mountain range, etc.), 1777, earlier round bend of a stream
(1620s), from trend (v.); sense of general course or direction is from 1884. Sense of a prevailing
new tendency in popular fashion or culture is from c.1950.


trendsetter (n.)

also trend-setter, 1950, from trend (n.) + agent noun from set (v.). Related: Trend-setting.


trendy (adj.)

1962, from trend (n.) + -y (2). Related: Trendily; trendiness.


Trent

river in England, a Celtic name, perhaps great wanderer, in reference to its flooding. The city in
Italy (Italian Trento) is Roman Tridentum, in reference to the triple-peaked mountain nearby. The
great ecumenical council there was held from 1543-63.


Trenton

city in New Jersey, U.S., originally Trentâ&euro;&trade;s Town, from William Trent, Philadelphia
merchant who laid it out in 1714.


trepan (v.)

c.1400, from Old French tr&eacute;paner (14c.), from trepan (n.), the name of the tool with which it
was done, from Medieval Latin trepanum a saw for cutting out small pieces of bone from the skull,
from Greek trypanon a borer, an auger, a carpenter's tool; a surgeon's trepan, from trypan to bore,
related to trype hole (cognate with Old Church Slavonic truplu hollow), from PIE *trup-, from root
*tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)). Related: Trepanned; trepanning.


trephine (n.)

an improved kind of trepan, 1620s, from French trephine, which is said to be from Latin tres fines
three ends, but perhaps rather an arbitrary diminutive of trepan. As a verb from 1804. Related:
Trephining; trephination.


trepid (adj.)

trembling from fear or terror, 1640s, from Latin trepidus scared (see trepidation). Related:
Trepidly; trepidness.


trepidation (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French trepidation (15c.) and directly from Latin trepidationem (nominative
trepidatio) agitation, alarm, trembling, noun of action from past participle stem of trepidare to
tremble, hurry, from trepidus alarmed, scared, from PIE *trep- (1) to shake, tremble (cognates:
Sanskrit trprah hasty, Old Church Slavonic trepetati to tremble), related to *trem- (see tremble
(v.)).


tres (adv.)

very, 1815, from French tr&egrave;s, from Old French tres right, precisely, completely, very, from
Latin trans beyond (see trans-), later very (compare Old Italian trafreddo very cold).


trespass (v.)

c.1300, transgress in some active manner, commit an aggressive offense, to sin, from Old French
trespasser pass beyond or across, cross, traverse; infringe, violate, from tres- beyond (from Latin
trans-; see trans-) + passer go by, pass (see pass (v.)). Meaning enter unlawfully is first attested
in forest laws of Scottish Parliament (c.1455). The Modern French descendant of Old French
trespasser, tr&eacute;passer, has come to be used euphemistically for to die (compare euphemistic
use of cross over, and obituary). Related: Trespassed; trespassing.


trespass (n.)

c.1300, a transgression, from Old French trespas, verbal noun from trespasser (see trespass (v.)).
Related: Trespasses.


tress (n.)

c.1300, long lock of hair, from Old French tresse a plait or braid of hair (12c.), of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *trichia braid, rope, from Greek trikhia rope, from thrix
(genitive trikhos) hair. Related: Tresses.


tress (v.)

arrange in tresses, mid-14c., from Old French trecier (12c.), from tresse (see tress (n.)).


tressel (n.)

see trestle.


trestle (n.)

early 14c., a support for something, from Old French trestel crossbeam (12c., Modern French
tr&#233;teu), presumed to be an alteration of Vulgar Latin *transtellum, diminutive of transtrum
beam, crossbar (see transom). Specific meaning support for a bridge is recorded from 1796.


tret (n.)

allowance on goods sold by weight, c.1500, of unknown origin; perhaps related to trait act of
drawing.


Trevor

surname, from Trevor, Denbeigh.


trey (n.)

late 14c., card, die, or domino with three spots, from Anglo-French, Old French treis (Modern French
trois), oblique case of treie three, from Latin tria (neuter) three (see three). In slang use for
three (of anything) from 1887.


tri-

word-forming element meaning three, having three, once every three, from Latin tres (neuter tria) or
Greek treis, trias three (see three).


triad (n.)

1540s, group or set of three, from Late Latin trias (genitive triadis), from Greek trias (genitive
triados) a triad, the number three, from treis three (see three). Musical sense of chord of three
notes is from 1801. Related: Triadic.


triage (n.)

1727, action of assorting according to quality, from French triage a picking out, sorting (14c.),
from Old French trier to pick, cull (see try (v.)). There seems to be some influence from or
convergence with Latin tria three (as in triage for coffee beans of the third or lowest quality). In
World War I, adopted for the sorting of wounded soldiers into groups according to the severity of
their injuries, from French use.    First of all, the wounded man, or bless&#233;, is carried into
the first of the so-called Salles de Triage or sorting wards. Here his name and regimental number,
and if he is in condition to give it, the address of his family are taken; .... Then a hasty look-
over from the surgeon sends him into one of the two other Salles de Triage -- that of the Petits
Bless&#233;s if he is only slightly wounded and that of the Grands Bless&#233;s if he is more
severely so. [Woods Hutchinson, M.D., The Doctor in War, Boston, 1918]


trial (n.)

mid-15c., act or process of testing, a putting to proof by examination, experiment, etc., from
Anglo-French trial, noun formed from triet to try (see try (v.)). Sense of examining and deciding of
the issues between parties in a court of law is first recorded 1570s; extended to any ordeal by
1590s. As an adjectival phrase, trial-and-error is recorded from 1806. Trial balloon (1826)
translates French ballon d'essai, a small balloon sent up immediately before a manned ascent to
determine the direction and tendency of winds in the upper air, though the earliest use in English
is figurative.


triangle (n.)

late 14c., from Old French triangle (13c.), from Latin triangulum triangle, noun use of neuter of
adjective triangulus three-cornered, having three angles, from tri- three (see tri-) + angulus
corner, angle (see angle (n.)).


triangular (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin triangularis triangular, pertaining to a triangle, from Latin triangulus
with three corners (the usual adjective in classical Latin), as a noun, a triangle; see triangle.
Related: Triangularly.  In the huts of witches all the instruments and implements are triangular.
[Handw&ouml;rterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens]


triangularity (n.)

1680s, from triangular + -ity.


triangulate (v.)

1833, originally in surveying, from Latin triangulum a triangle (see triangle) + -ate (2). Related:
Triangulated; triangulating. Figurative use by 1860.


triangulation (n.)

1809, from French triangulation, from Medieval Latin triangulationem (mid-12c., nominative
triangulatio), noun of action from Latin *triangulare, from triangulum (see triangle).


triannual (adj.)

1630s, from tri- + annual (adj.). Related: Triannually.


Triassic (adj.)

1841, from German, coined 1841 by German geologist Friedrich August von Alberti (1795-1878), from
Trias period preceding the Jurassic, from Greek trias triad, the number three (see triad). So called
because it is divisible (in Germany) into three groups.


triathlete (n.)

by 1983; see triathlon + athlete.


triathlon (n.)

1970, from tri- three + Greek athlon contest; formed on model of decathlon, biathlon, etc.
Originally of various combinations of events; one of the earliest so called combined clay-pigeon
shooting, fly-fishing, and horse-jumping; another was cross-country skiing, target shooting, and a
giant slalom run; and a third connected to the U.S. Army involved shooting, swimming, and running.
Applied to the combination of a long swim, a bicycle-race, and a marathon by 1981.


triaxial (adj.)

1886, from tri- + axial.


tribadism (n.)

lesbian sexual activity, 1811, with -ism + tribade (n.), c.1600, a lesbian, from French tribade
(16c.) or directly from Latin tribas, from Greek tribas, from tribein to rub, rub down, wear away,
from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)). In reference to a specific sexual
technique, from 1965.


tribal (adj.)

1630s, pertaining to or characteristic of tribes, from tribe + -al (1). Meaning characterized by a
strong sense of loyalty to one's group is from 1951 (Arendt). As a style of belly-dance from 1999,
American English. Related: Tribally.


tribalism (n.)

1868, condition of being a tribe, from tribal + -ism. Meaning group loyalty attested by 1955.


tribe (n.)

mid-13c., one of the twelve divisions of the ancient Hebrews, from Old French tribu or directly from
Latin tribus one of the three political/ethnic divisions of the original Roman state (Tites, Ramnes,
and Luceres, corresponding, perhaps, to the Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans), later, one of the 30
political divisions instituted by Servius Tullius (increased to 35 in 241 B.C.E.), of unknown
origin. Perhaps from tri- three + *bheue-, root of the verb be. Others connect the word with the PIE
root *treb- a dwelling (see tavern).    In the Biblical sense, which was the original one in
English, the Latin word translates Greek phyle race or tribe of men, body of men united by ties of
blood and descent, a clan (see phylo-). Extension to modern ethnic groups or races of people is from
1590s, specifically a division of a barbarous race of people, usually distinguishable in some way
from their congeners, united into a community under a recognized head or chief [Century Dictionary],
but colloquially of any aggregate of individuals of a kind.


TriBeCa

1983, area in Manhattan between Broadway and the Hudson, south of Greenwich Village, from triangle
below Canal (Street).


tribesman (n.)

1798, from genitive of tribe (n.) + man (n.).


tribology (n.)

1965, study of friction, from comb. form of Greek tribos rubbing, from tribein to rub, rub down,
wear away (from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist; see throw (v.)) + -logy.


tribulation (n.)

c.1200, from Old French tribulacion (12c.), from Church Latin tribulationem (nominative tribulatio)
distress, trouble, affliction, noun of action from past participle stem of tribulare to oppress,
afflict, a figurative use by Christian writers of Latin tribulare to press, also possibly to thresh
out grain, from tribulum threshing sledge, from stem of terere to rub (see throw (v.)) + -bulum,
suffix forming names of tools.


tribunal (n.)

early 15c., a judgement seat, from Old French tribunal justice seat, judgement seat (13c.) and
directly from Latin tribunal platform for the seat of magistrates, elevation, embankment, from
tribunus official in ancient Rome, magistrate, literally head of a tribe (see tribune). Hence, a
court of justice or judicial assembly (1580s).


tribune (n.)

late 14c., title of an official in ancient Rome, from Latin tribunus magistrate (specifically one of
the officers appointed to protect the rights and interests of the plebeians from the patricians),
originally head of a tribe (in the Roman sense), from tribus (see tribe). Also raised platform
(1762), from Italian tribuna, from Medieval Latin tribuna, from Latin tribunal in its classical
sense platform for the seats of magistrates in ancient Rome.


tributary (adj.)

late 14c., paying tribute, from Latin tributarius liable to tax or tribute, from tributum (see
tribute).


tributary (n.)

late 14c., person, country, etc. owing obedience or paying tribute or a tax to a sovereign or
another people, from Latin tributarius (see tributary (adj.)). Meaning stream that flows into a
larger body is from 1822, from the adjective in this sense, which is recorded from 1610s.


tribute (n.)

mid-14c., stated sum of money or other valuable consideration paid by one ruler or country to
another in acknowledgment of submission or as the price of peace or protection, from Anglo-French
tribute, Old French tribut and directly from Latin tributum tribute, a stated payment, a thing
contributed or paid, noun use of neuter of tributus, past participle of tribuere to pay, assign,
grant, also allot among the tribes or to a tribe, from tribus (see tribe). Sense of offering, gift,
token is first recorded 1580s.


trice (v.)

late 14c., haul up and fasten with a rope, from Middle Dutch trisen hoist, from trise pulley, of
unknown origin. Hence at a tryse (mid-15c.) in a very short time, literally at a single pluck or
pull. The Middle Dutch word is the source of Dutch trijsen to hoist and is cognate with Middle Low
German trissen (source of Danish trisse, German triezen); its ultimate origin is unknown.


triceps (n.)

the great extensor muscle, 1704, from Latin triceps three-headed, from tri- three (see tri-) +
-ceps, from caput head (see capitulum). So called because the muscle has three origins.


triceratops (n.)

dinosaur genus, 1890, from Greek trikeratos three-horned + ops face, literally eye, from PIE *okw-
to see (see eye (n.)). The first element is from tri- three (see three) + keras (genitive keratos)
horn (see kerato-).


trichinosis (n.)

disease caused by trichinae, 1864, coined by Bernhard Rupprecht (1815-1877) by 1864 from trichina
(1835), Modern Latin, genus name of the minute, hair-like parasitic worms that cause it, from Greek
trikhine, fem. of trikhinos of or like hair, from thrix (genitive trikhos) hair.


trichomoniasis (n.)

1915, with -iasis + trichomonas, genus of a family of flagellate parasites, from tricho-, Latinized
form of Greek trikho-, comb. form of thrix (genitive trikhos) hair + -monas.


trichotillomania (n.)

1905, from French trichotillomanie (1889), from tricho-, Latinized form of Greek trikho-, comb. form
of thrix (genitive trikhos) hair + Greek tillesthai to pull out + mania.


trick (n.)

early 15c., a cheat, a mean ruse, from Old North French trique trick, deceit, treachery, cheating,
from trikier to deceive, to cheat, variant of Old French trichier to cheat, trick, deceive, of
uncertain origin, probably from Vulgar Latin *triccare, from Latin tricari be evasive, shuffle, from
tric&aelig; trifles, nonsense, a tangle of difficulties, of unknown origin.    Meaning a roguish
prank is recorded from 1580s; sense of the art of doing something is first attested 1610s. Meaning
prostitute's client is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for a robbery (1865). To do
the trick accomplish one's purpose is from 1812; to miss a trick fail to take advantage of
opportunity is from 1889; from 1872 in reference to playing the card-game of whist, which might be
the original literal sense. Trick-or-treat is recorded from 1942. Trick question is from 1907.


trick (v.)

deceive by trickery, 1590s, from trick (n.). Related: Tricked; tricking. The sense of to dress,
adorn (c.1500) is perhaps a different word entirely.


trickery (n.)

1719, from trick (v.) + -ery.


trickle (n.)

1570s, from trickle (v.).


trickle (v.)

late 14c., intransitive, of uncertain origin, possibly a shortened variant of stricklen to trickle,
a frequentative form of striken to flow, move (see strike (v.)). Transitive sense from c.1600.
Related: Trickled; trickling. Trickle-down as an adjectival phrase in an economic sense first
recorded 1944; the image had been in use at least since Teddy Roosevelt.


trickster (n.)

1711, from trick (n.) + -ster.


tricky (adj.)

1786, characterized by tricks, from trick (n.) + -y (2). Meaning deceptively difficult is from 1868.
Related: Trickily; trickiness. Earlier was tricksy (1590s).


tricolor (n.)

also tricolour, 1798, flag having three colors, especially the emblem of France adopted during the
Revolution, from French tricolore, in drapeau tricolore three-colored flag. The arrangement of
colors on the modern French national flag dates from 1794.


tricot (n.)

knitted fabric, 1859, from French tricot knitting, knitted work, from tricoter to knit, of uncertain
origin, probably a variant of Old French estriquer to smooth, from a Germanic source (such as Middle
Low German striken pass over lightly).


tricuspid (n.)

1660s, from Latin tricuspidem (nominative tricuspis) three-pointed, from tri- (see tri-) + cuspis
point (see cusp).


tricycle (n.)

1828, three-wheeled horse-drawn carriage, from French tricycle (1827); see tri- + cycle (n.). The
pedal-powered version is first attested 1868.


trident (n.)

three-pointed spear, mid-15c., from Latin noun use of adjective tridentem (nominative tridens)
three-pronged, three-toothed, from tri- three (see tri-) + dens tooth (see tooth). As a type of U.S.
nuclear-powered submarine, recorded from 1972. Related: Tridental.


tried (adj.)

tested, proven, trusty, mid-14c., past participle adjective from try (v.). Coupled since mid-14c.
with true.


triennial (adj.)

1630s, lasting three years; 1640s, occurring every three years, with -al (1) + Latin triennium
three-year period, from tri- three (see tri-) + annus year (see annual). For vowel change, see
biennial. As a noun, 1630s. Related: Triennially.


Trier

city in Germany (French Tr&egrave;ves), founded c.15 B.C.E. by Augustus, named for the indigenous
Gaulish people, the Treveri.


trifecta (n.)

1974, from tri- + perfecta.


trifid (adj.)

divided into three lobes, 1620s, from Latin trifidus cleft in three, from tri- three (see tri-) +
-fid. This adjective probably inspired triffid, the name of the three-legged walking poisonous
plants in John Wyndham's novel The Day of the Triffids (1951).


trifle (n.)

c.1200, trufle false or idle tale, later matter of little importance (c.1300), from Old French
trufle mockery, diminutive of truffe deception, of uncertain origin. As a type of light confection
from 1755.


trifle (v.)

treat lightly, 1520s, from trifle (n.). Earlier cheat, mock (c.1300). Related: Trifled; trifling.


trifocals (n.)

1899, from bifocals with tri-.


trig (adj.)

smart, trim, c.1200, from Old Norse tryggr firm, trusty, true, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (see
true (adj.)). A Scottish and northern word only until 19c. Related: Trigness.


trig (n.)

1895 as a shortening of trigonometry.


trigeminal (adj.)

1815, from Latin trigeminus born in threes, as a noun, triplets; from tri- (see tri-) + geminus born
at the same birth (see geminate (adj.)).


trigger (n.)

device by means of which a catch or spring is released and a mechanism set in action, 1650s, earlier
tricker (1620s), from Dutch trekker trigger, from trekken to pull (see trek). Tricker was the usual
form in English until c.1750. Trigger-happy is attested from 1943.


trigger (v.)

1930, from trigger (n.). Related: Triggered; triggering.


triglyceride (n.)

1860, malformed from tri- + glyceride. So called for the three radicals which replace the three
hydrogen atoms.


trigonometric (adj.)

1811; see trigonometry + -ic. Related: Trigonometrical (1660s).


trigonometry (n.)

branch of mathematics that deals with relations between sides and angles of triangles, 1610s, from
Modern Latin trigonometria (Barthelemi Pitiscus, 1595), from Greek trigonon triangle (from tri-
three, see tri-, + gonia angle, see knee (n.)) + metron a measure (see meter (n.2)).


trike (n.)

short for tricycle, 1883.


trilateral (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin trilaterus three-sided; see tri- + lateral. The Trilateral Commission
(representing Japan, the U.S., and Europe) was founded 1973. Related: Trilateralism; trilaterally.


trilby (n.)

type of hat, 1897, from name of Trilby O'Ferrall, eponymous heroine of the novel by George du
Maurier (1834-1896), published in 1894. In the stage version of the novel, the character wore this
type of soft felt hat. In plural, also slang for feet (1895), in reference to the eroticism attached
in the novel to the heroine's bare feet. Related: Trilbies.


trilemma (n.)

1670s, from dilemma + tri-.


trilingual (adj.)

involving three languages, 1834, from tri- + Latin lingua language, literally tongue (see lingual).
Latin trilinguis meant triple-tongued, and was used of Cerberus.


trill (n.)

1640s, from Italian trillio, triglio a quavering or warbling in singing, probably ultimately of
imitative origin. The verb is 1660s, from Italian trillare to quaver, trill. Related: Trilled;
trilling.


trillion

1680s, from French trillion, from Italian trilione; see tri- + million. In the U.S., the fourth
power of a thousand (one thousand billion, 1 followed by 12 zeroes); in Great Britain, the third
power of a million (one million billion, 1 followed by 18 zeroes), which is the original sense.
Compare billion.


trillionth

1820, from trillion + -th (1).


trillium (n.)

1768, from Modern Latin trillium (Linnaeus, 1753), from Latin tri- three (see three). So called for
its leaves and flower segments.


trilobite (n.)

extinct marine arthropod, 1820, from Modern Latin Trilobites (Walch, 1771), from Greek tri- three
(see three) + lobos lobe (see lobe); so called because its body is divided into three lobes.


trilogy (n.)

series of three related works, 1660s, from Greek trilogia series of three related tragedies
performed at Athens at the festival of Dionysus, from tri- three (see three) + logos story (see
logos).


trim (v.)

mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite;
set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong, from trum strong, stable, from Proto-
Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of *deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Examples in Middle English are wanting.    Original sense is preserved in nautical phrase in
fighting trim (see trim (n.)); where the verb meant distribute the load of a ship so she floats on
an even keel (1570s). Meaning make neat by cutting is first recorded 1520s; that of decorate, adorn
is from 1540s. Sense of reduce is attested from 1966.


trim (n.)

state of being prepared, 1580s, nautical jargon, fit for sailing, from trim (v.). From 1570s as
ornament, decoration; the meaning visible woodwork of a house is recorded from 1884; sense of
ornamental additions to an automobile is from 1922. Slang meaning a woman regarded as a sex object
is attested from 1955, American English.


trim (adj.)

c.1500, neatly or smartly dressed, probably ultimately from trim (v.) or from related Old English
trum firm, fixed, secure, strong, sound, vigorous, active. Related: Trimly; trimness.


trimester (n.)

1821, period of three months, from French trimestre (early 17c.), from Latin trimestris of three
months, from tri- three (see tri-) + mensis month (see moon (n.)). Specific obstetrics sense is
attested from 1916. Related: Trimestrial.


trimeter (n.)

a verse of three metrical feet, 1560s, from Latin trimetrus, from Greek trimetros having three
measures, from tri- three (see tri-) + metron a measure (see meter (n.2)). Related: Trimetrical.


trimmer (n.)

1550s, one who trims, agent noun from trim (v.). Meaning one who changes opinions, actions, etc. to
suit circumstances is from 1680s, from the verb in the nautical sense of adjust the balance of sails
or yards with reference to the wind's direction (1620s).


trimmings (n.)

adornments, accessories, etc., 1610s, from trim (v.).


trine (adj.)

threefold, late 14c., from Old French trine triple, threefold (13c.), from Latin trinus threefold,
from tres three (see three).


trinity (n.)

early 13c., the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, constituting one God in prevailing Christian doctrine,
from Old French trinite Holy Trinity (11c.), from Late Latin trinitatem (nominative trinitas)
Trinity, triad (Tertullian), from Latin trinus threefold, triple, from plural of trini three at a
time, threefold, related to tres (neuter tria) three (see three). The Latin word was widely borrowed
in European languages with the rise of Christianity (Irish trionnoid, Welsh trindod, German
trinit&auml;t). Related: Trinitarian.


trinket (n.)

1530s, of unknown origin. Evidently a diminutive form, perhaps related to trick (n.).


trinomial (adj.)

1670s, having three names, from tri- + second element from binomial. In mathematics, consisting of
three terms (1704).


trio (n.)

1724, composition for three voices, from French trio (c.1600), from Italian trio, from tri- three
(see three); patterned on duo. Meaning group of three persons is from 1789.


triolet (n.)

verse form, from French triolet, a diminutive of trio (see trio).


trip (v.)

late 14c., tread or step lightly and nimbly, skip, dance, caper, from Old French triper jump around,
dance around, strike with the feet (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch trippen to
skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample, Low German trippeln, Frisian tripje, Dutch trappen, Old English
treppan to tread, trample) related to trap (n.).    The senses of to stumble (intransitive), strike
with the foot and cause to stumble (transitive) are from mid-15c. in English. Meaning to release (a
catch, lever, etc.) is recorded from 1897; trip-wire is attested from 1868. Related: Tripped;
tripping.


trip (n.)

act or action of tripping (transitive), early 14c., from trip (v.); sense of a short journey or
voyage is from mid-15c.; the exact connection to the earlier sense is uncertain. The meaning
psychedelic drug experience is first recorded 1959 as a noun; the verb in this sense is from 1966,
from the noun.


tripartite (adj.)

divided in three, early 15c., from Latin tripartitus divided into three parts, from tri- three (see
three) + partitus, past participle of partiri to divide (see part (v.)).


tripe (n.)

c.1300, from Old French tripe guts, intestines, entrails used as food (13c.), of unknown origin,
perhaps via Spanish tripa from Arabic therb suet [Klein, Barnhart]. Applied contemptuously to
persons (1590s), then to anything considered worthless, foolish, or offensive (1892).


triple (v.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin triplare to triple, from Latin triplus threefold, triple, from tri-
three (see tri-) + -plus -fold (see -plus). Related: Tripled; tripling.


triple (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French triple or directly from Latin triplus (see triple (adj.)). As a noun,
early 15c., a triple sum or quantity, from the adjective. The baseball sense of a three-base hit is
attested from 1880.  Related: Triply (adv.). Triple-decker is from 1940 of sandwiches and wedding
cakes, 1942 of beds.


triplet (n.)

1650s, three successive lines of poetry, from triple; perhaps patterned on doublet. Extended to a
set of three of anything by 1733, and to three children at the same birth by 1787 (another word for
this was trin, 1831, on the model of twin). Musical meaning three notes played in the time of two is
from 1801.


triplicate (adj.)

early 15c., triple, threefold, from Latin triplicatus, past participle of triplicare to triple, from
tri- three (see tri-) + plicare to fold see ply (v.1)).


triplicate (v.)

to multiply by three, 1620s, from Latin triplicatus (see triplicate (adj.)). Related: Triplicated;
triplicating; triplication.


tripod (n.)

c.1600, three-legged vessel, c.1600, from Latin tripus (genitive tripodis), from Greek tripous
(genitive tripodos) a three-legged stool or table, noun use of adjective meaning three-footed, from
tri- three (see tri-) + pous (genitive podos) foot (see foot (n.)). Related: Tripodal.


Tripoli

both the Libyan capital and the Lebanese port city represent Greek tri- three (see tri-) + polis
town (see polis). In Libya, Tripolis was the name of a Phoenician colony consisting of Oea (which
grew into modern Tripoli), Leptis Magna, and Sabratha. Arabic distinguishes them as Tarabulus ash-
sham (Syrian Tripoli) and Tarabulus al-garb (Western Tripoli).


triptych (n.)

three-part altar-piece carvings or pictures hinged together, 1849, based on Italian triptica, from
tri- three on model of diptych.


trireme (n.)

ancient ship with three rows of oars, c.1600, from Latin triremis, from tri- three (see tri-) +
remus oar (see row (v.)).


Triscuit (n.)

proprietary name for a type of cracker, 1906, curiously from tri- + biscuit.


trisect (v.)

1690s, from tri- three + Latin sectus cut, past participle of secare to cut (see section (n.)).
Probably patterned on bisect. Related: Trisected; trisecting; trisection (1660s).


trisexual (adj.)

by 1986, from tri- + sexual.


triskaidekaphobia (n.)

fear of the number 13, 1908, also triskaidecaphobia, from Greek treiskaideka, triskaideka thirteen
(from treis three + deka ten) + -phobia fear.


triskelion (n.)

figure consisting of three branches radiating from a center, 1880, earlier triskelos (1857), from
Greek triskeles three-legged, from tri- three (see tri-) + skelos leg (see scoliosis).


trismus (n.)

lockjaw, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek trismos a scream; a grinding, rasping, akin to  trizein to
chirp, gnash, imitative.


trisomy (n.)

1930, from trisome (from tri- + ending from chromosome) + -y (4).


trist (adj.)

sorrowful, early 15c., from French triste sad, sadness (10c.), from Latin tristis sad, mournful,
sorrowful, gloomy. Re-borrowed late 18c. (as dull, uninteresting) as a French word in English and
often spelled triste.


Tristram

masc. proper name, name of a medieval hero, from Welsh Drystan, influenced by French triste sad (see
trist). The German form is Tristan.


trite (adj.)

used till so common as to have lost its novelty and interest, 1540s, from Latin tritus worn, oft-
trodden, of language much-used, familiar, commonplace, past participle adjective from terere to rub,
wear down (see throw (v.)). Related: Tritely; triteness.


triticale (n.)

hybrid cereal grass, 1952, from Modern Latin Triti(cum) wheat (literally grain for threshing, from
tritus, past participle of terere to rub, thresh, grind) + (Se)cale rye.


tritium (n.)

1933, Modern Latin, from Greek tritos third (see third) + chemical suffix -ium.


Triton

minor sea god, son of Poseidon and Amphitrite, from Latin Triton, from Greek Triton, cognate with
Old Irish triath (genitive trethan) sea.


triturate (v.)

grind into powder, 1755, from Late Latin trituratus, past participle of triturare to thresh, to
grind, from Latin tritura a rubbing, a threshing, from past participle stem of terere to rub (see
throw (v.)). Related: Triturated; triturating.


trituration (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin triturationem (nominative trituratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin triturare to grind (see triturate).


triumph (n.)

late 14c., success in battle, conquest, also spiritual victory and a procession celebrating victory
in war, from Old French triumphe (12c., Modern French triomphe), from Latin triumphus an
achievement, a success; celebratory procession for a victorious general or admiral, from Old Latin
triumpus, probably via Etruscan from Greek thriambos hymn to Dionysus, a loan-word from a pre-
Hellenic language.


triumph (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French triumpher (13c.), from Latin triumphare, from triumphus (see triumph
(n.)). Related: Triumphed; triumphing.


triumphal (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin triumphalis, from triumphus (see triumph (n.)). Related: Triumphally.


triumphant (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin triumphantem (nominative triumphans), present participle of triumphare (see
triumph (n.)). Related: Triumphantly.


triumvir (n.)

one of three men in the same office or of the same authority, mid-15c., from Latin triumvir, from
Old Latin phrase trium virum, genitive plural of tres viri three men, from tres three (see three) +
viri, plural of vir man (see virile). The Latin plural was triumviri.


triumvirate (n.)

1580s, from Latin triumviratus, from triumvir (see triumvir).


triune (adj.)

three in one, 1630s, from tri- + Latin unus one (see one). Related: Triunity.


trivet (n.)

three-legged iron stand, 12c., trefet, probably from a noun use of Latin tripedem (nominative
tripes) three-footed, from tri- three (see three) + pes foot (see foot (n.)).


trivia (n.)

trivialities, bits of information of little consequence, by 1932, from the title of a popular book
by U.S.-born British aphorist Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946) first published in 1902 but
popularized in 1918 (with More Trivia following in 1921 and a collected edition including both in
1933), containing short essays often tied to observation of small things and commonplace moments.
Trivia is Latin, plural of trivium place where three roads meet; in transferred use, an open place,
a public place. The adjectival form of this, trivialis, meant public, hence common, commonplace (see
trivial). The Romans also had trivius dea, the goddess of three ways, another name for Hecate,
perhaps originally in her triple aspect (Selene/Diana/Proserpine), but also as the especial divinity
of crossroads (Virgil has Nocturnisque hecate triviis ululata per urbes). John Gay took this
arbitrarily as the name of a goddess of streets and roads for his mock Georgic Trivia: Or, the Art
of Walking the Streets of London (1716); Smith writes in his autobiography that he got the title
from Gay.    I KNOW too much; I have stuffed too many of the facts of History and Science into my
intellectuals. My eyes have grown dim over books; believing in geological periods, cave dwellers,
Chinese Dynasties, and the fixed stars has prematurely aged me. [Trivia, 1918 edition]    Then noted
c.1965 as an informal fad game among college students wherein one asked questions about useless bits
of information from popular culture (What was Donald Duck's address?) and others vied to answer
first.    Nobody really wins in this game which concentrates on sports, comics and television.
Everyone knows that Amos's wife on the Amos 'n' Andy Show is Ruby, but who knows that she is from
Marietta, Georgia? Trivia players do. They also know the fourth man in the infield of Tinker-to-
Evers-to-Chance, the Canadian who shot down Baron Von Richtofen, and can name ten Hardy Boy books.
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Nov. 9, 1965]    The board game Trivial Pursuit was released 1982 and was
a craze in U.S. for several years thereafter.


trivial (adj.)

ordinary (1580s); insignificant, trifling (1590s), from Latin trivialis common, commonplace, vulgar,
literally of or belonging to the crossroads, from trivium place where three roads meet, in
transferred use, an open place, a public place, from tri- three (see three) + via road (see via).
The sense connection is public, hence common, commonplace.    The earliest use of the word in
English was early 15c., a separate borrowing in the academic sense of the trivium (the first three
liberal arts -- grammar, rhetoric, and logic); from Medieval Latin use of trivialis in the sense of
the first three liberal arts, from trivium, neuter of the Latin adjective trivius of three roads, of
the crossroads. Related: Trivially. For sense evolution to pertaining to useless information, see
trivia.


triviality (n.)

1590s, quality of being trivial, from Middle French trivialite or else from trivial + -ity. Meaning
a trivial thing or affair is from 1610s. Related: Trivialities.


trivialize (v.)

1836, from trivial + -ize. Related: Trivialized; trivializing.


trivium (n.)

1804, from Medieval Latin trivium (9c.) grammar, rhetoric, and logic, the first three of the seven
liberal arts in the Middle Ages, considered initiatory and foundational to the other four:
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music. From Latin trivium, in classical Latin place where three
roads meet; a frequented place; public street, highway (see trivial).


trochaic (adj.)

composed of trochees, 1580s, from Middle French trocha&#239;que (1540s) or directly from Latin
trochaicus, from Greek trokhaikos pertaining to or consisting of trochees, from trokhaios (see
trochee).


trochanter (n.)

1610s as a part of the thigh-bone, from French trochanter (16c.), from Greek trokhanter (Galen),
from trekhein to run (see truckle (n.)). From 1816 as the second joint of an insect leg.


trochee (n.)

metrical foot consisting of a long followed by a short syllable, or an accented followed by an
unaccented one, 1580s, from French troch&eacute;e, from Latin trochaeus a trochee, from Greek
trokhaios (pous), literally a running (foot), from trekhein to run (see truckle (n.)). Its rapid
movement rendered it a fit accompaniment to dances.


trod

past tense of tread (v.).


trodden (adj.)

that has been stepped on, 1540s, past participle adjective from tread (v.). The past participle was
altered from Middle English treden under influence of Middle English past participles such as stolen
from steal.


trog (n.)

obnoxious person, boor, lout, 1956, short for troglodyte.


troglodyte (n.)

cave-dweller, 1550s, from Middle French troglodyte and directly from Latin troglodytae (plural),
from Greek troglodytes cave-dweller, cave-man (in reference to tribes identified as living in
various places by ancient writers; by Herodotus on the African coast of the Red Sea), literally one
who creeps into holes, from trogle hole, mouse-hole (from trogein to gnaw, nibble, munch; see trout)
+ dyein go in, dive in. Related: Troglodytic.


troika (n.)

1842, carriage drawn by three horses abreast, from Russian troika three-horse team, any group of
three, from collective numeral troje group of three (from PIE *tro-yo-, suffixed form of *trei-, see
three) + diminutive suffix -ka. Sense of any group of three administrators, triumvirate is first
recorded 1945.


Trojan (adj.)

Old English Troian of or pertaining to ancient Troy, from Latin Trojanus, from Troia, Troja Troy,
from the Greek name for the city, said to be from Tros, name of a king of Phrygia, the mythical
founder of Troy. Trojan horse was figurative of ambush-from-within in Roman times (equus Troianus);
attested in English from 1570s; the computer virus sense is attested by 1982.    As a noun from mid-
14c., inhabitant of ancient Troy; in early modern English, the noun could mean a determined fellow,
one who fights or works hard, from the Trojans' long resistance to the Greeks in the Trojan War, but
also in 17c., it was a colloquial term for person of dissolute life, carousing companion. The trade
name for a brand of prophylactic contraceptive was registered 1927 in U.S.


troll (v.)

late 14c., to go about, stroll, later (early 15c.) roll from side to side, trundle, probably from
Old French troller, a hunting term, wander, to go in quest of game without purpose (Modern French
tr&#244;ler), from a Germanic source (compare Old High German trollen to walk with short steps),
from Proto-Germanic *truzlanan.    Sense of sing in a full, rolling voice (first attested 1570s) and
that of fish with a moving line (c.1600) both are extended technical uses from the general sense of
roll, trundle, the former from sing in the manner of a catch or round, the latter perhaps confused
with trail or trawl. Figurative sense of to lure on as with a moving bait, entice, allure is from
1560s. Meaning to cruise in search of sexual encounters is recorded from 1967, originally in
homosexual slang.


troll (n.1)

supernatural being in Scandinavian mythology and folklore, 1610s (with an isolated use mid-14c.),
from Old Norse troll giant being not of the human race, evil spirit, monster. Some speculate that it
originally meant creature that walks clumsily, and derives from Proto-Germanic *truzlan, from
*truzlanan (see troll (v.)). But it seems to have been a general supernatural word, such as Swedish
trolla to charm, bewitch; Old Norse trolldomr witchcraft.    The old sagas tell of the troll-bull, a
supernatural being in the form of a bull, as well as boar-trolls. There were troll-maidens, troll-
wives, and troll-women; the trollman, a magician or wizard, and the troll-drum, used in Lappish
magic rites. The word was popularized in literary English by 19c. antiquarians, but it has been
current in the Shetlands and Orkneys since Viking times. The first record of the word in modern
English is from a court document from the Shetlands, regarding a certain Catherine, who, among other
things, was accused of airt and pairt of witchcraft and sorcerie, in hanting and seeing the Trollis
ryse out of the kyrk yeard of Hildiswick.    Originally conceived as a race of malevolent giants,
they have suffered the same fate as the Celtic Danann and by 19c. were regarded by peasants in in
Denmark and Sweden as dwarfs and imps supposed to live in caves or under the ground.    They are
obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and elsewise keeping up a friendly
intercourse with mankind. But they have a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions,
but even women and children. [Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, London, 1850]


troll (n.2)

act of going round, repetition, 1705, from troll (v.). Meaning song sung in a round is from 1820.


trolley (n.)

1823, in Suffolk dialect, a cart, especially one with wheels flanged for running on a track (1858),
probably from troll (v.) in the sense of to roll. Sense transferred to device used to transmit
electric current to streetcars, consisting of a trolley wheel which makes contact with the overhead
wires (1888), then streetcar drawing power by a trolley (1891), which probably is short for trolley-
car, attested from 1889.


trollop

1610s, slovenly woman, often with implications of moral looseness, probably from troll (v.) in sense
of roll about, wallow.[A] certain Anne Hayward, wife of Gregory Hayward of Beighton, did in the
parishe church of Beighton aforesaid in the time of Divine Service or Sermon there, and when the
Minister was reading &amp; praying, violently &amp; boisterously presse &amp; enter into the seat or
place where one Elizabeth, wife of Robert Spurlinir, was quietly at her Devotion &amp; Duty to
Almighty God and then and there did quarrel chide &amp; braule &amp; being evilly &amp; inalitiously
bent did use then and there many rayleing opprobrious Speeches &amp; Invectives against the said
Elizabeth calling her Tripe &amp; Trallop, to the great disturbance both of the Minister and
Congregation. [Archdeaconry of Sudbury, Suffolk, Court Proceedings, 1682]


trombone (n.)

brass wind instrument, 1724, from Italian trombone, augmentative form of tromba trumpet, from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German trumba trumpet; see trumpet (n.)).


tromp (v.)

1892, variant of tramp (v.); mainly American English. Related: Tromped; tromping.


trompe l&#039;oeil

1889, French, literally deceives the eye, from tromper to deceive, a verb of uncertain origin and
the subject of many theories (see trump (v.2)).


troop (n.)

1540s, body of soldiers, 1540s, from Middle French troupe, from Old French trope band of people,
company, troop, crowd (13c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Frankish *throp assembly, gathering
of people or another Germanic source, perhaps related to Old English &eth;orp, Old Norse thorp
village (see thorp). OED derives the French word from Latin troppus flock, which is of unknown
origin but also might be from the proposed Germanic source. Of groups of animals from 1580s.
Specifically as a subdivision of a cavalry force from 1580s; of Boy Scouts from 1908. Troops armed
forces is from 1590s.


troop (v.)

1560s, to assemble, from troop (n.). Meaning to march is recorded from 1590s; that of to go in great
numbers, to flock is from c.1600. Related: Trooped; trooping.


trooper (n.)

1630s, soldier in a cavalry troop, from troop (n.) + -er (1). Extended to mounted policeman (1858,
in Australia) then to state policeman (U.S.) by 1911.


trope (n.)

1530s, from Latin tropus a figure of speech, from Greek tropos a turn, direction, course, way;
manner, fashion, in rhetoric, turn or figure of speech, related to trope a turning and trepein to
turn, from PIE root trep- (2) to turn (cognates: Sanskrit trapate is ashamed, confused, properly
turns away in shame; Latin trepit he turns). Technically, in rhetoric, a figure of speech which
consists in the use of a word or phrase in a sense other than that which is proper to it [OED], as
when we call a stupid fellow an ass, or a shrewd man a fox [Century Dictionary].


trophic (adj.)

of or pertaining to nutrition, food, or nourishment, 1856, from Greek trophikos, from trophe
nourishment, food (see -trophy).


tropho-

before vowels, troph-, word-forming element meaning nourishment, food, from comb. form of Greek
trophe nourishment (see -trophy).


trophy (n.)

1510s, a spoil or prize of war, from Middle French troph&eacute;e (15c.) from Latin trophaeum a sign
of victory, monument, originally tropaeum, from Greek tropaion monument of an enemy's defeat, noun
use of neuter of adjective tropaios of defeat, causing a rout, from trope a rout, originally a
turning (of the enemy); see trope. In ancient Greece, spoils or arms taken in battle and set up on
the field and dedicated to a god. Figurative extension to any token or memorial of victory is first
recorded 1560s. As a symbolic representation of a classical trophy from 1630s. Trophy wife attested
by 1984.


tropic (n.)

late 14c., either of the two circles in the celestial sphere which describe the northernmost and
southernmost points of the ecliptic, from Late Latin tropicus of or pertaining to the solstice (as a
noun, one of the tropics), from Latin tropicus pertaining to a turn, from Greek tropikos of or
pertaining to a turn or change; of or pertaining to the solstice (as a noun, the solstice, short for
tropikos kyklos), from trope a turning (see trope).    The notion is of the point at which the sun
turns back after reaching its northernmost or southernmost point in the sky. Extended 1520s to the
corresponding latitudes on the earth's surface (23 degrees 28 minutes north and south); meaning
region between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn is from 1837.


tropical (adj.)

1520s, pertaining to the celestial tropics, from tropic + -al (1). In reference to the torrid zones
of the earth, from 1690s. Meaning hot and lush like the climate of the tropics is first attested
1834.


tropism (n.)

1899, tendency of an animal or plant to turn or move in response to a stimulus, 1899, abstracted
from geotropism or heliotropism, with the second element taken in an absolute sense; ultimately from
Greek tropos a turning (see trope).


troposphere (n.)

1914, from French troposph&egrave;re, literally sphere of change, coined by French meteorologist
Philippe Teisserenc de Bort (1855-1913) from Greek tropos a turn, change (see trope) + sphaira
sphere (see sphere). Related: Tropopause.


trot (n.)

a gait faster than a walk and slower than a run, c.1300, originally of horses, from Old French trot
a trot, trotting (12c.), from troter to trot, to go, from Frankish *trotton, from Proto-Germanic
*trott- (cognates: Old High German trotton to tread), derivative of *tred- (see tread (v.)). The
trots diarrhea is recorded from 1808 (compare the runs).


trot (v.)

go at a quick, steady pace, late 14c., from Old French troter to trot, to go, from Frankish *trotton
(see trot (n.)). Italian trottare, Spanish trotar also are borrowed from Germanic. To trot
(something) out originally (1838) was in reference to horses; figurative sense of produce and
display for admiration is slang first recorded 1845. Related: Trotted; trotting.


troth (n.)

truth, verity, late 12c., from a phonetic variant of Old English treow&eth; faithfulness, veracity,
truth (see truth). Restricted to Midlands and Northern England dialect after 16c., and to certain
archaic phrases (such as plight one's troth). Also see betroth.


Trotskyite (n.)

1919, from Leon Trotsky, assumed name of Russian revolutionary leader Lev Davidovich Bronstein
(1879-1940) + -ite (1).


trotter (n.)

late 14c. as a type of horse; agent noun from trot (v.). Meaning foot of a quadruped is from 1520s.
Related: Trotters.


troubadour (n.)

1727, from French troubadour (16c.) one of a class of lyric poets in southern France, eastern Spain,
and northern Italy 11c.-13c., from Old Proven&ccedil;al trobador, from trobar to find, earlier
invent a song, compose in verse, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *tropare compose, sing, especially in the
form of tropes, from Latin tropus a song (see trope). The alternative theory among French
etymologists derives the Old Proven&ccedil;al word from a metathesis of Latin turbare to disturb,
via a sense of to turn up. Meanwhile, Arabists posit an origin in Arabic taraba to sing. General
sense of one who composes or sings verses or ballads first recorded 1826.


trouble (v.)

c.1200, from Old French trubler, metathesis of turbler, torbler to trouble, disturb; make cloudy,
stir up, mix (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *turbulare, from Late Latin turbidare to trouble, make
turbid, from Latin turbidus (see turbid). Related: Troubled; troubling.


trouble (n.)

c.1200, agitation of the mind, emotional turmoil, from Old French truble, torble trouble,
disturbance (12c.), from trubler/torbler (see trouble (v.)). From early 15c. as a concern, a cause
for worry; 1590s as something that causes trouble. Meaning unpleasant relations with the authorities
is from 1550s. Related: Troubles (1510s). Trouble and strife as rhyming slang for wife is recorded
from 1908.


troubled (adj.)

of persons, minds, etc., early 14c.; past participle adjective from trouble (v.). In reference to
waters, etc., late 14c.


troublemaker (n.)

also trouble-maker, 1843, from trouble (n.) + maker.


troubleshoot (v.)

also trouble-shoot, 1918 (implied in troubleshooting), probably a back-formation from
troubleshooter.


troubleshooter (n.)

also trouble-shooter, 1898, originally one who works on telegraph or telephone lines. From trouble
(n.) + agent noun from shoot (v.).


troublesome (n.)

1540s, from trouble (n.) + -some (1). Troublesomeness.


troublous (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French troblos, torblos, from truble/torble (see trouble (n.)).


trough (n.)

Old English trog wooden vessel, tray, hollow vessel, canoe, from Proto-Germanic *trugaz (cognates:
Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Old Norse trog, Middle Dutch troch, Dutch trog, Old High German troc, German
trog), from PIE *dru-ko-, from root *dru-, *deru- wood, tree (see tree (n.)). Originally pronounced
in English with a hard -gh- (as in Scottish loch); pronunciation shifted to -ff, but spelling
remained.


trounce (v.)

1550s, to trouble, afflict, harass, later to beat, thrash (1560s), of uncertain origin. Perhaps
related to Middle French troncer to cut, cut off a piece from, from tronce piece of timber, from Old
French tronc (see trunk). Related: Trounced; trouncing.


troupe (n.)

1825, company, band, especially of performers, actors, dancers, etc., from French troupe company
(see troop (n.)).


trouper (n.)

1890, actor or performer in a troupe, from troupe (n.) + -er (1). Transferred sense of reliable,
uncomplaining person [OED] is attested by 1942, American English.


trousers (n.)

garment for men, covering the lower body and each leg separately, 1610s, earlier trouzes (1580s),
extended from trouse (1570s), with plural ending typical of things in pairs, from Gaelic or Middle
Irish triubhas close-fitting shorts, of uncertain origin. Early recorded use of the word indicates
the garment was regarded as Celtic: A jellous wife was like an Irish trouze, alwayes close to a mans
tayle [1630]. The unexplained intrusive second -r- is perhaps by influence of drawers or other words
in pairs ending in -ers.


trousseau (n.)

a bride's clothing, etc., brought from her former home, 1817, from French trousseau, originally a
bundle, diminutive of Old French trousse bundle (see truss (n.)). Italicized as foreign at first,
nativized by 1833. The Old French word was borrowed into Middle English early 13c. as a bundle of
keys, but it fell from use.


trout (n.)

Old English truht trout, in part from Old French truite, both from Late Latin tructa, perhaps from
Greek troktes a kind of sea fish, literally nibbler, from trogein to gnaw, from PIE *tro-, from root
*tere- (1) (see throw (v.)). In late 17c. slang, trusty trout was used in a sense of confidential
friend.


trove (n.)

1888, from treasure trove (c.1550), from Anglo-French tresor trov&eacute; (late 12c.), translating
Latin thesaurus inventus, literally treasure found. Originally any precious metal object one finds
hidden whose owner is unknown. As this usually meant ancient hoards, the term came to mean treasure
hoard in popular use. Rendered treasure found from mid-15c. French trove is past participle of
trover to find, from Old French trover, torver, of unknown origin, perhaps from Latin turbare to
move (hence to seek for) or Medieval Latin *tropare to compose, sing.


trow (v.)

Old English treowan to trust in, believe, hope, be confident; persuade, suggest; make true; be
faithful (to), confederate with, from treow faith, belief, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (cognates:
Old Saxon truon, Old Frisian trouwa, Dutch vertrouwen trust, Old High German triuwen, German trauen
hope, believe, trust; see true (adj.)).


trowel (n.)

mid-14c., tool for spreading plaster or mortar, from Old French truele trowel (13c.), from Late
Latin truella small ladle, dipper (mid-12c.), diminutive of Latin trua a stirring spoon, ladle,
skimmer. The gardening tool was so called since 1796.


troy

late 14c., standard system of weights for gems and precious metals, from Troyes, city in France
(Roman (Civitas) Tricassium, capital of the Tricasses, a Celtic people whose name was said to mean
those with three tresses), former site of an important fair at which this weight is said to have
been used. Many medieval towns had their own standard weights. The pound troy contains 5,760 grains
and is divided into 12 ounces.


truancy (n.)

1754, from truant + -cy.


truant (n.)

c.1200, beggar, vagabond, from Old French truant beggar, rogue (12c.), as an adjective, wretched,
miserable, of low caste, from Gaulish *trougant- (compare Breton *truan, later truant vagabond,
Welsh truan wretch, Gaelic truaghan wretched), of uncertain origin. Compare Spanish truhan buffoon,
from same source. Meaning one who wanders from an appointed place, especially a child who stays away
from school without leave is first attested mid-15c.


truant (adj.)

idle, loitering, given to shirking duty or business, 1540s, from truant (n.).


truce (n.)

mutually agreed-upon temporary intermission of hostilities, early 13c., triws, variant of trewes,
originally plural of trewe faith, assurance of faith, covenant, treaty, from Old English treow
faith, truth, fidelity; pledge, promise, agreement, treaty, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (cognates:
Old Frisian triuwe, Middle Dutch trouwe, Dutch trouw, Old High German triuwa, German treue, Gothic
triggwa faith, faithfulness). Related to Old English treowe faithful (see true (adj.)). The Germanic
word was borrowed into Late Latin as tregua, hence French tr&egrave;ve, Italian tregua.


trucial (adj.)

1876, from truce + -ial. Trucial States, the pre-1971 name of the United Arab Emirates, is attested
from 1891, in reference to the 1835 maritime truce between Britain and the Arab sheiks of Oman.


truck (n.1)

vehicle, 1610s, originally small wheel (especially one on which the carriages of a ship's guns were
mounted), probably from Latin trochus iron hoop, from Greek trokhos wheel, from trekhein to run (see
truckle (n.)). Sense extended to cart for carrying heavy loads (1774), then in American English to
motor vehicle for carrying heavy loads (1913), a shortened form of motor truck in this sense (1901).
There have also been lost to the enemy 6,200 guns, 2,550 tanks and 70,000 trucks, which is the
American name for lorries, and which, I understand, has been adopted by the combined staffs in
North-West Africa in exchange for the use of the word petrol in place of gasolene. [Winston
Churchill, address to joint session of U.S. Congress, May 19, 1943]   Truck stop is attested from
1956.


truck (v.1)

to exchange, barter, early 13c., from Old North French troquer to barter, exchange, from Medieval
Latin trocare barter, of unknown origin. Rare before 16c. Sense of have dealings with is first
recorded 1610s. The noun is first recorded 1550s, act or practice of barter. Sense of vegetables
raised for market is from 1784, preserved in truck farm (1866).


truck (v.2)

to convey on a truck, 1809, from truck (n.). Verbal meaning dance, move in a cool way, first
attested 1935, from popular dance of that name in U.S., supposedly introduced at Cotton Club, 1933.
Related: Trucked; trucking.


truck (n.2)

1530s, act or practice of barter, trading by exchange, from French troque, from troquer (see truck
(v.1)). Sense of dealings is from 1620s. Exchange of commodities, barter, then commodities for
barter and exchange. In this sense the word was given a wide use in 19c. American English: Truck at
first meant market-garden produce; then it came to mean stuff in general, including 'doctor-stuff.'
SPUN TRUCK is knitting work [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Sense of vegetables raised for
market is from 1784, preserved in truck farm (1866).


trucker (n.)

1853, worker who moves loads using a cart; agent noun from truck (v.2). Meaning person who drives a
motorized truck is by 1935, a shortening of truck driver (1907).


truckle (n.)

small wheel or roller, late 14c., from Anglo-French trocle, from Latin trochlea a small wheel, sheaf
of a pulley, from Greek trokhileia a system of pulleys, from trokhos wheel, from trekhein to run,
from PIE root *dhregh- to run (cognates: Old Irish droch wheel, Lithuanian pa-drosti to run fast).
Truckle bed small bed on wheels that can be stowed under a larger bed is from mid-15c.


truckle (v.)

give up or submit tamely, 1610s, originally sleep in a truckle bed (see truckle (n.)). Meaning give
precedence, assume a submissive position (1650s, implied in truckling) is perhaps in reference to
that type of bed being used by servants and inferiors or simply occupying the lower position.
Related: Truckled; truckling.


truculence (n.)

1727, from Latin truculentia savageness, cruelty, from truculentus (see truculent). Related:
Truculency (1560s).


truculent (adj.)

1530s, from Latin truculentus fierce, savage, stern, harsh, cruel, from trux (genitive trucis)
fierce, rough, savage, wild. Related: Truculently.


trudge (v.)

to walk laboriously, 1540s, of unknown origin. Related: Trudged; trudging. The noun meaning an act
of trudging is attested from 1835.


true (adj.)

Old English triewe (West Saxon), treowe (Mercian) faithful, trustworthy, honest, steady in adhering
to promises, friends, etc., from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- having or characterized by good faith
(cognates: Old Frisian triuwi, Dutch getrouw, Old High German gatriuwu, German treu, Old Norse
tryggr, Danish tryg, Gothic triggws faithful, trusty), from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the
root *deru-/*dreu- be firm, solid, steadfast (cognates: Lithuanian drutas firm, Welsh drud, Old
Irish dron strong, Welsh derw true, Old Irish derb sure), with specialized sense wood, tree and
derivatives referring to objects made of wood (see tree (n.)).    Sense of consistent with fact
first recorded c.1200; that of real, genuine, not counterfeit is from late 14c.; that of conformable
to a certain standard (as true north) is from c.1550. Of artifacts, accurately fitted or shaped it
is recorded from late 15c. True-love (n.) is Old English treowlufu. True-born (adj.) first attested
1590s. True-false (adj.) as a type of test question is recorded from 1923. To come true (of dreams,
etc.) is from 1819.


true (v.)

make true in position, form, or adjustment, 1841, from true (adj.) in the sense agreeing with a
certain standard. Related: Trued; truing.


truffle (n.)

type of edible underground fungus, 1590s, from Middle French trufle (14c.), probably from Old
Proven&ccedil;al trufa, metathesized from Late Latin tufera (plural), cognate of Latin tuber edible
root. Another theory notes Italian tartuffo (Milanese tartuffel) potato, supposedly from terr&aelig;
tuber. Extended 1926 to powdered, round chocolates that look like truffles.


truism (n.)

self-evident truth, 1708, from true (adj.) + -ism; first attested in Swift.


trull (n.)

a low prostitute or concubine; a drab, strumpet, trollop [OED], 1510s, from German trulle trollop,
wench, hussy, perhaps cognate with troll (n.), or perhaps from troll (v.), compare Middle High
German trolle awkward fellow, Swabian trull a thick, fat woman.


truly (adv.)

Old English treowlice, from treow (see true (adj.)). Similar formation in Dutch treuwelijk, German
getreulich, Swedish troligen.


Truman

surname, attested by 1215, literally faithful man, trusty man.


trumeau (n.)

1883, in architecture, piece of a wall between two openings, as the central pillar of a great
doorway, from French trumeau, literally calf of the leg (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare
German Trumm end, stump, Swedish dialectal tromm stump, end of a log).


trump (v.1)

surpass, beat, 1580s, from trump (n.). Related: Trumped; trumping.


trump (n.1)

playing card of a suit ranking above others, 1520s, alteration of triumph (n.), which also was the
name of a card game.


trump (v.2)

fabricate, devise, 1690s, from trump deceive, cheat (1510s), from Middle English trumpen (late
14c.), from Old French tromper to deceive, of uncertain origin. Apparently from se tromper de to
mock, from Old French tromper to blow a trumpet. Brachet explains this as to play the horn, alluding
to quacks and mountebanks, who attracted the public by blowing a horn, and then cheated them into
buying .... The Hindley Old French dictionary has baillier la trompe blow the trumpet as act the
fool, and Donkin connects it rather to trombe waterspout, on the notion of turning (someone) around.
Connection with triumph also has been proposed. Related: Trumped; trumping. Trumped up false,
concocted first recorded 1728.


trump (n.2)

trumpet, c.1300, from Old French trompe long, tube-like musical wind instrument (12c.), cognate with
Proven&ccedil;al tromba, Italian tromba, all probably from a Germanic source (compare Old High
German trumpa, Old Norse trumba trumpet), of imitative origin.


trumpery (n.)

mid-15c., deceit, trickery, from Middle French tromperie (14c.), from tromper to deceive, of
uncertain origin (see trump (v.2), which has influenced the spelling in English). Meaning showy but
worthless finery is first recorded c.1600.


trumpet (n.)

late 14c., from Old French trompette trumpet, diminutive of trompe (see trump (n.2)).


trumpet (v.)

1520s, from trumpet (n.). Figurative sense of to proclaim, extol is attested from 1580s. Related:
Trumpeted; trumpeting.


truncate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin truncatus cut off, past participle of truncare to maim, mutilate, cut off,
from truncus mutilated, cut off, deprived of branches or limbs (see trunk). Related: Truncated;
truncating.


truncated (adj.)

late 15c., past participle adjective from truncate. Originally in heraldry; modern senses are
post-1700.


truncation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin truncationem (nominative truncatio ), noun of action from past
participle stem of truncare (see truncate).


truncheon (n.)

c.1300, shaft of a spear, also short stick, cudgel, from Old North French tronchon, Old French
tronchon (11c., Modern French tron&#231;on) a piece cut off, thick stick, stump, from Vulgar Latin
*truncionem (nominative *truncio), from Latin truncus trunk of a tree (see trunk). Meaning staff as
a symbol of office is recorded from 1570s; sense of policeman's club is recorded from 1880.


trundle (n.)

small wheel to support heavy weights, 1540s (implied in trundle bed low bed on small wheels),
possibly from Middle English trendle wheel, suspended hoop (early 14c.), from Old English trendel
ring, disk (see trend (v.)). Also probably in part from Old French trondeler to roll down, fall
down, which is of Germanic origin.


trundle (v.)

1590s (transitive), from trundle (n.). Intransitive use from 1620s. Related: Trundled; trundling.


trunk (n.2)

elephant's snout, 1560s, apparently from trunk (n.1), perhaps from confusion with trump (n.2), short
for trumpet.


trunk (n.1)

mid-15c., box, case, from Old French tronc alms box in a church, also trunk of a tree, trunk of the
human body, wooden block (12c.), from Latin truncus trunk of a tree, trunk of the body, of uncertain
origin, perhaps originally mutilated, cut off. The meaning box, case is likely to be from the notion
of the body as the case of the organs. English acquired the main stem of a tree and torso of the
body senses from Old French in late 15c. The sense of luggage compartment of a motor vehicle is from
1930. Railroad trunk line is attested from 1843; telephone version is from 1889.


trunnion (n.)

either of two round projections of a cannon, 1620s, from French trognon core of fruit, stump, tree
trunk, from Middle French troignon (14c.), probably from Latin truncus (see trunk).


truss (n.)

c.1200, collection of things bound together, from Old French trousse, torse parcel, package, bundle,
of uncertain origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *torciare to twist, from Late Latin torquere (see
torque (n.)). Meaning surgical appliance to support a rupture, etc. first attested 1540s. Sense of
framework for supporting a roof or bridge is first recorded 1650s.


truss (v.)

c.1200, to load, load up, from Anglo-French trusser, Old French trusser, torser to load, fill, pack,
fasten (11c.), from Old French trousse, torse (see truss (n.)). Related: Trussed; trussing.


trust (n.)

c.1200, reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious
faith, from Old Norse traust help, confidence, protection, support, from Proto-Germanic abstract
noun *traustam (cognates: Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost comfort, consolation, Old High German
trost trust, fidelity, German Trost comfort, consolation, Gothic trausti agreement, alliance), from
Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-, source of Old English treowian to believe, trust, and treowe faithful,
trusty (see true (adj.)).    from c.1300 as reliability, trustworthiness; trustiness, fidelity,
faithfulness; from late 14c. as confident expectation and that on which one relies. From early 15c.
in legal sense of confidence placed in a one who holds or enjoys the use of property entrusted to
him by its legal owner; mid-15c. as condition of being legally entrusted. Meaning businesses
organized to reduce competition is recorded from 1877. Trust-buster is recorded from 1903.


trust (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse treysta to trust, rely on, make strong and safe, from traust (see trust
(n.)). Related: Trusted; trusting.


trustee (n.)

person who is responsible for the property of another, 1640s, from trust (v.) + -ee.


trustful (adj.)

1570s, trustworthy, from trust (n.) + -ful. Meaning trusting attested from 1832. Related:
Trustfully, trustfulness.


trustworthy (adj.)

1791, from trust (n.) + worthy. Related: Trustworthiness.


trusty (adj.)

early 13c., trusting, from trust (n.) + -y (2). Old English expressed this idea by treowful. Meaning
reliable, to be counted on is from early 14c. The noun meaning trustworthy person is from 1570s;
specifically as a prisoner granted special privileges as reward for good conduct by 1855.


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


truthful (adj.)

habitually speaking truth, 1590s, from truth + -ful. Related: Truthfully; truthfulness.


truthiness (n.)

act or quality of preferring concepts or facts one wishes to be true, rather than those known to be
true, a catch word popularized in this sense by U.S. comedian Stephen Colbert (b.1964), declared by
American Dialect Society to be 2005 Word of the Year. It was used in 1832 in a sense habit of
telling the truth, from truthy characterized by truth (1800), from truth (n.) + -y (2).


try (v.)

c.1300, examine judiciously, discover by evaluation, test; mid-14c., sit in judgment of, also
attempt to do, from Anglo-French trier (13c.), from Old French trier to pick out, cull (12c.), from
Gallo-Roman *triare, of unknown origin. The ground sense is separate out (the good) by examination.
Sense of subject to some strain (of patience, endurance, etc.) is recorded from 1530s. To try on
test the fit of a garment is from 1690s; to try (something) on for size in the figurative sense is
recorded by 1946. Try and instead of try to is recorded from 1680s.


try (n.)

late 15c., screen for sifting, from try (v.). From 1832 as an effort, an attempt.


trying (adj.)

distressing, 1718, present-participle adjective from try (v.). Related: Tryingly.


tryout (n.)

also try-out, by 1900, from phrase to try out to examine, test, attested by 1785.


trypsin (n.)

chief digestive enzyme of pancreatic juice, 1876, coined 1874 by German physiologist Wilhelm
Friedrich K&#252;hne (1837-1900), apparently from Greek tripsis rubbing, friction (from tribein to
rub, rub down, wear away, from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)) + chemical
suffix -in (2). Said to be so called because it first was obtained (in 1862) by rubbing the pancreas
with glycerin.


tryptic (adj.)

1877, from trypsin + -ic (compare pepsin/peptic).


tryptophan (n.)

also tryptophane, complex amino acid, 1890, coined in German (1876) from trypto-, taken as a comb.
form of tryptic by trypsin (see trypsin) + Greek phainein to appear (see phantasm).


tryst (n.)

late 14c., appointment to meet at a certain time and place, from Old French tristre waiting place,
appointed station in hunting, probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse treysta to
trust, make firm (see trust (v.)). The notion would be place one waits trustingly. As a verb, late
14c. Related: Trysting.


tsar (n.)

1660s, the more correct Latinization of Russian czar, from prehistoric Slavic *tsesar, from a
Germanic source, ultimately from Latin Caesar. See czar. Related: Tsardom; tsarevich; tsarina;
tsarevna.


tsetse (n.)

fly of tropical Africa, 1849, probably via South African Dutch, from a Bantu language (compare
Setswana tsetse, Luyia tsiisi flies).


tsk

sound expressing commiseration or disapproval, 1947; as a verb, tsk-tsk is recorded from 1967.


Tso

in Chinese restaurant dishes, a reference to General Tso Tsungtang  (1812-1885), military leader
during the late Qing dynasty who crushed the Taiping rebels in four provinces. The chicken dish that
bears his name (for no apparent reason) in Chinese restaurants apparently is modified from a
traditional Hunan chung ton gai and may have been named for the general c.1972 by a chef in New York
City during the time Hunan cuisine first became popular among Americans.


tsunami (n.)

1896, in reference to the one that struck Japan that year on June 15, from Japanese tsunami, from
tsu harbor + nami waves.


tu quoque

Latin, literally thou also (or, in modern vernacular, so are you!); an argument which consists in
retorting accusations.


tuatara (n.)

New Zealand lizard, 1844, from Maori, from tua on the back + tara spine.


Tuatha de Danann

1680s, from Irish Tuatha d&eacute; Danann, literally the people of Danann, from plural of tuath (see
Teutonic) + Danann, apparently originally an oblique case of Danu, mother of the gods.


tub (n.)

open wooden vessel made of staves, late 14c., from Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, or Middle
Flemish tubbe, of uncertain origin. Related to Old High German zubar vessel with two handles, wine
vessel, German Zuber. Considered to be unrelated to Latin tubus (see tube (n.)); one theory connects
it to the root of two based on the number of handles. Also 17c. slang for pulpit; hence tub-thumper
(1660s) speaker or preacher who thumps the pulpit for emphasis.


tuba (n.)

1852 in reference to a modern, large, low-pitched brass musical instrument, from French tuba, from
Latin tuba (plural tubae) straight bronze war trumpet (as opposed to the crooked bucina), related to
tubus (see tube (n.)).


tubby (adj.)

shaped like a tub, corpulent, 1835, from tub + -y (2). The noun meaning a fat person is attested
from 1891. Related: Tubbily; tubbiness.


tube (n.)

1610s, from Middle French tube (15c.), from Latin tubus tube, pipe, of unknown origin. The London
subway was christened the Twopenny Tube (H.D. Browne, in the Londoner of June 30, 1900) before it
even opened; tube for cylindrical railway tunnel is attested from 1847. The meaning TV as a medium
is from 1959, short for cathode ray tube or picture tube. Tube top as a women's clothing style is
attested from 1972. Tube steak is attested from 1963 as frankfurter, slang meaning penis is recorded
by mid-1980s.


tuber (n.)

thick underground stem, 1660s, from Latin tuber edible root, truffle; lump, bump, swelling, from PIE
*tubh-, from root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh).


tubercle (n.)

1570s, from Latin tuberculum a small swelling, diminutive of tuber lump (see tuber).


tubercular (adj.)

1799, characterized by tubers, from Latin tuberculum (see tubercule) + -ar. From 1898 as having
tuberculosis.


tuberculosis (n.)

1860, disease characterized by tubercules, a medical Latin hybrid, from Latin tuberculum small
swelling, pimple, diminutive of tuber lump (see tuber) + -osis, a suffix of Greek origin. So called
in reference to the tubercules which form in the lungs. Originally in reference to any disease
characterized by tubercules; since the discovery in 1882 of the tubercule bacillus by German
bacteriologist Robert Koch (1843-1910) restricted to disease caused by this. Abbreviation T.B.
attested from 1912.


tuberculous (adj.)

characterized by tubers, 1747, from Latin tuberculum (see tubercule) + -ous.


tubing (n.)

recreational pastime of riding a river on a truck tire inner tube, 1975; see tube (n.).


tubular (adj.)

1670s, having the form of a tube or pipe, from Latin tubulus a small pipe (see tube) + -ar. Teen
slang sense attested by 1982, Valspeak, apparently from surfers' use of tube as slang for a hollow,
curling wave, ideal for riding (1962).


tuck (v.)

late 14c., to pull or gather up, earlier to pluck, stretch (implied in tucker one who finishes
clothes by stretching them on tenters, late 13c. as a surname), probably from Middle Low German or
Middle Dutch tucken pull up, draw up, tug (cognate with Old English tucian mistreat, torment, and
related to Old English togian to pull, German zucken; see tow (v.)). Sense of thrust into a snug
place is first recorded 1580s. Slang meaning to consume, swallow, put into one's stomach is recorded
from 1784. Related: Tucked; tucking.


tuck (n.)

late 14c., flattened fold in clothing, pleat, from tuck (v.). As a folded-up diving position, from
1951.


tuckahoe (n.)

edible plant root of eastern U.S., 1610s, American English, from Powhatan (Algonquian) tockawhouge
(compare Mohegan tquogh, Shawnee tukwhah), perhaps related to Cree (Algonquian) pitikwaw made round.
From early 19c. a name applied in Virginia to those east of the Blue Ridge Mountains by the settlers
west of them, who called themselves Cohees.


tucker (n.)

piece of lace worn around the neck, 1680s, agent noun from tuck (v.). In Middle English tukere was
one who dresses or finishes cloth, hence the surname.


tucker (v.)

to tire, weary, 1833, New England slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps from tucked (past participle
of tuck (v.)), which had, in reference to dogs, a slang sense of exhausted, underfed. Especially
with out. Related: Tuckered; tuckering.


Tucson

city in Arizona, U.S.A., from Spanish Tucson, from O'odham (Piman) cukson black base, from cuk black
+ son base.


tude (n.)

teenager slang shortening of attitude, 1970s.


Tudor

1779 in reference to the English royal family, from Welsh surname Tewdwr, used of the line of
English sovereigns from Henry VII to Elizabeth I, descended from Owen Tudor, who married Catherine,
widowed queen of Henry V. Applied from 1815 to a style of architecture prevalent during these
reigns. The name is the Welsh form of Theodore.


Tuesday (n.)

third day of the week, Old English tiwesd&aelig;g, from Tiwes, genitive of Tiw Tiu, from Proto-
Germanic *Tiwaz god of the sky, the original supreme deity of ancient Germanic mythology,
differentiated specifically as Tiu, ancient Germanic god of war, from PIE *deiwos god, from root
*dyeu- to shine (see diurnal). Compare Old Frisian tiesdei, Old Norse tysdagr, Swedish tisdag, Old
High German ziestag.    The day name (second element d&aelig;g, see day) is a translation of Latin
dies Martis (source of Italian martedi, French Mardi) Day of Mars, from the Roman god of war, who
was identified with Germanic Tiw (though etymologically Tiw is related to Zeus), itself a loan-
translation of Greek Areos hemera. In cognate German Dienstag and Dutch Dinsdag, the first element
would appear to be Germanic ding, &thorn;ing public assembly, but it is now thought to be from
Thinxus, one of the names of the war-god in Latin inscriptions.


tufa (n.)

type of porous rock, 1770, from Italian tufa tufa, porous rock, probably from Latin tufus, tophus
loose, porous volcanic rock, said to be an Oscan-Umbrian loan-word. Related: Tufaceous.


tuff (adj.)

advertiser's spelling of tough (adj.), attested by 1940.


tuffet (n.)

1550s, little tuft, from Old French touffel (with diminutive suffix -et for French -el), diminutive
of touffe (see tuft). Obsolete except in the nursery rhyme Little Miss Muffet (1843), where it has
been felt to mean hassock, footstool.    LITTLE Miss Muffet  Sat on a tuffet  And made of her knees
such display  That the old fashioned spider,  Embarrassed beside her,  Was actually frightened away!
[Life Oct. 1, 1927]


tuft (n.)

bunch of soft and flexible things fixed at the base with the upper ends loose, late 14c., of
uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French touffe tuft of hair (14c.), which is either from Late
Latin tufa a kind of crest on a helmet (also found in Late Greek toupha), or from a Germanic source
(compare Old High German zopf, Old Norse toppr tuft, summit; see top (n.1)). As a verb from 1530s.
Related: Tufted.


tug (v.)

c.1200, from weak grade of Old English teohan to pull, drag, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan to pull
(cognates: Old High German zucchen to pull, jerk, German z&#252;cken to draw quickly), from PIE
*deuk- to lead (see duke (n.)). Related to tow (v.). Related: Tugged; tugging.


tug (n.)

mid-14c., in reference to some part of a harness; c.1500 as act of pulling or dragging, from tug
(v.). Meaning small, powerful vessel for towing other vessels is recorded from 1817. Phrase tug of
war (1670s) was originally figurative, the decisive contest, the real struggle, from the noun in the
sense supreme effort, strenuous contest of forces (1650s). As an actual athletic event, from 1876.


tugboat (n.)

also tug-boat, 1830, from tug (n.) + boat (n.).


Tuileries

former palace in Paris, begun by Catherine de Medici, 1564; so called because it was built on the
site of an ancient tile-works, from Old French tieule tile, from Latin tegula (see tile (n.)). The
former residence of the royal court, it was destroyed by fire in 1871 and now is the site of the
Jardin des Tuileries.


tuition (n.)

early 15c., protection, care, custody, from Anglo-French tuycioun (13c.), Old French tuicion
guardianship, from Latin tuitionem (nominative tuitio) a looking after, a caring for, watching over,
protection, guardianship, from tuitus, past participle of tueri to look after (see tutor (n.)).
Meaning action or business of teaching pupils is recorded from 1580s. The meaning money paid for
instruction (1828) probably is short for tuition fees, in which tuition refers to the act of
teaching and instruction (a sense attested from 1580s).


tulip (n.)

1570s, via Dutch or German tulpe, French tulipe a tulip (16c.), all ultimately from Turkish
t&uuml;lbent turban, also gauze, muslin, from Persian dulband turban; so called from the fancied
resemblance of the flower to a turban.    Introduced from Turkey to Europe, where the earliest known
instance of a tulip flowering in cultivation is 1559 in the garden of Johann Heinrich Herwart in
Augsburg; popularized in Holland after 1587 by Clusius. The tulip-mania raged in Holland in the
1630s. The full form of the Turkish word is represented in Italian tulipano, Spanish tulipan, but
the -an tended to drop in Germanic languages, where it was mistaken for a suffix. Tulip tree (1705),
a North American magnolia, so called from its tulip-shaped flowers.


tulle (n.)

fine silk bobbin-net, 1817, from Tulle, town in central France, where the fabric was first
manufactured. The place name is Medieval Latin Tutelae, said to be from Tutela, name of a pagan god.


tumble (n.)

accidental fall, 1716, from tumble (v.). Earlier as disorder, confusion (1630s).


tumble (v.)

c.1300, to perform as an acrobat, also to fall down, perhaps from a frequentative form of Old
English tumbian dance about, tumble, leap. This is of unknown origin but apparently related to
Middle Low German tummelen to turn, dance, Dutch tuimelen to tumble, Old High German tumon, German
taumeln to turn, reel. Transitive sense from late 14c. Related: Tumbled; tumbling.


tumble-down (adj.)

1791, originally habitually falling down and used first of horses, from tumble (v.) + down (adv.);
in reference to buildings, in a dilapidated condition, from 1818.


tumbler (n.)

mid-14c., acrobat, agent noun from tumble (v.). Compare Old English tumbere tumbler, dancer. A fem.
form was tumblester (early 15c.), tumbester (late 14c.) female acrobatic dancer. Meaning drinking
glass is recorded from 1660s, originally a glass with a rounded or pointed bottom which would cause
it to tumble; thus it could not be set down until it was empty. As a part of a lock mechanism, from
1670s.


tumbleweed (n.)

also tumble-weed, 1881, from tumble (v.) + weed (n.).


tumbrel (n.)

mid-15c., two-wheeled cart for hauling dung, stones, etc., earlier an instrument of punishment of
uncertain type (early 13c.), from Old French tomberel dump cart (Modern French tombereau), from
tomber (let) fall or tumble, possibly from a Germanic source (compare Old Norse tumba to tumble, Old
High German tumon to turn, reel; see tumble (v.)). Notoriously the name given to the carts used to
take victims to the guillotine during the Reign of Terror (though illustrations often show four-
wheeled carts, not true tumbrels).


tumefaction (n.)

morbid swelling, early 15c., from Medieval Latin tumefaccionem (nominative tumefaccio), noun of
action from Latin tumefactus, from tumescere (see tumescence).


tumescence (n.)

1725, from French tumescence, from Latin tumescentem (nominative tumescens) swelling, present
participle of tumescere begin to swell, swell up, figuratively grow excited, become enraged,
inceptive of tumere to swell (see tumid) + inchoative suffix -escere.


tumescent (adj.)

1806, from Latin tumescentem (nominative tumescens), present participle of tumescere to begin to
swell, swell up (see tumescence).


tumid (adj.)

morbidly swollen, 1540s, from Latin tumidus swollen, swelling, rising high, figuratively swollen
with anger or pride, from tumere to swell, from PIE root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh). Figurative
sense in English (in reference to prose, etc.) is attested from 1640s. Related: Tumidity.


tummy (n.)

1867, infantile for stomach. Tummy-ache is attested from 1874.


tumor (n.)

early 15c., from Latin tumor swelling, condition of being swollen, a tumor, from tumere to swell
(see tumid).


tumour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of tumor; see -or.


tumulous (adj.)

1727, from Latin tumulosus full of hills, from tumulus hill, mound, heap of earth (see tumulus).


tumult (n.)

late 14c., from Old French tumult (12c.), from Latin tumultus commotion, bustle, uproar, disorder,
disturbance, related to tumere to be excited, swell (see tumid).


tumultuous (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French tumultuous (Modern French tumultueux), from Latin tumultuosus full of
bustle or confusion, disorderly, turbulent, from tumultus (see tumult). Related: Tumultuously;
tumultuousness.


tumulus (n.)

ancient burial mound, 1680s, from Latin tumulus hillock, heap of earth, mound, related to tumere to
swell (see tumid).


tun (n.)

large cask, especially one for wine, ale, or beer, Old English tunne tun, cask, barrel, a general
North Sea Germanic word (compare Old Frisian tunne, Middle Dutch tonne, Old High German tunna,
German tonne), also found in Medieval Latin tunna (9c.) and Old French tonne (diminutive tonneau);
perhaps from a Celtic source (compare Middle Irish, Gaelic tunna, Old Irish toun hide, skin). Tun-
dish (late 14c.) was a funnel made to fit into the bung of a tun.    -- That? said Stephen. -- Is
that called a funnel? Is it not a tundish? --  -- What is a tundish? --  --That. The ... the funnel.
--  --Is that called a tundish in Ireland? --  asked the dean. -- I never heard the word in my life.
--  -- It is called a tundish in Lower Drumcondra -- said Stephen, laughing -- where they speak the
best English.--  -- A tundish -- said the dean reflectively. -- That is a most interesting word I
must look that word up. Upon my word I must. --  His courtesy of manner rang a little false, and
Stephen looked at the English convert with the same eyes as the elder brother in the parable may
have turned on the prodigal. [Joyce, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man]


tuna (n.)

1881, from American Spanish (California) tuna, from Spanish atun, from Arabic tun, borrowed,
probably in Spain, from Latin thunnus tunny (see tunny).


tundra (n.)

an Arctic steppe, 1841, from Russian tundra, from Lappish tundar, said to mean elevated wasteland or
a marshy plain.


tune (n.)

early 14c., a musical sound, unexplained variant of tone (n.). From late 14c. as a well-rounded
succession of musical notes, an air, melody. Meaning state of being in proper pitch is from mid-15c.


tune (v.)

bring into a state of proper pitch, c.1500, from tune (n.). Non-musical meaning to adjust an organ
or receiver, put into a state proper for some purpose is recorded from 1887. Verbal phrase tune in
in reference to radio (later also TV) is recorded from 1913; figurative sense of become aware is
recorded from 1926. Tune out eliminate radio reception is recorded from 1908; figurative sense of
disregard, stop heeding is from 1928. Related: Tuned; tuning.


tune-up (n.)

adjustments made to an automobile to improve its working, 1911, from verbal phrase tune up bring to
a state of effectiveness, 1718, in reference to musical instruments, from tune (v.) + up (adv.).
Attested from 1901 in reference to engines. Meaning event that serves as practice for a later one is
from 1934, U.S. sports jargon.


tuneful (adj.)

1590s, from tune (n.) + -ful. Related: Tunefully.


tuneless (adj.)

1590s, from tune (n.) + -less. Related: Tunelessly; tunelessness.


tuner (n.)

one who tunes musical instruments, 1801, agent noun from tune (v.). From 1570s as musician, singer.
From 1909 as device for varying the frequency of a radio or (later) television.


tunesmith (n.)

1926, U.S. colloquial coinage, from tune (n.) + smith (n.).


tung

1889, from Chinese tong.


tungsten (n.)

rare metallic element, 1796, from Swedish tungsten calcium tungstate, coined 1780 by its discoverer,
Swedish chemist Karl Wilhelm Scheele (1742-1786) from tung heavy + sten stone (see stone (n.)). The
word was used earlier as the name for calcium tungstate (1770). Atomic symbol W is from Latin
wolframium, from German Wolfram iron tungstate (see wolfram).


tunic (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French tunique (12c.) or directly from Latin tunica undergarment worn by
either sex (source of Spanish tunica, Italian tonica, Old English tunece, Old High German tunihha),
probably from a Semitic source (compare Hebrew kuttoneth coat, Aramaic kittuna). Also see chitin.


tunicate (adj.)

1760, from Latin tunicatus clothed with a tunic only (i.e. without a toga), in shirt-sleeves, past
participle of tunicare to clothe in a tunic, from tunica (see tunic). As a noun, from 1848.


tuning (n.)

1550s, action of putting in tune, verbal noun from tune (v.). Of motors, from 1863. Tuning fork
attested from 1776, supposedly invented by John Shore (d.1753), royal trumpeter.    [Shore] was a
man of humour and pleasantry, and was the original inventor of the tuning-fork, an instrument which
he constantly carried about him, and used to tune his lute by, and which whenever he produced it
gave occasion to a pun. At a concert he would say, I have not about me a pitch-pipe, but I have what
will do as well to tune by, a pitch-fork. [Sir John Hawkins, A General History of the Science and
Practice of Music, London, 1776]


tunnel (n.)

early 15c., funnel-shaped net for catching birds, from Middle French tonnelle net, or tonel cask,
diminutive of Old French tonne tun, cask for liquids, possibly from the same source as Old English
tunne (see tun).    Sense of tube, pipe (1540s) developed in English and led to sense of underground
passage (1660s). This sense subsequently has been borrowed into French (1878). The earlier native
word for this was mine (n.). Meaning burrow of an animal is from 1873. Tunnel vision first recorded
1912. The amusement park tunnel of love is attested from 1911 (in reference to New York's Luna
Park). The figurative light at the end of the tunnel has been seen since 1882.    The Tunnel of
Love, an attraction found at many amusement parks, has been responsible for a surprising number of
proposals. In this and similar devices, couples are allowed to drift through dark or semi-dark
underground caverns, usually in a boat or gondola borne on an artificial stream of water. ... Their
dim interiors often give a bashful young man the opportunity to propose. [The American Magazine,
July 1922]


tunnel (v.)

excavate underground, 1795, from tunnel (n.). From 1570s as furnish with a tunnel. Related:
Tunneled; tunneling.


tunny (n.)

large sea-fish of the mackerel order, 1520s, probably from Middle French thon (14c.), from Old
Proven&ccedil;al ton and directly from Latin thunnus a tuna, tunny, from Greek thynnos a tuna,
tunny, possibly with a literal sense of darter, from thynein dart along.


tup (n.)

male sheep, c.1300, Scottish and Northern English; of unknown origin. As a verb, to copulate, 1540s.
Related: Tupped; tupping.


tupelo (n.)

American black gum tree, 1730, from an Algonquian language, such as Cree ito opilwa swamp tree,
Muskogee eto opelwv.


Tupi (n.)

a native language group of South America, also Tupian.


tuppence (n.)

mid-15c., to-pens, representing the common pronunciation of twopence (see two + pence).


Tupperware (n.)

1954, trademark (reg. U.S.), from Earl S. Tupper, president of Tupper Corp., + ware. Patent claims
use from 1950.


tuque (n.)

type of cap worn in Canada, 1871, from Canadian French variant of French toque (see toque).


turban (n.)

1560s, from Middle French turbant (15c.), from Italian turbante (Old Italian tolipante), from
Turkish t&uuml;lbent gauze, muslin, tulle, from Persian dulband turban. The change of -l- to -r- may
have taken place in Portuguese India and thence been picked up in other European languages. A men's
headdress in Muslim lands, it was popular in Europe and America c.1776-1800 as a ladies' fashion.
Related: Turbaned.


turbid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin turbidus muddy, full of confusion, from turbare to confuse, bewilder, from turba
turmoil, crowd, probably from Greek tyrbe turmoil, tumult, disorder, from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn,
whirl (see storm (n.)). Related: Turbidly; turbidness.


turbidity (n.)

1782, from Medieval Latin turbiditas, from Latin turbidus (see turbid). Turbidity current is from
1939.


turbine (n.)

1838, from French turbine (19c.), from Latin turbinem (nominative turbo) spinning top, eddy,
whirlwind, that which whirls, related to turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). Originally applied to a
wheel spinning on a vertical axis driven by falling water. Turbo in reference to gas turbine engines
is attested from 1904.


turbo-

word-forming element, abstracted c.1900 from turbine; influenced by Latin turbo spinning top. E.g.
turbocharger (1934), aeronautic turboprop (1945, with second element short for propeller); turbojet
(1945).


turbot (n.)

large, edible flatfish, c.1300, from Old French turbut (12c., Modern French turbot), probably from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Swedish t&ouml;rnbut, from t&ouml;rn thorn + but flatfish; see
halibut). But OED says of uncertain origin and speculates on a connection to Latin turbo spinning
top.


turbulence (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin turbulentia trouble, disquiet, from Latin turbulentus (see turbulent).
In reference to atmospheric eddies that affect airplanes, by 1918. Related: Turbulency.


turbulent (adj.)

early 15c., disorderly, tumultuous, unruly (of persons), from Middle French turbulent (12c.), from
Latin turbulentus full of commotion, restless, disturbed, boisterous, stormy, figuratively troubled,
confused, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). In reference to weather, from 1570s. Related:
Turbulently.


turd (n.)

Old English tord piece of excrement, from Proto-Germanic *turdam (cognates: Middle Dutch torde piece
of excrement, Old Norse tord-yfill, Dutch tort-wevel dung beetle), from PIE *drtom, past participle
of root *der- (2) to split, peel, flay, tear; thus that which is separated (torn off) from the body
(compare shit (v.) from root meaning to split; Greek skatos from root meaning to cut off; see
scatology). As a type of something worthless and vile, it is attested from mid-13c. Meaning
despicable person is recorded from mid-15c.    A tord ne yeue ic for eu alle [The Owl and the
Nightingale, c.1250]   <hr />   Alle thingis ... I deme as toordis, that I wynne Crist. [Wyclif,
Phil. iii.8, 1382; KJV has I count all things ... but dung, that I may win Christ]


tureen (n.)

1706, from French terrine earthen vessel, from Old French therine (15c.), noun use of fem. of terrin
(adj.) earthen, from Gallo-Roman *terrinus, from Latin terrenus of the earth (see terrain).


turf (n.)

Old English turf, tyrf slab of soil and grass, sod, also surface of grassland, from Proto-Germanic
*turb- (cognates: Old Norse torf, Danish t&oslash;rv, Old Frisian turf, Old High German zurba,
German Torf), from PIE root *drebh- to wind, compress (cognates: Sanskrit darbhah tuft of grass).
Especially the race course, hence the turf the profession of racing horses (1755). French tourbe
turf is a Germanic loan-word. The Old English plural was identical with the singular, but in Middle
English turves sometimes was used. Slang meaning territory claimed by a gang is attested from 1953
in Brooklyn, N.Y.; earlier it had a jive talk sense of the street, the sidewalk (1930s), which is
attested in hobo use from 1899, and before that the work and venue of a prostitute (1860). Turf war
is recorded from 1962.


turf (v.)

early 15c., to cover (ground) with turf, from turf (n.). Related: Turfed; turfing.


turgid (adj.)

1610s, from Latin turgidus swollen, inflated, distended, from turgere to swell, of unknown origin.
Figurative use in reference to prose is from 1725. Related: Turgidly; turgidness.


turgor (n.)

1857, from medical Latin turgor, from Latin turgere to swell (see turgid).


Turin

city in northern Italy, Italian Torino, Roman Augusta Taurinorum, probably from the Taurini, a
Ligurian people who had a capital there, the name perhaps from Celtic *tauro mountain or *tur water,
but long interpreted by folk etymology as from Latin taurus bull.


Turing machine (n.)

1937, named for English mathematician and computer pioneer Alan M. Turing (1912-1954), who described
such a device in 1936.


Turk (n.)

c.1300, from French Turc, from Medieval Latin Turcus, from Byzantine Greek Tourkos, Persian turk, a
national name, of unknown origin. Said to mean strength in Turkish. Compare Chinese tu-kin, recorded
from c.177 B.C.E. as the name of a people living south of the Altai Mountains (identified by some
with the Huns). In Persian, turk, in addition to the national name, also could mean a beautiful
youth, a barbarian, a robber.    In English, the Ottoman sultan was the Grand Turk (late 15c.), and
the Turk was used collectively for the Turkish people or for Ottoman power (late 15c.). From 14c.
and especially 16c.-18c. Turk could mean a Muslim, reflecting the Turkish political power's status
in the Western mind as the Muslim nation par excellence. Hence Turkery Islam (1580s); turn Turk
convert to Islam.    Meaning person of Irish descent is first recorded 1914 in U.S., apparently
originating among Irish-Americans; of unknown origin (Irish torc boar, hog has been suggested).
Young Turk (1908) was a member of an early 20c. political group in the Ottoman Empire that sought
rejuvenation of the Turkish nation. Turkish bath is attested from 1640s; Turkish delight from 1877.


turkey (n.)

1540s, originally guinea fowl (Numida meleagris), a bird imported from Madagascar via Turkey, and
called guinea fowl when brought by Portuguese traders from West Africa. The larger North American
bird (Meleagris gallopavo) was domesticated by the Aztecs, introduced to Spain by conquistadors
(1523) and thence to wider Europe. The word turkey first was applied to it in English 1550s because
it was identified with or treated as a species of the guinea fowl, and/or because it got to the rest
of Europe from Spain by way of North Africa, then under Ottoman (Turkish) rule. Indian corn was
originally turkey corn or turkey wheat in English for the same reason.    The Turkish name for it is
hindi, literally Indian, probably influenced by Middle French dinde (c.1600, contracted from poulet
d'inde, literally chicken from India, Modern French dindon), based on the then-common misconception
that the New World was eastern Asia.    After the two birds were distinguished and the names
differentiated, turkey was erroneously retained for the American bird, instead of the African. From
the same imperfect knowledge and confusion Melagris, the ancient name of the African fowl, was
unfortunately adopted by Linn&#230;us as the generic name of the American bird. [OED]    The New
World bird itself reputedly reached England by 1524 at the earliest estimate, though a date in the
1530s seems more likely. The wild turkey, the North American form of the bird, was so called from
1610s. By 1575, turkey was becoming the usual main course at an English Christmas. Meaning inferior
show, failure, is 1927 in show business slang, probably from the bird's reputation for stupidity.
Meaning stupid, ineffectual person is recorded from 1951. Turkey shoot something easy is World War
II-era, in reference to marksmanship contests where turkeys were tied behind a log with their heads
showing as targets. To talk turkey (1824) supposedly comes from an old tale of a Yankee attempting
to swindle an Indian in dividing up a turkey and a buzzard as food.


Turkey

country name, late 14c., from Medieval Latin Turchia, from Turcus (see Turk) + -ia.


turkey-vulture (n.)

1823, from turkey + vulture. From 1670s as turkey-buzzard.


Turkish (adj.)

1540s, from Turk (n.) + -ish. As a noun, the Turkish language, from 1718.


Turkoman

also Turcoman, c.1600, from Medieval Latin Turcomannus, from Persian Turkman, literally Turk-like,
from Turk + -man like.


Turkophile

also Turcophile, 1876, from comb. form of Turk + -phile.


turmeric (n.)

pungent powder made from the root of an East Indian plant, 1530s, altered from Middle English
turmeryte (early 15c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Middle French terrem&eacute;rite saffron,
from Medieval Latin terra merita, literally worthy earth, though the reason why it would be called
this is obscure. Klein suggests it might be a folk-etymology corruption of Arabic kurkum curcuma,
saffron.


turmoil (n.)

1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps an alteration of Middle French tremouille mill hopper, in
reference to the hopper's constant motion to and fro, from Latin trimodia vessel containing three
modii, from modius, a Roman dry measure, related to modus measure. Attested earlier in English as a
verb (1510s), though this now is obsolete.


turn (v.)

late Old English turnian to rotate, revolve, in part also from Old French torner to turn away or
around; draw aside, cause to turn; change, transform; turn on a lathe (Modern French tourner), both
from Latin tornare to polish, round off, fashion, turn on a lathe, from tornus lathe, from Greek
tornos lathe, tool for drawing circles, from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, rub by turning, turn, twist
(see throw (v.)). Transitive sense in English is from c.1300. Related: Turned; turning.    Use in
expression to turn (something) into (something else) probably retains the classical sense of to
shape on a lathe. To turn up arrive, make an appearance is recorded from 1755. Turn about by turns,
alternately is recorded from 1640s. To turn (something) loose set free is recorded from 1590s. Turn
down (v.) reject first recorded 1891, American English. Turn in go to bed is attested from 1690s,
originally nautical. To turn the stomach nauseate is recorded from 1620s. To turn up one's nose as
an expression of contempt is attested from 1779.   Turning point is attested by 1640s in a
figurative sense point at which a decisive change takes place; literal sense point on which a thing
turns; point at which motion in one direction ceases and that in another or contrary direction
begins is from 1660s.


turn (n.)

c.1200, action of rotating, from Anglo-French tourn (Old French torn, tour), from Latin tornus
turning lathe; also partly from turn (v.). Meaning an act of turning, a single revolution or part of
a revolution is attested from late 15c. Sense of place of bending (in a road, river, etc.) is
recorded from early 15c. Meaning beginning of a period of time is attested from 1853 (as in turn-of-
the-century, from 1921 as an adjectival phrase).    Sense of act of good will is recorded from
c.1300. Meaning spell of work is from late 14c.; that of an individual's time for action, when these
go around in succession is recorded from late 14c. The automatic automobile turn-signal is from
1915. Turn-sick dizzy, is attested from early 15c. Phrase done to a turn (1780) suggests meat
roasted on a spit. The turn of the screw (1796) is the additional twist to tighten its hold,
sometimes with reference to torture by thumbscrews.


turn-around (n.)

also turnaround, 1936, from verbal phrase turn around reverse, 1880, American English, from turn
(v.) + around (adv.).


turn-off (n.)

something that dampens one's spirits recorded by 1971 (said to have been in use since 1968), from
verbal phrase turn off stop the flow of (1850), from turn (v.) + off (adv.). Turn-off (n.) as place
where one road diverges from another is from 1881.


turn-on (n.)

that which arouses or excites, 1968, originally of psychedelic drugs, from verbal phrase turn on
activate (a mechanism) (1833), specifically from figurative sense turn (someone) on excite,
stimulate, arouse, recorded from 1903; from turn (v.) + on (adv.).


turn-out (n.)

audience, assemblage of persons who have come to see a show, spectacle, etc., 1816, from the verbal
phrase; see turn (v.) + out (adv.).


turnbuckle (n.)

also turn-buckle, 1703, catch or fastening for windows and shutters, from turn (v.) + buckle (n.).
Meaning coupling with internal screw threads for connecting metal rods is attested from 1877.


turncoat (n.)

1550s, from turn (v.) + coat (n.). The image is of one who attempts to hide the badge of his party
or leader. The expression to turn one's coat change principles or party is recorded from 1560s.


turner (n.)

c.1400, one who works a lathe, agent noun from turn (v.). As a surname from late 12c.


turnip (n.)

c.1500, turnepe, probably from turn (from its shape, as though turned on a lathe) + Middle English
nepe turnip, from Old English n&aelig;p, from Latin napus turnip. The modern form of the word
emerged late 18c.


turnkey (adj.)

1650s, jailer, from turn (v.) + key (n.). In reference to a job that only has to be done only once,
it is recorded from 1934. The notion probably is of something that can be accomplished with a single
turn of a key.


turnover (n.)

also turn-over, 1650s, action of turning over, from the verbal phrase; see turn (v.) + over (adv.).
As a kind of pastry tart, from 1798. Meaning number of employees leaving a place and being replaced
is recorded from 1955.


turnpike (n.)

early 15c., spiked road barrier used for defense, from turn + pike (n.2) shaft. Sense transferred to
horizontal cross of timber, turning on a vertical pin (1540s), which were used to bar horses from
foot roads. This led to the sense of barrier to stop passage until a toll is paid (1670s). Meaning
road with a toll gate is from 1748, shortening of turnpike road (1745).


turnstile (n.)

1640s, from turn (v.) + stile (n.).


turntable (n.)

also turn-table, circular platform designed to turn upon its center, 1835, originally in the
railroad sense, from turn (v.) + table (n.). The record-player sense is attested from 1908.


turpentine (n.)

early 14c., semi-liquid resin of the terebinth tree, terbentyn, from Old French terebinte turpentine
(13c.), from Latin terebintha resina resin of the terebinth tree, from Greek rhetine terebinthe,
from fem. of terebinthos (see terebinth). By 16c. applied generally to resins from fir trees.


turpitude (n.)

depravity, infamy, late 15c., from Middle French turpitude (early 15c.), from Latin turpitudinem
(nominative turpitudo) baseness, from turpis vile, physically ugly, base, unsightly, figuratively
morally ugly, scandalous, shameful, of unknown origin. Klein suggests perhaps originally what one
turns away from (compare Latin trepit he turns).


turquoise (n.)

greenish-blue precious stone, 1560s, from Middle French, replacing Middle English turkeis, turtogis
(late 14c.), from Old French fem. adjective turqueise Turkish, in pierre turqueise Turkish stone, so
called because it was first brought to Europe from Turkestan or some other Turkish dominion. Cognate
with Spanish turquesa, Medieval Latin (lapis) turchesius, Middle Dutch turcoys, German t&uuml;rkis,
Swedish turkos. As an adjective, 1570s. As a color name, attested from 1853. Chemically it is a
hydrated phosphate of aluminum and copper [Flood].


turret (n.)

c.1300, touret small tower forming part of a city wall or castle, from Old French torete (12c.,
Modern French tourette), diminutive of tour tower, from Latin turris (see tower (n.1)). Meaning low,
flat gun-tower on a warship is recorded from 1862, later also of tanks. Related: Turreted. Welsh
twrd is from English.


turtle (n.1)

tortoise, c.1600, originally marine tortoise, from French tortue, tortre (13c.) turtle, tortoise
(often associated with diabolical beasts), of unknown origin. The English word perhaps is a sailors'
mauling of the French one, influenced by the similar sounding turtle (n.2). Later extended to land
tortoises; sea-turtle is attested from 1610s.


turtle (n.2)

turtledove, Old English turtle, dissimilation of Latin turtur turtledove, a reduplicated form
imitative of the bird's coo. Graceful, harmonious and affectionate to its mate, hence a term of
endearment in Middle English. Turtle-dove is attested from c.1300.


turtleneck (n.)

also turtle-neck close-fitting collar, 1893, from turtle (n.1) + neck (n.).


Tuscaloosa

river in Alabama, first attested in Spanish as Tascaluza, from Choctaw (Muskogean) taska-losa,
literally warrior-black.


Tuscan (n.)

late 14c., from Italian Toscano, from Late Latin Tuscanus belonging to the Tusci, a people of
ancient Italy, from Tuscus, earlier *Truscus, shortened form of Etruscus (see Etruscan).


Tuscarora

Iroquoian people originally inhabiting what is now North Carolina, 1640s, from Catawba (Siouan)
/taskarude:/, literally dry-salt eater, a folk-etymologizing of the people's name for themselves,
Tuscarora (Iroquoian) /skaru:re/, literally hemp-gatherers.


tush (n.)

backside, buttocks, 1962, an abbreviation of tochus (1914), from Yiddish tokhes, from Hebrew tahat
beneath.


tush (interj.)

mid-15c.; see tut. Related: Tushery.


tushy (n.)

also tushie, 1962, from tush (n.) + -y (3).


tusk (n.)

Old English tusc, also transposed as tux, long, pointed tooth protruding from the mouth of an
animal, cognate with Old Frisian tusk, probably from Proto-Germanic *tunthsk- (cognates: Gothic
tun&thorn;us tooth), from an extended form of PIE *dent-, the root of tooth. But there are no
certain cognates outside of the Anglo-Frisian area [OED].


Tuskegee

place in Alabama, named from a Muskogee tribal town taskeke (first recorded in Spanish as
tasquiqui), literally warriors.


tussive (adj.)

pertaining to cough, 1857, from Latin tussis a cough, of unknown origin, + -ive.


tussle (v.)

to struggle, scuffle, wrestle confusedly, late 15c. (transitive); 1630s (intransitive), Scottish and
northern English variant of touselen (see tousle). Related: Tussled; tussling.


tussle (n.)

a struggle, conflict, scuffle, 1620s (but rare before 19c.), from tussle (v.).


tussock (n.)

1540s, tuft of hair, of uncertain origin; perhaps a diminutive of earlier tusk (1520s) with the same
meaning (and also of obscure origin). Meaning tuft of grass is first recorded c.1600.


tut (interj.)

1520s, along with tush (mid-15c.), a natural interjection expressing impatient or dismissive
contempt.


tutee (n.)

1927; see tutor (v.) + -ee.


tutelage (n.)

guardianship, c.1600, from -age + Latin tutela a watching, keeping, safeguard, protection, from
variant past participle stem of tueri watch over (see tutor (n.)). Meaning instruction first
appeared 1857.


tutelary (adj.)

1610s, from Late Latin tutelarius a guardian, from Latin tutela protection, watching (see tutor
(n.)).


tutor (n.)

late 14c., guardian, custodian, from Old French tuteor guardian, private teacher (13c., Modern
French tuteur), from Latin tutorem (nominative tutor) guardian, watcher, from tutus, variant past
participle of tueri watch over, of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE *teue- (1) pay attention to
(see thews). Specific sense of senior boy appointed to help a junior in his studies is recorded from
1680s.


tutor (v.)

1590s, from tutor (n.). Related: Tutored; tutoring.


tutorial (adj.)

1742, from tutor (n.) + -al (1). As a noun, attested from 1923.


tutti-frutti (n.)

1834, from Italian tutti frutti all fruits, from tutti, plural of tutto all (from Latin totus whole,
entire; see total (adj.)) + frutti, plural of frutto fruit (from Latin fructus; see fruit).


tutu (n.)

ballet skirt, 1910, from French tutu, alteration of cucu, infantile reduplication of cul bottom,
backside, from Latin culus bottom, backside, fundament.


tux (n.)

1922, colloquial shortening of tuxedo.


tuxedo (n.)

man's evening dress for semiformal occasions, 1889, named for Tuxedo Park, N.Y., a rural resort
development for wealthy New Yorkers and site of a country club where it first was worn, supposedly
in 1886. The name is an attractive subject for elaborate speculation, and connections with
Algonquian words for bear or wolf were proposed. The authoritative Bright, however, says the tribe's
name probably is originally a place name, perhaps Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) p'tuck-sepo crooked
river.    There was a hue and cry raised against the Tuxedo coat upon its first appearance because
it was erroneously considered and widely written of as intended to displace the swallow tail. When
the true import of the tailless dress coat came to be realized it was accepted promptly by swelldom,
and now is widely recognized as one of the staple adjuncts of the jeunesse dor&#233;e. [Clothier and
Furnisher, August, 1889]


TV (n.)

1948, shortened form of television (q.v.). Spelled out as tee-vee from 1949. TV dinner (1954), made
to be eaten from a tray while watching a television set, is a proprietary name registered by Swanson
&amp; Sons, Omaha, Nebraska, U.S.


TWA

formed May 16, 1928, as Transcontinental Air Transport, merged 1930 with Western Air Express to form
Transcontinental and Western Air Inc. (TWA). Name changed to Trans World Airlines 1950, but the
moniker remained the same. Its last remnants were bought out by rival American Airlines in April
2001.


twa (n.)

Scottish form of two.


twaddle (n.)

silly talk, prosy nonsense, 1782, probably from twattle (1550s), of obscure origin.


twain

Old English twegen two (masc. nominative and accusative), from Proto-Germanic *twa- two (see two).
It corresponds to Old Frisian twene, Dutch twee, Old High German zwene, Danish tvende. The word
outlasted the breakdown of gender in Middle English and survived as a secondary form of two,
especially in cases where the numeral follows a noun. Its continuation into modern times was aided
by its use in KJV and the Marriage Service, in poetry (where it is a useful rhyme word), and in oral
use where it is necessary to be clear that two and not to or too is meant. In U.S. nautical use as a
depth of two fathoms from 1799.


twang (n.)

1550s, of imitative origin. Originally the sound of plucked bows and strings; extension to a nasal
vocal sound is first recorded 1660s. The verb is first attested 1540s. Related: Twanged; twanging.


twangy (adj.)

1858, from twang (n.) + -y (2). Related: Twangily; twanginess.


twat (n.)

female pudendum, 1650s, of unknown origin. A general term of abuse since 1920s.    The T-word
occupies a special niche in literary history, however, thanks to a horrible mistake by Robert
Browning, who included it in 'Pippa Passes' (1841) without knowing its true meaning. 'The owls and
bats,/Cowls and twats,/Monks and nuns,/In a cloister's moods.' Poor Robert! He had been misled into
thinking the word meant 'hat' by its appearance in 'Vanity of Vanities,' a poem of 1660, containing
the treacherous lines: 'They'd talk't of his having a Cardinalls Hat,/They'd send him as soon an Old
Nuns Twat.' (There is a lesson here about not using words unless one is very sure of their meaning.)
[Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989]


tweak (v.)

pinch, pluck, twist, usually to the nose, c.1600, probably from Middle English twikken to draw, tug,
pluck (mid-15c.), from Old English twiccian to pluck, of obscure origin; perhaps related to twitch.
Meaning to make fine adjustments is attested from 1966. Related: Tweaked; tweaking.


tweak (n.)

c.1600, a twitch, a pluck, from tweak (v.). As a fine adjustment by 1989.


twee (adj.)

tiny, dainty, miniature, 1905, from childish pronunciation of sweet (adj.). Compare tummy from
stomach.


tweed (n.)

1839, a trade name for a type of woolen fabric:    MICHAEL NOWAK, alias John Mazurkiewiez, was
indicted for stealing on the 15th of April 2 &#188; yards of woollen cloth, called tweed, value
12s., and 2 &#188; yards of woollen cloth, called doe skin, value 17s., the goods of George
Priestley Heap. [London Central Criminal Court minutes of evidence from 1839]    This apparently
developed from the Tweed Fishing or Travelling Trousers advertised in numerous publications from
1834-1838 by the clothing house of Doudney &amp; Son, 49 Lombard Street.    So celebrated has
amateur rod-fishing in the Tweed become, that the proper costume of the sportsman has now become an
object of speculation among the London tailors, one of whom advertises among other articles of dress
Tweed Fishing Trousers. The anglers who have so long established their head-quarters at Kelso, for
the purpose of enjoying the amusement of salmon fishing in the Tweed, have had excellent sport
lately : some of the most skilful having caught five or six salmon a day, weighing from six to
fourteen pounds each. [New Sporting Magazine, June 1837]    Thus ultimately named for the River
Tweed in Scotland. The place name has not been explained, and it is perhaps pre-Celtic and non-Indo-
European.


tweedledum (n.)

paired with tweedledee to signify two things or persons nearly alike, differing in name, 1725,
coined by English poet John Byrom (1692-1767) in his satire On the Feud Between Handel and
Bononcini, a couple of competing musicians, from tweedle to sing, to whistle (1680s), of imitative
origin. The -dum and -dee perhaps suggest low and high sounds respectively.


tweedy (adj.)

characteristic of the country or suburban set, 1912, from tweed + -y (2). Related: Tweediness.


tween (prep.)

also 'tween, c.1300 as an abbreviation of between. As a noun meaning child nearing puberty
(approximately ages 9 to 12), attested by 1988, in this case by influence of teen. Earlier in this
sense was subteen (1952). Related: Tweens. Tweeny was a c.1900 term for a servant who assists two
others.


tweet (n.)

1845, imitative of the sound made by a small bird. As a verb by 1872. Related: Tweeted; tweeting. As
the word for what one does on the Twitter microblogging service, by 2007.


tweeter (n.)

loudspeaker for high frequencies, 1934, agent noun from tweet (v.).


tweeze (v.)

to pluck with tweezers, 1921, back-formation from tweezers. Related: Tweezed; tweezing. Earlier verb
was tweezer (1806).


tweezers (n.)

small pincers, diminutive tongs, 1650s, extended from tweezes, plural of tweeze case for tweezers
(1620s), a shortening of etweese, considered as plural of etwee (1610s) a small case, from French
&eacute;tui small case (see etui). Sense transferred from the case to the implement inside it. For
form, compare trousers from trouzes.


twelfth (adj.)

late 14c., with -th (1), altering Middle English twelfte, from Old English twelfta, from twelf ((see
twelve). The earlier form is cognate with Old Norse tolfti, Danish tolvte, Old Frisian twelefta,
Dutch twaalfde, Old High German zwelifto, German zw&ouml;lfte .    As a noun meaning a twelfth part,
from 1550s. Twelfth Night is Old English twelftan niht Twelfth Night, the eve of Epiphany, which
comes twelve days after Christmas, formerly an occasion of social rites and a time of merrymaking.


twelve (adj.)

Old English twelf twelve, literally two left (over ten), from Proto-Germanic *twa-lif-, a compound
of the root of two + *lif-, root of the verb leave (see eleven). Compare Old Saxon twelif, Old Norse
tolf, Old Frisian twelef, Middle Dutch twalef, Dutch twaalf, Old High German zwelif, German
zw&ouml;lf, Gothic twalif. Outside Germanic, an analogous formation is Lithuanian dvylika, with
second element -lika left over.


twelve-month (n.)

a year, Old English twelf-mon&#240;; see twelve + month.


twenties (n.)

1829 as the years of someone's life between 20 and 29; 1830 as the third decade of years in a given
century. See twenty.


twentieth (adj.)

16c., from twenty + -th (1), replacing Middle English twentithe, from Old English twentigo&eth;a.
The Twentieth Century Limited was an express train from New York to Chicago 1902-1967.


twenty (n.)

Old English twentig group of twenty, from twegen two (see two) + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)).
Cognate with Old Saxon twentig , Old Frisian twintich, Dutch twintig, Old High German zweinzug,
German zwanzig. Gothic twai tigjus is even more transparent: literally two tens.    The card game
twenty-one (1790) is from French vingt-et-un (1781). Twenty-twenty hindsight is first recorded 1962,
a figurative use of the Snellen fraction for normal visual acuity, expressed in feet. The guessing
game of twenty questions is recorded from 1786.


twerk (v.)

to dance in a way that simulates the body's action in copulation, by 2005, alteration of twurk,
which seems to have originated in the Atlanta, Georgia, strip club and hip-hop scene and first came
to wide attention in the Ying Yang Twins' 2000 song Whistle While You Twurk, described as an ode to
strippers [Country Fried Soul, Adventures in Dirty South Hip-Hop]. Probably ultimately imitative of
something. Related: Twerked; twerking. There is a verb twirk from 1599, to pull, tug, twirl, what a
man does with his mustache, but OED regards this as possibly a misprint of twirl.


twerp (n.)

of unknown origin; OED and Barnhart give earliest date as 1925, but the Dictionary of American Slang
gives a first reference of 1874 (but without citation and I can't find it), which, if correct, would
rule out the usual theory that it is from the proper name of T.W. Earp, a student at Oxford c.1911,
who kindled wrath in the hearts of the rugger-playing stalwarts at Oxford, when he was president of
the Union, by being the last, most charming, and wittiest of the 'decadents.'  [Rawson]    Mean to
say you never heard of Sinzy? Why, he's one of the greatest characters in this town. He's a terrible
twerp to look at -- got a face like bad news from home, but I guess he's the best jazz piano player
in the world. [Julian Street, Cross-Sections, 1923]


Twi (n.)

chief language of Ghana in West Africa; also known as Akan, it is in the Niger-Congo language
family.


twi-

word-forming element meaning two, twice, double, in two ways, from Old English twi- two, in two
ways, twice, double, from Proto-Germanic *twi- (cognates: Old Frisian twi-, Old Norse tvi-, Dutch
twee-, Old High German zwi-, German zwei-), from PIE *dwis (cognates: Sanskrit dvi-, Greek di-, Old
Latin dvi-, Latin bi-, Lithuanian dvi-), from *dwo two (see two). Cognate with bi-. Older instances
of it include Middle English twinter two years old (c.1400, of cattle, sheep, etc.), reduced from
Old English twi-wintre, and Old English twispr&aelig;c double or deceitful speech.


twi-night (adj.)

1939, in reference to evening double-header baseball games, from twilight + night.


twice (adv.)

late Old English twies, from Old English twiga, twigea two times, from Proto-Germanic *twiyes
(cognates: Old Frisian twia, Old Saxon tuuio), from PIE *dwis-, adverbial form of *dwo- two (see
two). Spelling with -ce reflects the voiceless pronunciation.    Life is as tedious as a twice-told
tale  Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man.  [King John, III.iv.]   Think twice, then speak was an
old Prouerbe by 1623. At twice, though less common than at once, means at two distinct times; by two
distinct operations.


twiddle (v.)

1540s, to trifle, of unknown origin, said to be probably imitative; of the fingers, to twirl idly,
first recorded 1670s. Figurative phrase twiddle one's thumbs have nothing to do is recorded from
1846; to twirl one's thumbs in the same sense is recorded from 1816. Related: Twiddled; twiddling.


twig (n.)

Old English twig twig, branch, shoot, small tree, from Proto-Germanic *twigga a fork (cognates:
Middle Dutch twijch, Dutch twijg, Old High German zwig, German Zweig branch, twig), from PIE *dwi-
ko-, from *dwo- two (see two). Compare Old English twisel fork, point of division.


twiggy (adj.)

slender, 1560s, from twig + -y (2). The famous 1960s English model was born Lesley Hornby (1949).
The older adjectival form was twiggen made of twigs (1540s).


twilight (n.)

light from the sky when the sun is below the horizon at morning and evening, late 14c.
(twilighting), a compound of twi- + light (n.) Cognate with Middle Flemish twilicht, Dutch tweelicht
(16c.), Middle High German twelicht, German zwielicht. Exact connotation of twi- in this word is
unclear, but it appears to refer to half light, rather than the fact that twilight occurs twice a
day. Compare also Sanskrit samdhya twilight, literally a holding together, junction, Middle High
German zwischerliecht, literally tweenlight. Originally and most commonly in English with reference
to evening twilight but occasionally used of morning twilight (a sense first attested mid-15c.).
Figurative extension recorded from c.1600.   Twilight zone is from 1901 in a literal sense, a part
of the sky lit by twilight; from 1909 in extended senses in references to topics or cases where
authority or behavior is unclear. In the 1909 novel In the Twilight Zone, the reference is to
mulatto heritage. She was in the twilight zone between the races where each might claim her .... The
U.S. TV series of that name is from 1959.


twill (n.)

cloth woven in parallel diagonal lines, early 14c., Scottish and northern English variant of Middle
English twile, from Old English twili woven with double thread, twilled, partial loan-translation of
Latin bilix with a double thread (with Old English twi- substituted for cognate Latin bi-); the
second element from Latin licium thread, which is of uncertain origin.


twin (adj.)

Old English twinn consisting of two, twofold, double, two-by-two, from Proto-Germanic *twisnjaz
double (cognates: Old Norse tvinnr double, twin, Old Danish tvinling, Dutch tweeling, German
zwillung), from PIE *dwisno- (cognates: Latin bini two each, Lithuanian dvynu twins), from *dwi-
double, from root *dwo- two (see two). Minneapolis and St. Paul in Minnesota have been the Twin
Cities since 1883, but the phrase was used earlier of Rock Island and Davenport (1856).


twin (v.)

to combine two things closely, join, couple, late 14c., from twin (adj.). Related: Twinned;
twinning. In Middle English, the verb earlier and typically meant to part, part with, separate from,
estrange, etc. (c.1200), on the notion of making two what was one.


twin (n.)

c.1300, from Old English getwinn double; getwinnas twins, two born at one birth, from twinn (see
twin (adj.)).


twine (n.)

strong thread made from twisted strands, Old English twin double thread, from Proto-Germanic
*twiznaz double thread, twisted thread (cognates: Dutch twijn, Low German twern, German zwirn twine,
thread), from the same root as twin (adj.).


twine (v.)

to twist strands together to form twine, c.1300, from twine (n.) and probably also from Old Norse
tvinna to double. Sense of to twist around something (as twine does) is recorded from late 14c.
Related: Twined; twining.


twinge (n.)

1540s, a pinch, a nipping, from obsolete verb twinge to pinch, tweak, from Old English twengan to
pinch, from Proto-Germanic *twangjan (cognates: Old Frisian thwinga, Old Norse &#254;vinga, Danish
tvinge, Dutch dwingen, Old High German thwingan, German zwingen to compel, force), from PIE *twengh-
to press in on (see thong). Meaning sharp, sudden minor pain is recorded from c.1600. Figurative
sense (with reference to shame, remorse, etc.) is recorded from 1620s.


twink (n.)

c.1400, in phrase in a twynk of oon eye suddenly, almost instantaneously, from twink (v.) to wink,
probably from Old English twincan (see twinkle (v.)). Meaning a twinkle is from 1830. Meaning young
sexually attractive person is recorded from 1963, probably from Twinkie; but compare 1920s-30s
British homosexual slang twank in a similar sense.


Twinkie (n.)

snack food, supposedly invented and named 1930 by Jimmy Dewar, baker for the Chicago branch of
Continental Baking Co. (later Hostess); said to have been inspired by twinkle.


twinkle (v.)

Old English twinclian to twinkle, wink, frequentative of twincan to wink, blink; related to Middle
High German zwinken, German zwinkern, and probably somehow imitative.Related: Twinkled; twinkling.
The noun is recorded from 1540s. Phrase in the twinkling of an eye in a very brief time is attested
from c.1300.


twirl (v.)

1590s, move round rapidly (intransitive), of uncertain origin, possibly connected with Old English
&thorn;wirl a stirrer, handle of a churn, and Old Norse &#254;vara pot-sticker, stirrer. Or on
another guess a blend of twist and whirl. Transitive sense, cause to revolve rapidly, is from 1620s.
Related: Twirled; twirling.


twirl (n.)

1590s, rapid circular motion, from twirl (v.).


twirler (n.)

1808, agent noun from twirl (v.). As baseball slang for pitcher, by 1891.


twist (n.)

mid-14c., flat part of a hinge (now obsolete), probably from Old English -twist divided object;
fork; rope (as in m&aelig;sttwist mast rope, stay; candeltwist wick), from Proto-Germanic *twis-,
from PIE root *dwo- (see two). Original senses suggest dividing in two (cognates: cognate Old Norse
tvistra to divide, separate, Gothic twis- in two, asunder, Dutch twist, German zwist quarrel,
discord, though these senses have no equivalent in English), but later ones are of combining two
into one, hence the original sense of the word may be rope made of two strands.    Meaning thread or
cord composed of two or more fibers is recorded from 1550s. Meaning act or action of turning on an
axis is attested from 1570s. Sense of beverage consisting of two or more liquors is first attested
c.1700. Meaning thick cord of tobacco is from 1791. Meaning curled piece of lemon, etc., used to
flavor a drink is recorded from 1958. Sense of unexpected plot development is from 1941.    The
popular rock 'n' roll dance craze is from 1961, so called from the motion involved, but twist was
used to describe popular dances in 1894 and again in the 1920s. To get one's knickers in a twist be
unduly agitated is British slang first attested 1971.


twist (v.)

c.1200 (implied in past tense form twaste), to wring, from twist (n.). Sense of to spin two or more
strands of yarn into thread is attested from late 15c. Meaning to move in a winding fashion is
recorded from 1630s.  To twist the lion's tail was U.S. slang (1895) for to provoke British feeling
(the lion being the symbol of Britain). To twist (someone's) arm in the figurative sense of pressure
(to do something) is from 1945. Related: Twisted; twisting.


twist-off (adj.)

of bottle or jar caps, 1959, from the verbal phrase; see from twist (v.) + off (adv.).


twisted (adj.)

late 15c., intertwined, past participle adjective from twist (v.). Meaning perverted, mentally
strange (1900) probably is from twist (n.) in a sense of mental peculiarity, perversion attested by
1811.


twister (n.)

late 15c., one who spins thread, agent noun from twist (v.). Meaning tornado is attested from 1881,
American English.


twisty (adj.)

1857, full of windings, from twist (n.) + -y (2). Meaning attractively feminine, 1970s slang, is
from twist girl (1928), apparently from rhyming slang twist and twirl (1924).


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


twit (n.)

foolish, stupid and ineffectual person, 1934, British slang, popular 1950s-60s, crossed over to U.S.
with British sitcoms. It probably developed from twit (v.) in the sense of reproach, but it may be
influenced by nitwit.


twitch (v.)

late 12c., to-twic-chen pull apart with a quick jerk, related to Old English twiccian to pluck,
gather, catch hold of, from Proto-Germanic *twikjon- (cognates: Low German twicken, Dutch twikken,
Old High German gizwickan, German zwicken to pinch, tweak). Related: Twitched; twitching.


twitch (n.)

1520s, from twitch (v.).


twitter (v.)

late 14c., twiteren, in reference to birds, of imitative origin (compare Old High German zwizziron,
German zwitschern, Danish kvidre, Old Swedish kvitra). The noun meaning condition of tremulous
excitement is attested from 1670s. The microblogging service with the 140-character limit was
introduced in 2006. The following is considered an unrelated word of obscure origin:    TWITTER. 1.
That part of a thread that is spun too small. Yarn is said to be twined to twitters, when twined too
small, S. Hence, to twitter yarn, to spin it unequally, A. Bor. Ray.  2. It is transferred to any
person or thing that is slender or feeble. It is said of a lank delicate girl: She is a mere
twitter, S. [Jamieson, Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language, Edinburgh, 1808]


twitterpated (adj.)

1942, apparently first attested in the Walt Disney movie Bambi (there also was a song by that name
but it was not in the studio release of the film), a past participle adjective formed from twitter
in the tremulous excitement noun sense (1670s) + pate (n.2) head (compare flutterpated, 1894).
Thumper: Why are they acting that way?   Friend Owl: Why, don't you know? They're twitterpated.
Flower, Bambi, Thumper: Twitterpated?   Friend Owl: Yes. Nearly everybody gets twitterpated in the
springtime. For example: You're walking along, minding your own business. You're looking neither to
the left, nor to the right, when all of a sudden you run smack into a pretty face. Woo-woo! You
begin to get weak in the knees. Your head's in a whirl. And then you feel light as a feather, and
before you know it, you're walking on air. And then you know what? You're knocked for a loop, and
you completely lose your head!   Thumper: Gosh, that's awful.


twizzle (v.)

to twist, form by twisting (transitive), 1788, apparently a made-up word suggested by twist.
Related: Twizzled; twizzling.


two (adj.)

Old English twa two, fem. and neuter form of twegen two (see twain), from Proto-Germanic *twa
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian twene, twa, Old Norse tveir, tvau, Dutch twee, Old High German
zwene, zwo, German zwei, Gothic twai), from PIE *duwo, variant of dwo two (cognates: Sanskrit dvau,
Avestan dva, Greek duo, Latin duo, Old Welsh dou, Lithuanian dvi, Old Church Slavonic duva two,
first element in Hittite ta-ugash two years old).   Two-fisted is from 1774. Two cheers for _____,
expressing qualified enthusiasm first recorded 1951 in E.M. Forster's title Two Cheers for
Democracy. Two-dimensional is recorded from 1883; figurative sense of lacking substance or depth is
attested from 1934.


two bits (n.)

quarter dollar, 1730, in reference to the Mexican real, a large coin that was divided into eight
bits; see bit (n.1). Compare piece of eight (see piece (n.)). Two bits thus would have equaled a
quarter of the coin. Hence two-bit (adj.) cheap, tawdry, first recorded 1929.


two-faced (adj.)

also two faced, deceitful, 1610s; see two + face (n.).


two-step (n.)

dance style, 1893, from two + step (n.); so called for the time signature of the music (as
distinguished from the three-step waltz). But as the positions taken by the dancers involved direct
contact, it was highly scandalous in its day and enormously popular.    A certain Division of an
Auxiliary gave a dance not long since. I went and looked on. What did they dance? Two-step, two-step
and two-step. How did they dance? When we used to waltz, we clasped arms easily, took a nice,
respectable position, and danced in a poetry of motion. Now, girls, how do you two-step? In nine
cases out of ten the dear girl reposes her head on the young man's shoulder, or else their faces
press each other. He presses her to his breast as closely as possible, and actually carries her
around. Disgraceful? I should say so. Do you wonder at the ministers preaching on dancing as a sin,
when it looks like this to a woman like myself who believes in dancing and has danced all her life?
Mothers, as you love your girls, forbid them to dance after this manner. [letter in the ladies'
section of Locomotive Engineers' Monthly Journal, March 1898]   <hr />   To the Two Step may be
accredited, serious injury to the Waltz, awkward and immodest positions assumed in round dancing,
also as being a prominent factor in overcrowding the profession and causing a general depression in
the business of the legitimate Master of Dancing. [The Director, March 1898]


two-time (v.)

to deceive, cheat, betray, 1924, perhaps from notion of to have two at a time. An earlier reference
(1922) in a Kentucky criminal case involves a double-cross or betrayal without a romance angle.
Related: two-timing (adj.); two-timer.


twofer (n.)

1911 (originally in reference to cigars), from two for (a quarter); see two + for.


twofold (adj.)

Old English tweofeald; see two + -fold.


Tyburn

place of public execution for Middlesex from c.1200 to 1783; it stood at the junction of modern
Oxford Street, Bayswater Road and Edgware Road.


Tyche

goddess of fortune, Latinized form of Greek Tykhe, literally fortune.


tycoon (n.)

1857, title given by foreigners to the shogun of Japan (said to have been used by his supporters
when addressing foreigners, as an attempt to convey that the shogun was more important than the
emperor), from Japanese taikun great lord or prince, from Chinese tai great + kiun lord. Transferred
meaning important person is attested from 1861, in reference to U.S. president Abraham Lincoln (in
the diary of his secretary, John Hay); specific application to wealthy and powerful businessman is
post-World War I.


tyke (n.)

late 14c., cur, mongrel, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tik bitch, from Proto-Germanic
*tikk- (cognates: Middle Low German tike). Also applied in Middle English to a low-bred or lazy man.
The meaning child is from 1902, though the word was used in playful reproof from 1894. As a nickname
for a Yorkshireman, from c.1700; Perhaps originally opprobrious; but now accepted and owned [OED].


Tylenol (n.)

introduced 1955 as the name of an elixir for children, trade name originally registered by McNeil
Laboratories, Philadelphia, Pa., from elements abstracted from N-acetyl-para-aminophenol, the
chemical name of its active compound.


Tyler

surname, 12c., literally tile-maker.


tympanic (adj.)

1808, from tympanum + -ic.


tympanist (n.)

1610s, one who plays on a drum, from Latin tympanista, from Greek tympanistes, from tympanizein,
from tympanon (see tympanum). Since mid-19c. specifically of players on kettledrums.


tympanum (n.)

drum of the ear, 1610s, from Medieval Latin tympanum, introduced in this sense by Italian anatomist
Gabriello Fallopio (1523-1562), from Latin tympanum a drum, timbrel, tambourine, from Greek tympanon
a kettledrum, from root of typtein to beat, strike (see type (n.)). Compare Old English timpan drum,
timbrel, tambourine, from Latin tympanum. The modern meaning a drum is attested in English from
1670s.


type (n.)

late 15c., symbol, emblem, from Latin typus figure, image, form, kind, from Greek typos a blow,
dent, impression, mark, effect of a blow; figure in relief, image, statue; anything wrought of metal
or stone; general form, character; outline, sketch, from root of typtein to strike, beat, from PIE
*tup-, variant of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Extended 1713
to printing blocks with letters carved on them in relief. The meaning general form or character of
some kind, class is attested in English from 1843, though it had that sense in Latin and Greek. To
be (someone's) type be the sort of person that person is attracted to is recorded from 1934.


type (v.)

to write with a typewriter, 1888; see type (n.). Earlier it meant to symbolize, typify (1836) and to
foreshadow (1590s). Related: Typed; typing.


type-setting (n.)

1824, from type (n.) in the printing sense + verbal noun from set (v.).


typecast (v.)

also type-cast, with reference to actors, 1937 (implied in typecasting), from type (n.) in the
general character sense (perhaps a deliberate pun on the verbal phrase in the printing sense to
found types in molds, attested from 1847). See type (n.) + cast (v.).


typeface (n.)

also type-face, top of a type, 1852, from type (n.) in the printing sense + face (n.).


typesetter (n.)

also type-setter, compositor, 1800, from type (n.) in the printing sense + setter.


typewriter (n.)

in the mechanical sense, 1868, from type (n.) + writer. Related: Type-write (v.) print by means of a
typewriter; type-written (1882).


typhoid (adj.)

1800, literally resembling typhus, from typhus + -oid. The noun is from 1861, a shortened form of
typhoid fever (1845), so called because it originally was thought to be a variety of typhus. Typhoid
Mary (1909) was Mary Mallon (d.1938), a typhoid carrier who worked as a cook and became notorious
after it was learned she unwittingly had infected hundreds in U.S.


Typhon

giant in Greek mythology; see typhoon.


typhoon (n.)

Tiphon violent storm, whirlwind, tornado, 1550s, from Greek typhon whirlwind, personified as a
giant, father of the winds, perhaps from typhein to smoke (see typhus), but according to Watkins
from PIE *dheub- deep, hollow, via notion of monster from the depths. The meaning cyclone, violent
hurricane of India or the China Seas is first recorded 1588 in Thomas Hickock's translation of an
account in Italian of a voyage to the East Indies by Caesar Frederick, a merchant of Venice:
concerning which Touffon ye are to vnderstand, that in the East Indies often times, there are not
stormes as in other countreys; but euery 10. or 12. yeeres there are such tempests and stormes, that
it is a thing incredible, but to those that haue seene it, neither do they know certainly what yeere
they wil come. [The voyage and trauell of M. Caesar Fredericke, Marchant of Venice, into the East
India, and beyond the Indies]    This sense of the word, in reference to titanic storms in the East
Indies, first appears in Europe in Portuguese in the mid-16th century. It aparently is from tufan, a
word in Arabic, Persian, and Hindi meaning big cyclonic storm. Yule [Hobson-Jobson, London, 1903]
writes that the probability is that Vasco [da Gama] and his followers got the tufao ... direct from
the Arab pilots.    The Arabic word sometimes is said to be from Greek typhon, but other sources
consider it purely Semitic, though the Greek word might have influenced the form of the word in
English. Al-tufan occurs several times in the Koran for a flood or storm and also for Noah's Flood.
Chinese (Cantonese) tai fung a great wind also might have influenced the form or sense of the word
in English, and that term and the Indian one may have had some mutual influence; toofan still means
big storm in India.


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


typical (adj.)

c.1600, symbolic, emblematic, from Medieval Latin typicalis symbolic, from Late Latin typicus of or
pertaining to a type, from Greek typikos, from typos impression (see type (n.)). Sense of
characteristic is first recorded 1850. Related: Typically.


typify (v.)

1630s, to represent by a symbol, from Late Latin typus (see type (n.)) + -fy. Meaning serve as a
typical specimen of some class, etc. is attested from 1854. Related: Typified; typifying.


typist (n.)

1843, compositor, from type (n.) + -ist. Meaning person who operates a typewriter is from 1884.


typo (n.)

1816, compositor, short for typographer; 1892 as short for typographical error.


typographer (n.)

printer, 1640s, from typography + -er (1).


typographic (adj.)

1778, of or pertaining to the art of printing from types, from Medieval Latin typographicus (16c.),
from typographus, from Greek typos (see type (n.)) + graphos writing, from graphein to write (see
-graphy).


typographical (adj.)

pertaining to typography, 1590s, from typography + -ical. Related: Typographically.


typography (n.)

art of composing types and printing from them, 1640s, from French typographie, from Medieval Latin
typographia, from Greek typos (see type (n.)) + -grapheia writing, from graphein to write (see
-graphy).


typology (n.)

doctrine of symbols, 1845, from Greek typos (see type (n.)) + -logy. Related: Typological;
typologically.


tyrannical (adj.)

1530s, from Latin tyrannicus arbitrary, despotic, from Greek tyrannikos befitting a despot, from
tyrannos (see tyrant) + -al (1). Tyrannic was used in this sense from late 15c. Related:
Tyrannically.


tyrannize (v.)

rule despotically or cruelly; rule tyrannically, late 15c., from Middle French tyranniser (14c.),
from tyrannie (see tyranny). Greek tyrannizein meant to take the part of tyrants in politics.
Related: Tyrannized; tyrannizing.


tyrannosaurus (n.)

carnivorous Cretaceous bipedal dinosaur, 1905, Modern Latin genus name, coined by H.F. Osborn
(published 1906 in Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History XXI, p.259) from comb. form of
Greek tyrannos tyrant (see tyrant) + -saurus. Abbreviated name T. rex attested by 1970 (apparently
first as the band name).


tyrannous (adj.)

of tyrannical character, late 15c., from Latin tyrannus (see tyrant) + -ous.


tyranny (n.)

late 14c., cruel or unjust use of power; the government of a tyrant, from Old French tyranie (13c.),
from Late Latin tyrannia tyranny, from Greek tyrannia rule of a tyrant, absolute power, from
tyrannos master (see tyrant).


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


tyre (n.)

variant spelling of tire (n.), chiefly British English.


Tyrian (adj.)

1510s, from Latin Tyrius of Tyre, (Latin Tyrus), island-city in the Levant, from Greek Tyros, from
Hebrew/Phoenician tzor, literally rock, rocky place. Especially in reference to Tyrian purple, a dye
chemically similar to indigo, made there in ancient times from certain mollusks (Murex brandaris).


tyro (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin tyro, variant of Latin tiro (plural tirones) young soldier, recruit,
beginner, of unknown origin.


Tyrol

German Tirol, ultimately from Celtic tir land (see Tyrone). Related: Tyrolean.


Tyrone

Irish county, from Irish Tir Eoghain Eoghan's Land, from Eoghan Owen, ancestor of the O'Neills, who
owned land here. Tir also forms the final syllable in Leinster, Munster, Ulster.


tyrosine (n.)

white, crystalline amino acid, 1857, coined 1846 by German chemist Justus von Liebig (1803-1873),
who had first obtained it a year before from the products of a fusion of old cheese and potash, from
Greek tyros cheese (from PIE *tu-ro-, from *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh) on the notion of a
swelling, coagulating) + chemical suffix -ine (2).


Tyrrhenian (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to the Etruscans, from Latin Tyrrheni, from Greek Tyrrenoi Tyrrhenians, from
tyrsis tower, walled city (cognate with Latin turris tower). Earlier Tyrrhene (late 14c.).


