-ular

see -ule + -ar.


-ule

word-forming element meaning small, little (in capsule, module, etc.), from French -ule, from Latin
diminutive suffix -ulus (fem. -ula, neuter -ulum) from PIE *-(o)lo-, from *-lo-, secondary suffix
forming diminutives. Also the first element in native diminutive suffix -ling.


-ulent

word-forming element meaning full of, abounding in, from Latin adjective suffix -ulentus full of.


-ure

suffix forming abstract nouns of action, from Old French -ure, from Latin -ura, an ending of fem.
nouns denoting employment or result.


U

for historical evolution, see V. Used punningly for you by 1588 [Love's Labour's Lost, V.i.60], not
long after the pronunciation shift that made the vowel a homonym of the pronoun. As a simple
shorthand (without intentional word-play), it is recorded from 1862. Common in business
abbreviations since 1923 (such as U-Haul, attested from 1951).


U-bahn (n.)

German or Austrian subway system, 1938 (originally in reference to Berlin), from German U-bahn,
short for Untergrund-bahn, literally underground railway.


U-boat (n.)

1916 (said to have been in use from 1913), partial translation of German U-Boot, short for
Unterseeboot, literally undersea boat.


U-turn (n.)

1934, from U + turn (n.). So called in reference to the shape of the path described.


U.K.

abbreviation of United Kingdom, attested from 1883.


U.N.

abbreviation of United Nations, attested from 1946.


ubeity (n.)

whereness, 1670s, from Modern Latin ubietas, from Latin ubi where (see ubi).


ubi

place, location, position, 1610s, common in English c.1640-1740, from Latin ubi where?, in which
place, in what place, relative pronomial adverb of place, ultimately from PIE *kwo-bhi- (cognates:
Sanskrit kuha, Old Church Slavonic kude where), locative case of pronomial base *kwo- (see who). Ubi
sunt, literally where are (1914), in reference to lamentations for the mutability of things is from
a phrase used in certain Medieval Latin Christian works.


ubiquitous (adj.)

being, existing, or turning up everywhere, 1800, from ubiquity + -ous. The earlier word was
ubiquitary (c.1600), from Modern Latin ubiquitarius, from ubique (see ubiquity). Related:
Ubiquitously; ubiquitousness.


ubiquity (n.)

omnipresence, 1570s, from Modern Latin ubiquitas, from Latin ubique everywhere, from ubi where (see
ubi) + que any, also, and, ever, as a suffix giving universal meaning to the word it is attached to,
from PIE root *kwe and. Originally a Lutheran theological position maintaining the omnipresence of
Christ.


udder (n.)

Old English udder milk gland of a cow, goat, etc., from Proto-Germanic *udr- (cognates: Old Frisian
uder, Middle Dutch uyder, Dutch uijer, Old High German utar, German Euter, and, with unexplained
change of consonant, Old Norse jugr), from PIE *eue-dh-r udder (cognates: Sanskrit udhar, Greek
outhar, Latin uber udder, breast).


UFO (n.)

1953, abbreviation of Unidentified Flying Object, which is attested from 1950.


ufology (n.)

1959, from UFO + -logy.


ug (v.)

early 13c., to inspire fear or loathing; mid-14c. to feel fear or loathing, from Old Norse ugga to
fear, dread (see ugly). Related: Ugging.


Uganda

from Swahili u land, country + Ganda, indigenous people name, of unknown origin. Related: Ugandan.


Ugaritic

1936, pertaining to Ugarit, ancient city of northern Syria, and especially to the Semitic language
first discovered there 1929 by Claude Schaeffer, from Ugarit, which probably is ultimately from
Sumerian ugaru field.


ugh

1765, imitative of the sound of a cough; as an interjection of disgust, recorded from 1822.


uglification (n.)

1820 (Shelley), noun of action from uglify.


uglify (v.)

1570s; see ugly + -fy. Related: uglified; uglifying.


ugliness (n.)

repulsiveness of appearance, late 14c., from ugly + -ness.


ugly (adj.)

mid-13c., uglike frightful or horrible in appearance, from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse
uggligr dreadful, fearful, from uggr fear, apprehension, dread (perhaps related to agg strife, hate)
+ -ligr -like (see -ly (1)). Meaning softened to very unpleasant to look at late 14c. Extended sense
of morally offensive is attested from c.1300; that of ill-tempered is from 1680s.    Among words for
this concept, ugly is unusual in being formed from a root for fear, dread. More common is a compound
meaning ill-shaped (such as Greek dyseides, Latin deformis, Irish dochrud, Sanskrit ku-rupa).
Another Germanic group has a root sense of hate, sorrow (see loath). Ugly duckling (1877) is from
the story by Hans Christian Andersen, first translated from Danish to English 1846. Ugly American
U.S. citizen who behaves offensively abroad is first recorded 1958 as a book title.


uh

inarticulate sound, attested from c.1600; uh-huh, spoken affirmative (often ironic or non-committal)
is recorded from 1904; negative uh-uh is attested from 1924.


UHF

1937, abbreviation of ultra-high frequency (1932) in reference to radio frequencies in the range of
300 to 3,000 megahertz.


uhlan (n.)

type of cavalryman, 1753, from German Uhlan, from Polish u&#322;an a lancer, from Turkish oghlan a
youth. For sense evolution, compare infantry.


uilleann

in uilleann pipe, from Irish uilleann elbow, from Old Irish uilenn, from PIE *ol-ena-, from root
*el- (1) elbow, forearm (see ell (n.1)).


ukase (n.)

decree issued by a Russian emperor, 1729, from Russian ukaz edict, back-formation from from ukazat'
to show, decree, to order, from Old Church Slavonic ukazati, from u- away, perhaps here an intensive
prefix, from PIE *au- (2) off, away + kazati to show, order, from Slavic *kaz- (related to the first
element of Casimir), from PIE root *kwek- to appear, show.


uke (n.)

short for ukulele, by 1915.


Ukraine

from Russian or Polish Ukraina, literally border, frontier, from u- at + krai edge. So called from
being regarded as the southern frontier of Poland or Russia. Related: Ukrainian.


ukulele (n.)

1896, from Hawaiian 'ukulele, literally leaping flea, from 'uku louse, flea + lele to fly, jump,
leap. Noted earlier in English as the Hawaiian word for flea. The instrument so called from the
rapid motion of the fingers in playing it. It developed from a Portuguese instrument introduced to
the islands c.1879.


ulcer (n.)

c.1400, from Old French ulcere, from Vulgar Latin ulcerem, from Latin ulcus (genitive ulceris)
ulcer, a sore, figuratively painful subject, from PIE *elk-es- wound (cognates: Greek elkos a wound,
sore, ulcer, Sanskrit Related: arsah hemorrhoids).


ulceration (n.)

c.1400, from Latin ulcerationem (nominative ulceratio), noun of action from past participle stem of
ulcerare to make sore, from stem of ulcus (see ulcer).


ulcerous (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin ulcerosus full of sores, from stem of ulcus (see ulcer).


ulema (n.)

scholars of Muslim religious law, 1680s, from Arabic 'ulema learned men, scholars, plural of 'alim
learned, from 'alama to know.


ullage (n.)

amount by which a cask or bottle falls short of being full, late 15c., from Anglo-French ulliage
(early 14c.), Anglo-Latin oliagium (late 13c.), Old French ouillage, from ouiller to fill up (a
barrel) to the bung, literally to fill to the eye, from ueil eye (perhaps used colloquially for
bung), from Latin oculus (see eye (n.)).


ulna (n.)

inner bone of the forearm, 1540s, medical Latin, from Latin ulna the elbow, also a measure of
length, from PIE *el-ina-, extended form of root *el- (1) elbow, forearm (see ell (n.1)). Related:
Ulnar.


Ulrich

masc. proper name, German, from Old High German Uodalrich, literally of a rich home, from uodal
home, nobility (related to Old English &aelig;&eth;ele noble, Old Norse o&eth;al home).


Ulster

northernmost of the four provinces of Ireland, 14c., from Anglo-French Ulvestre (early 13c.), Anglo-
Latin Ulvestera (c.1200), corresponding to Old Norse Ulfastir, probably from Irish Ulaidh men of
Ulster + suffix also found in Leinster, Munster, and perhaps representing Irish tir land.


ult.

see ultimo.


ulterior (adj.)

1640s, on the other side of, from Latin ulterior more distant, more remote, farther, on the farther
side, comparative of *ulter beyond (see ultra-). The sense not at present in view or consideration
(as in ulterior motives) is attested from 1735.


ultimate (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin ultimatus, past participle of ultimare to be final, come to an end, from
Latin ultimus (fem. ultima) last, final, farthest, most distant, extreme, superlative of *ulter
beyond (see ultra-). As a noun from 1680s. Ultimate Frisbee is attested by 1972.


ultimatum (n.)

final demand, 1731, from Modern Latin, from Medieval Latin ultimatum a final statement, noun use of
Latin adjective ultimatum last possible, final, neuter of ultimatus (see ultimate). The Latin plural
ultimata was used by the Romans as a noun, what is farthest or most remote; the last, the end. In
slang c.1820s, ultimatum was used for the buttocks.


ultimo (adv.)

in the month preceding the present, 1610s, common in abbreviated form ult. in 18c.-19c.
correspondence and newspapers, from Latin ultimo (mense) of last (month), ablative singular masc. of
ultimus last (see ultimate). Earlier it was used in the sense of on the last day of the month
specified (1580s). Contrasted with proximo in the next (month), from Latin proximo (mense).


ultra vires

Latin, literally beyond powers, from ultra (see ultra-) + vires strength, force, vigor, power,
plural of vis. Usually beyond the legal or constitutional power of a court, etc.


ultra-

word-forming element meaning beyond (ultraviolet) or extremely (ultramodern), from Latin ultra- from
ultra (adv. and prep.) beyond, on the other side, on the farther side, past, over, across, from PIE
*ol-tero-, suffixed form of root *al- (1) beyond (see alias (adv.)). In common use from early 19c.,
it appears to have arisen from French political designations. As its own word, a noun meaning
extremist of various stripes, it is first recorded 1817, from French ultra, shortening of ultra-
royaliste extreme royalist.


ultra-conservative (adj.)

1828, from ultra- + conservative (adj.).


ultralight (adj.)

1959, from ultra- + light (adj.1). As a noun meaning ultralight aircraft it is recorded by 1979.


ultramarine (n.)

1590s, blue pigment made from lapis lazuli, from Medieval Latin ultramarinus, literally beyond the
sea, from ultra- beyond + marinus of the sea (see marine (adj.)). Said to be so called because the
mineral was imported from Asia.


ultramontane (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French ultramontain beyond the mountains (especially the Alps), from Old French
(early 14c.), from Latin ultra beyond (see ultra-) + stem of mons (see mount (n.)). Used especially
of papal authority, though connotation varies according to the position of the speaker or writer.
[Weekley]


ultranationalism (n.)

also ultra-nationalism, 1845, from ultra- + nationalism. Related: Ultranationalist


ultrasonic (adj.)

having frequency beyond the audible range, 1923, from ultra- + sonic. For sense, see supersonic.


ultrasonography (n.)

1960, from ultra- + sonography (see sonogram).


ultrasound (adj.)

1911, from ultra- + sound (n.1). Compare ultrasonic. In reference to ultrasonic techniques of
detection or diagnosis it is recorded from 1958.


ultraviolet (adj.)

beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum, 1840, from ultra- + violet. Ultra-red (1870) was a
former name for what now is called infra-red.


ululate (v.)

1620s, back-formation from ululation, or else from Latin ululatus, past participle of ululare.
Related: Ululated; ululating.


ululation (n.)

1590s, from Latin ululationem (nominative ululatio) a howling or wailing, noun of action from past
participle stem of ululare to howl, yell, shriek, wail, lament loudly, from a reduplicated imitative
root (cognates: Greek ololyzein to cry aloud, Sanskrit ululih a howling, Lithuanian uluti howl,
Gaelic uileliugh wail of lamentation, Old English ule owl).


Ulysses

Latin name for Odysseus, from Latin Ulysses, Ulixes. Famous for wandering as well as craftiness and
ability at deceit. For -d- to -l- alteration, see lachrymose.


um

a sound denoting hesitation, 1670s.


Umayyad

member of a Muslim dynasty which ruled the Caliphate 661-750 C.E. and in 756 C.E. founded an emirate
in Spain, 1758, from Arabic, from Umayya, proper name of an ancestor of Muhammad from whom the
dynasty claimed descent.


umbel (n.)

1590s in botany, from Latin umbella parasol, sunshade, diminutive of umbra (see umbrage).


umber (n.)

brown earthy pigment, 1560s, from Middle French ombre (in terre d'ombre), or Italian ombra (in terra
di ombra), both from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage) or else from Umbra, fem. of Umber
belonging to Umbria, region in central Italy from which the coloring matter first came (compare
Sienna). Burnt umber, specially prepared and redder in color, is attested from c.1650, distinguished
from raw umber.


umbilical (adj.)

pertaining to the navel, 1540s, from Medieval Latin umbilicalis of the navel, from Latin umbilicus
navel (see umbilicus). Umbilical cord attested by 1753 (the native term is navel string).


umbilicus (n.)

navel, 1610s, from Latin umbilicus the navel, also the center of anything, from PIE *ombh-alo-,
suffixed variant form of root *(o)nobh- navel (see navel). In English, mostly confined to medical
writing. Latin umbilicus is source of Spanish ombligo as well as Old French lombril, literally the
navel, from l'ombril, which by dissimilation became Modern French nombril (12c.).


umbles (n.)

edible inner parts of a deer or other animal, c.1400, see humble.


umbo (n.)

boss of a shield, 1921, from Latin umbo shield-boss, knob, projection.


umbra (n.)

1590s, phantom, ghost, a figurative use from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage). Astronomical
sense of shadow cast by the earth or moon during an eclipse is first recorded 1670s. Meaning an
uninvited guest accompanying an invited one is from 1690s in English, from a secondary sense among
the Romans. Related: Umbral.


umbrage (n.)

early 15c., shadow, shade, from Middle French ombrage shade, shadow, from noun use of Latin
umbraticum of or pertaining to shade; being in retirement, neuter of umbraticus of or pertaining to
shade, from umbra shade, shadow, from PIE root *andho- blind, dark (cognates: Sanskrit andha-,
Avestan anda- blind, dark). Many figurative uses in 17c.; main remaining one is the meaning
suspicion that one has been slighted, first recorded 1610s; hence phrase to take umbrage at,
attested from 1670s.


umbrageous (adj.)

shady, 1580s, from French ombrageux, from Old French umbrageus, from umbre shade, from Latin umbra
(see umbrage).


umbrella (n.)

hand-held portable canopy which opens and folds, c.1600, first attested in Donne's letters, from
Italian ombrello, from Late Latin umbrella, altered (by influence of umbra) from Latin umbella
sunshade, parasol, diminutive of umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage).    A sunshade in the
Mediterranean, a shelter from the rain in England; in late 17c. usage, usually as an Oriental or
African symbol of dignity. Said to have been used by women in England from c.1700; the use of rain-
umbrellas carried by men there traditionally is dated to c.1750, first by Jonas Hathaway, noted
traveler and philanthropist. Figurative sense of authority, unifying quality (usually in a phrase
such as under the umbrella of) is recorded from 1948.


Umbrian

c.1600, noun and adjective, in reference to Umbria, ancient region of central Italy, or its people
or the Italic language they spoke.


umiak (n.)

large Eskimo boat, c.1743, from Eskimo umiaq an open skin boat. Said by 18c.-19c. sources to be a
woman's boat, as opposed to the kayak, which was worked exclusively by men.


umlaut (n.)

1852, from German umlaut change of sound, from um about (see ambi-) + laut sound, from Old High
German hlut (see listen). Coined 1774 by poet Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock (1724-1803) but first
used in its current sense modification of vowels 1819 by linguist Jakob Grimm (1785-1863).


umma (n.)

the Islamic community, founded by Muhammad and bound to one another by religious ties and
obligations, 1855, from Arabic 'umma people, community, nation.


ump (n.)

short for umpire (n.), by 1915, American English.


umpire (n.)

mid-14c., noumper, from Old French nonper odd number, not even, in reference to a third person to
arbitrate between two, from non not (see non-) + per equal, from Latin par (see par). Initial -n-
lost by mid-15c. due to faulty separation of a noumpere, heard as an oumpere. Originally legal, the
gaming sense first recorded 1714 (in wrestling).


umpire (v.)

1610s, from umpire (n.). Related: Umpired; umpiring.


umpteen (adj.)

1917, World War I army slang, from umpty + -teen. Related: Umpteenth.


umpty

1905, of an indefinite number, originally Morse code slang for dash, influenced by association with
numerals such as twenty, thirty, etc.


un- (1)

prefix of negation, Old English un-, from Proto-Germanic *un- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old
High German, German un-, Gothic un-, Dutch on-), from PIE *n- (source of Sanskrit a-, an- not, Greek
a-, an-, Old Irish an-, Latin in-), comb. form of PIE root *ne not (cognates: Avestan na, Old Church
Slavonic and Lithuanian ne not, Latin ne that not, Greek ne- not, Old Irish ni, Cornish ny not).
Often euphemistic (such as untruth for lie).     The most prolific of English prefixes, freely and
widely used in Old English, where it forms more than 1,000 compounds. It underwent a mass extinction
in early Middle English, but emerged with renewed vigor 16c. to form compounds with native and
imported words. It disputes with Latin-derived cognate in- (1) the right to form the negation of
certain words (indigestable/undigestable, etc.), and though both might be deployed in cooperation to
indicate shades of meaning (unfamous/infamous), typically they are not.    It also makes words from
phrases (such as uncalled-for, c.1600; undreamed-of, 1630s; uncome-at-able, 1690s; unputdownable,
1947, of a book; un-in-one-breath-utterable, Ben Jonson; etc., but the habit is not restricted to
un-; such as put-up-able-with, 1812). As a prefix in telegramese to replace not and save the cost of
a word, it is attested by 1936.


un- (2)

prefix of reversal, deprivation, or removal (as in unhand, undo, unbutton), Old English on-, un-,
from Proto-Germanic *andi- (cognates: Old Saxon ant-, Old Norse and-, Dutch ont-, Old High German
ant-, German ant-, Gothic and- against), from PIE *anti facing opposite, near, in front of, before,
against (see ante).    More or less confused with un- (1) through similarity in the notions of
negation and reversal; an adjective such as unlocked might represent not locked (un- (1)) or the
past tense of unlock (un- (2)).


un-American (adj.)

not characteristic of American principles or methods, foreign to U.S. customs, 1818, from un- (1)
not + American (adj.).    Everything is un-American that tends either to government by a plutocracy
or government by a mob. [Theodore Roosevelt, 1917]


un-British (adj.)

1746, from un- (1) not + British.


un-English (adj.)

lacking in qualities regarded as typically English, 1630s, from un- (1) not + English (adj.).


unabashed (adj.)

1570s, from un- (1) not + past participle of abash (v.). Related: Unabashedly.


unabated (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of abate (v.).


unable (adj.)

late 14c., lacking in ability, incapable, from un- (1) not + able (adj.). Modeled on Old French
inhabile or Latin inhabilis.


unabridged (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of abridge (v.). Since 19c. chiefly in reference to
literary works.


unaccented (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of accent (v.).


unacceptable (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + acceptable. Related: Unacceptably.


unaccompanied (adj.)

1540s, not in the company of others, having no companions, from un- (1) not + past participle of
accompany (v.). Musical sense without instrumental accompaniment is first recorded 1818.


unaccomplished (adj.)

1520s, not finished, from un- (1) not + past participle of accomplish (v.). Meaning not furnished
with social or intellectual accomplishments is from 1729 (see accomplished).


unaccountable (adj.)

1640s, inexplicable, from un- (1) not + accountable. Meaning not liable to be called to account is
recorded from 1640s. Related: Unaccountably; unaccountability; unaccountableness.


unaccredited (adj.)

1828, from un- (1) not + accredited.


unaccustomed (adj.)

1520s, not customary, unfamiliar, from un- (1) not + past participle of accustom (v.). Meaning not
accustomed or habituated (to) is first attested 1610s (see accustomed).


unacknowledged (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of acknowledge (v.).


unacquainted (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + past participle of acquaint (v.).


unadorned (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + past participle of adorn (v.).


unadulterated (adj.)

1719, from un- (1) not + past participle of adulterate (v.).


unadvertised (adj.)

mid-15c., uninformed, unadvised, from un- (1) + advertised. Sense of not announced or made known is
from 1864.


unaffected (adj.)

1580s, not influenced, untouched in mind or feeling, from un- (1) not + past participle of affect
(v.). Meaning not adopted or assumed, genuine is recorded from 1590s; that of not acted upon or
altered (by something) is first attested 1830. Related: Unaffectedly; unaffectedness.


unafraid (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + afraid.


unaided (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + past participle of aid (v.).


unalienable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + alienable. Related: Unalienably.


unalloyed (adj.)

1670s (figurative); 1760s (literal), from un- (1) not + past participle of alloy (v.).


unalterable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + alterable. Related: Unalterably.    He reach'd a middle height, and at the
stars,      Which are the brain of heaven, he look'd, and sank.        Around the ancient track
march'd, rank on rank,    The army of unalterable law.    [George Meredith, Lucifer in Starlight]


unaltered (adj.)

1550s, from un- (1) not + past participle of alter (v.).


unambiguous (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + ambiguous. Related: Unambiguously; unambiguousness.


unanimity (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French unanimite (14c.), from Late Latin unanimitatem (nominative unanimitas)
unanimity, concord, from unanimus (see unanimous).


unanimous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin unanimus of one mind, in union, from unus one (see one) + animus mind (see
animus). Related: Unanimously.


unannounced (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of announce (v.).


unanswerable (adj.)

1610s, admitting of no answer, from un- (1) not + answerable.


unanswered (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of answer (v.).


unanticipated (adj.)

1741, from un- (1) not + past participle of anticipate (v.).


unapologetic (adj.)

1834, from un- (1) not + apologetic. Related: Unapologetically.


unappeasable (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + appeasable. Related: Unappeasably.    Desolate winds that cry over the
wandering sea;  Desolate winds that hover in the flaming West;  Desolate winds that beat the doors
of Heaven, and beat  The doors of Hell and blow there many a whimpering ghost;  O heart the winds
have shaken, the unappeasable host  Is comelier than candles at Mother Mary's feet.    [W.B. Yeats,
The Unappeasable Host, 1899]


unappreciated (adj.)

1809, from un- (1) not + past participle of appreciate (v.).


unappreciative (adj.)

1834, from un- (1) not + appreciative. Related: Unappreciatively; unappreciativeness.


unapprehended (adj.)

1590s, not understood; 1610s, not taken or arrested, from un- (1) not + past participle of apprehend
(v.).


unapproachable (adj.)

1580s, of places, from un- (1) not + approachable. Of persons, distant, aloof, attested from 1848.
Related: Unapproachably.


unapproved (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of approve (v.).


unarmed (adj.)

c.1300, with armor removed, from un- (1) not + armed, or else past participle adjective from unarm
strip of armor (c.1300), from un- (2) opposite of + arm (v.). Meaning not fitted to attack,
weaponless is from late 14c.


unary (adj.)

1923, from Latin unus one (see one) on model of binary, etc.


unashamed (adj.)

c.1500, implied in unashamedness, from un- (1) not + ashamed. Related: Unashamedly.


unasked (adj.)

mid-13c., uninvited, from un- (1) not + past participle of ask (v.). Old English had ungeaxod.


unaspiring (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + present participle of aspire (v.).


unassailable (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + assailable (see assail (v.)). Related: Unassailably.


unassimilated (adj.)

1748, from un- (1) not + past participle of assimilate (v.).


unassisted (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of assist (v.). Related: Unassistedly.


unassuming (adj.)

unpretentious, modest, 1726, from un- (1) not + present participle of assume (v.). Related:
Unassumingly.


unattached (adj.)

late 15c., not arrested or seized, from un- (1) not + past participle of attach (v.). Meaning not
associated with any body or institution is recorded from 1796; sense of single, not engaged or
married is first attested 1874.


unattainable (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + attainable.


unattended (adj.)

c.1600, alone, unaccompanied, from un- (1) not + past participle of attend (v.). Meaning with no one
in attendance is from 1796.


unattested (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + past participle of attest (v.).


unattractive (adj.)

1729, from un- (1) not + attractive. Related: Unattractively; unattractiveness.


unauthorized (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of authorize (v.).


unavailability (n.)

1855, from un- (2) opposite of + availability, or else from unavailable + -ity.


unavailable (adj.)

1540s, ineffectual, from un- (1) not + available. Meaning incapable of being used is recorded from
1855. Unavailing has taken up the older sense of the word.


unavailing (adj.)

ineffectual, useless, 1660s, from un- (1) not + availing. Also see unavailable.


unavoidable (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + avoidable. Related: Unavoidably.


unaware (adj.)

1590a; see unawares.


unawares (adv.)

1530s, without being aware, from un- (1) not + aware + adverbial genitive -s. Meaning without being
noticed is recorded from 1660s. Form unaware is recorded from 1590s.


unbalance (v.)

1856, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + balance (v.).


unbalanced (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of balance (v.). Earliest use is in reference to the mind,
judgment, etc. Of material things, it is recorded from 1732.


unbar (v.)

late 14c., from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + bar (v.). Related: Unbarred; unbarring.


unbearable (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + bearable. Related: Unbearably. Old English had unberendlic.


unbeatable (adj.)

1897, from un- (1) not + beatable.


unbeaten (adj.)

late 13c., not beaten or struck, from un- (1) + beaten. In the sense of undefeated it is first
recorded 1757. Old English had ungebeaten unwrought, unstruck.


unbecoming (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + becoming fitting. Related: Unbecomingly.


unbefitting (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + befitting.


unbefriended (adj.)

from un- (1) not + past participle of befriend (v.).


unbegotten (adj.)

1530s, from un- (1) not + begotten.


unbegun (adj.)

Old English unbegunnen; see un- (1) not + begun.


unbeknown (adj.)

unknown, 1630s, from un- (1) not + beknown (see beknow).


unbeknownst (adj.)

1833, vulgar formation from unbeknown (1630s). No clear reason for the -st, but since 19c. this has
become the dominant form.


unbelief (n.)

mid-12c., absence or lack of religious belief; disbelief of the truth of the Gospel, from un- (1)
not or un- (2) opposite of + belief. Old English had ungeleafa in this sense.


unbelievable (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + believable. Related: Unbelievably.


unbeliever (n.)

one who does not believe in any given religion, 1520s, from un- (1) not believer. Old English had
ungelifend in this sense.


unbend (v.)

mid-13c., relax a bow by unstringing it, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + bend (v.). Intransitive
sense from 1746. Figurative meaning to become genial, relax (1748) has a sense opposite to that of
unbending inflexible, obstinate (1680s), which does not derive from the bow-stringing image.


unbeseeming (adj.)

1580s, not befitting, inappropriate, unsuitable, from un- (1) not + beseeming. A common 17c. word.


unbesought (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + besought.


unbias (v.)

to free from bias, 1708, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + bias (v.).    The truest service a
private man may hope to do his country is, by unbiassing his mind as much as possible. [Swift, The
Sentiments of a Church of England Man with respect to Religion and Government, 1708]


unbiased (adj.)

c.1600, literal, in reference to throws at bowls, from un- (1) not + biased. Figurative sense of
impartial, unprejudiced is recorded from 1640s.


unbidden (adj.)

Old English unbedene, not asked or invited, from un- (1) not + bidden. Similar formation in Middle
Dutch ongebeden, German ungebeten, Old Norse ube&eth;inn.


unbind (v.)

Old English unbindan, to free from binding, from un- (2) opposite of, reverse + bind (v.). Similar
formation in Old Frisian unbinda, German entbinden, Dutch ontbinden. Literal and figurative senses
both present in Old English.  Su&aelig; hu&aelig;t &eth;u unbindes ofer eor&eth;u bi&eth; unbunden
in heofnum. [Lindisfarne Gospels, Matt. xvi:19]   Unbound is from Old English unbunden, in literal
sense. Figurative sense first attested late 14c.; of books from 1540s.


unbleached (adj.)

1530s, from un- (1) not + past participle of bleach (v.).


unblemished (adj.)

c.1300, from un- (1) not + past participle of blemish (v.). Originally in moral sense; material
sense is attested from mid-15c.


unblown (adj.)

not yet bloomed, 1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of blow (v.2).    Life is the rose's hope
while yet unblown;  The reading of an ever-changing tale;  [Keats, Sleep and Poetry]


unborn (adj.)

Old English unboren not yet born; stillborn, from un- (1) not + born. Similar formation in Old
Frisian unbern, Dutch ongeboren, Old High German ungiporan, German ungeboren.


unbosom (v.)

disclose in confidence (secret opinions or feelings), 1580s, from un- (1) + bosom.


unbounded (adj.)

1590s, not limited in extent, from un- (1) not + past participle of bound (v.1). Sense of generous,
profuse, liberal is recorded from 1704. Related: Unboundedness.


unbowed (adj.)

late 14c., not bent, also figuratively not subdued, from un- (1) not + past participle of bow (v.).


unbreakable (adj.)

late 15c.; see un- (1) not + breakable.


unbridled (adj.)

late 14c., originally in figurative sense of unrestrained, ungoverned, from un- (1) not + bridled
(see bridle (v.)). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ongebreidelt. Literal sense of not fitted with
a bridle (of horses) is not recorded before 1550s. The verb unbridle (see un- (2)) is attested from
c.1400 in the literal sense; mid-15c. in the figurative sense.


unbroken (adj.)

c.1300, in reference to vows or compacts, from un- (1) not + broken. Attested from late 15c. in
reference to material things; 1510s in reference to courage, spirit, etc.; 1530s in reference to
horses; 1560s in reference to the flow of time. Old English had ungebrocen.


unbuckle (v.)

late 14c., from un- (2) reverse of + buckle (v.1). Related: Unbuckled; unbuckling.


unburden (v.)

1530s, to unload (transitive), from un- (2) reverse of + burden (v.). Similar formation in German
entb&uuml;rden. Reflexive sense is recorded from 1580s. Related: Unburdened; unburdening.


unburied (adj.)

Old English unbyrged unburied, from un- (1) not + past participle of bury (v.).


unbutton (v.)

early 14c., from un- (2) opposite of + button (v.). Related: Unbuttoned; unbuttoning.


uncalled (adj.)

c.1400, not summoned, from un- (1) not + past participle of call (v.). Similar formation in Swedish
okallad, Danish ukaldet. With for and sense of unnecessary, intrusive it is first attested 1610.


uncanny (adj.)

1590s, mischievous; 1773 in the sense of associated with the supernatural, originally Scottish and
northern English, from un- (1) not + canny.


uncap (v.)

1560s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + cap (v.). Related: Uncapped; uncapping.


uncaring (adj.)

1786, from un- (1) not + caring.


unceasing (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + present participle of cease (v.). Related: Unceasingly (mid-14c.).


uncensored (adj.)

1890, from un- (1) not + past participle of censor (v.).


unceremonious (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + ceremonious. Related: Unceremoniously.


uncertain (adj.)

c.1300, of indeterminate time or occurrence, from un- (1) not + certain (adj.). Meaning not fully
confident is recorded from late 14c. (implied in uncertainty). Related: Uncertainly.


uncertainty (n.)

late 14c., from uncertain + -ty.


unchain (v.)

1580s, from un- (2) opposite of + chain (v.). Figurative sense of to liberate is recorded from 1793.
Related: Unchained; unchaining.


unchallenged (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + past participle of challenge (v.).


unchangeable (adj.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) + changeable.


unchanged (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of change (v.).


unchanging (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + present participle of change (v.).


uncharacteristic (adj.)

1753, from un- (1) not + characteristic (adj.). Related: Uncharacteristically.


uncharitable (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + charitable (v.). Related: Uncharitably (late 14c.).


uncharted (adj.)

1804, from un- (1) not + past participle of chart (v.).


unchartered (adj.)

1805, from un- (1) not + past participle of charter (v.).


unchaste (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + chaste.


unchecked (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of check (v.).


unchivalrous (adj.)

1814, from un- (1) not + chivalrous. Related: Unchivalrously; unchivalric.


unchristian (adj.)

1550s, not professing Christianity (of persons), from un- (1) not + Christian (adj.). Meaning at
variance with Christian principles (of actions) is recorded from 1580s.


unchurched (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + churched committed or belonging to a church (see church (v.)). A verb,
unchurch to remove or exclude (someone) from membership in a church is recorded from 1610s.


uncial (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to an ounce, from Latin uncialis of an inch, of an ounce, from uncia a twelfth
part (see inch (n.1)). In reference to letters, it is attested from 1712, from Late Latin litterae
unciales (Jerome), probably meaning letters an inch high, from Latin uncialis of an inch, inch-high.
As a noun, an uncial letter, from 1775.


uncirculated (adj.)

1749, from un- (1) not + past participle of circulate (v.).


uncircumcised (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of circumcise (v.).


uncivil (adj.)

1550s, barbarous, from un- (1) not + civil (adj.). Meaning impolite is 1590s.


uncivilized (adj.)

c.1600, barbarous, from un- (1) not + past participle of civilize (v.). Uncivil in the same sense is
recorded from 1550s.


unclasp (v.)

1520s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + clasp (v.). Related: Unclasped; unclasping.


unclassified (adj.)

1813, from un- (1) not + past participle of classify.


uncle (n.)

late 13c., from Old French oncle, from Latin avunculus mother's brother (father's brother was
patruus), literally little grandfather, diminutive of avus grandfather, from PIE root *awo-
grandfather, adult male relative other than one's father (cognates: Armenian hav grandfather,
Lithuanian avynas maternal uncle, Old Church Slavonic uji uncle, Welsh ewythr uncle).    Replaced
Old English eam (usually maternal; paternal uncle was f&aelig;dera), which represents the Germanic
form of the root (cognates: Dutch oom, Old High German oheim maternal uncle, German Ohm uncle).
Also from French are German, Danish, Swedish onkel. As a familiar title of address to an old man,
attested by 1793; in the U.S. South, especially a kindly title for a worthy old negro [Century
Dictionary]. First record of Dutch uncle (and his blunt, stern, benevolent advice) is from 1838;
Welsh uncle (1747) was the male first cousin of one's parent. To say uncle as a sign of submission
in a fight is North American, attested from 1909, of uncertain signification.


Uncle Sam (n.)

symbol of the United States of America, 1813, coined during the war with Britain as a contrast to
John Bull, and no doubt suggested by the initials U.S. in abbreviations. [L]ater statements
connecting it with different government officials of the name of Samuel appear to be unfounded
[OED]. The common figure of Uncle Sam began to appear in political cartoons c.1850. Only gradually
superseded earlier Brother Jonathan (1776), largely through the popularization of the figure by
cartoonist Thomas Nast. British in World War I sometimes called U.S. soldiers Sammies.


Uncle Tom (n.)

servile black man, 1922, somewhat inaccurately in reference to the humble, pious, but strong-willed
main character in Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852). The image implied in the
insult perhaps is more traceable to the late 19c. minstel show versions of the story, which reached
a far wider audience than the book.    I don't recall anyone in the 1920s using the term 'Uncle Tom'
as an epithet. But what's amazing is how fast it caught on (in the 1930s). Black scholars picked up
(the term) and just started throwing it at each other. [Ernest Allen, quoted in Hamilton, Kendra,
The Strange Career of Uncle Tom, Black Issues in Higher Education, June 2002]    As a verb, attested
from 1937.


unclean (adj.)

Old English uncl&aelig;ne, morally impure, defiled, unfit for food, from un- (1) not + clean (adj.).
Literal sense of dirty is recorded from mid-13c.


uncleanly (adj.)

Old English uncl&aelig;nlic; see un- (1) not + cleanly (adj.). Related: Uncleanliness.


uncleanness (n.)

Old English uncl&aelig;nnes; see unclean + -ness.


unclear (adj.)

c.1300, not easy to understand, from un- (1) not + clear (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch
onclaer, Dutch onklaar, German unklar, Old Norse uklarr, Danish uklar, Swedish oklar. Of persons, in
sense of uncertain, doubtful, it is recorded from 1670s.


uncleared (adj.)

1630s in reference to debts, 1772 in reference to land; from un- (1) not + past participle of clear
(v.).


unclog (v.)

c.1600, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + clog (v.). Related: Unclogged; unclogging.


unclothe (v.)

c.1300, unclo&thorn;e (transitive), from un- (2) opposite of + clothe (v.). Reflexive sense is
attested from late 14c. Related: Unclothed; unclothing.


unclouded (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of cloud (v.).


uncoil (v.)

1713 (transitive), from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + coil (v.). Related: Uncoiled; uncoiling.


uncollectable (adj.)

see uncollectible.


uncollected (adj.)

1730, of things, from un- (1) not + past participle of collect (v.).


uncollectible (adj.)

1819, from un- (1) not + collectible. Form uncollectable is attested by 1796.


uncolored (adj.)

also uncoloured, 1530s, from un- (1) not + past participle of color (v.). As a verb, from uncolor is
recorded from early 15c.


uncomely (adj.)

c.1200, improper, unseemly, indecent, from un- (1) not + comely. Related: Uncomeliness.


uncomfortable (adj.)

early 15c. causing bodily or mental discomfort, affording no comfort, from un- (1) not + comfortable
(adj.). Intransitive meaning feeling discomfort, ill-at-ease is attested from 1796. Related:
Uncomfortably.


uncommitted (adj.)

late 14c., not delegated, from un- (1) not + committed. Meaning not pledged to any particular course
or party is attested from 1814.


uncommon (adj.)

1540s, not possessed in common, from un- (1) not + common (adj.). Meaning not commonly occurring,
unusual, rare is recorded from 1610s. Related: Uncommonly.


uncommunicative (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + communicative.


uncomparable (adj.)

late 14c., incomparable, from un- (1) not + comparable. Meaning unable to be compared (to something
else) is from 1826. Related: Uncomparably.


uncompassionate (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + compassionate (adj.).


uncompensated (adj.)

1774, not compensated by any good, from un- (1) not + past participle of compensate (v.). Meaning
not recompensed is attested from 1830.


uncomplaining (adj.)

1744, from un- (1) not + past participle of complain (v.).


uncomplicated (adj.)

1724, from un- (1) not + complicated.


uncompounded (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of compound (v.).


uncomprehending (adj.)

1795, from un- (1) not + present participle of comprehend (v.). Related: Uncomprehendingly.


uncomprehensible (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + comprehensible. The usual word is incomprehensible.


uncompromised (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of compromise (v.).


uncompromising (adj.)

1799, from un- (1) not + present participle of compromise (v.). Related: Uncompromisingly.


unconcerned (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + past participle of concern (v.). Related: Unconcernedly.


unconditional (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + conditional (adj.). Related: Unconditionally. Unconditional surrender in
the military sense is attested from 1730; in U.S., often associated with Civil War Gen. Ulysses S.
Grant and the taking of Fort Donelson.    The ringing phrase of Grant's latest despatch circulated
through the North like some coinage fresh from the mint, and Unconditional Surrender, which suited
the initials of his modest signature, became like a baptismal name. [James Schouler, History of the
United States of America, Dodd, Mead &amp; Co., 1899].


unconditioned (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + past participle of condition (v.).


unconfined (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of confine (v.).


unconfirmed (adj.)

1560s, not having received the rite of confirmation, from un- (1) not + confirmed. Meaning not
supported by further evidence is attested from 1670s.


unconformable (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of conformable (v.).


unconformity (n.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + conformity. Geological sense is from 1829.


uncongenial (adj.)

1749, from un- (1) not + congenial (adj.).


unconnected (adj.)

1736, from un- (1) not + past participle of connect (v.).


unconquerable (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + conquer + -able.


unconscionable (adj.)

1560s, showing no regard for conscience, from un- (1) + now rare conscionable conscientious.
Related: Unconscionably.


unconscious (adj.)

1712, unaware, not marked by conscious thought, from un- (1) not + conscious. Meaning temporarily
insensible, knocked out is recorded from 1860. Related: Unconsciously; unconsciousness. In
psychology, the noun the unconscious (1876) is a loan-translation of German das Unbewusste. The
adjective in this sense is recorded from 1912.


unconstitutional (adj.)

1734, from un- (1) not + constitutional (adj.). Related: Unconstitutionally.


unconstrained (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of constrain (v.). Related: Unconstrainedly.


uncontested (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + contested.


uncontrollable (adj.)

1570s, irrefutable, from un- (1) not + controllable. From 1590s as not subject to authority; meaning
that cannot be restrained is from 1640s. Related: Uncontrollably.


uncontrolled (adj.)

1510s, from un- (1) not + past participle of control (v.).


uncontroverted (adj.)

not liable to be called into question, 1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of controvert (v.).


unconventional (adj.)

1832, from un- (1) not + conventional (adj.). A 19 cent. epithet for a certain type of affectation.
[Weekley] Related: Unconventionally.


unconventionality (n.)

1849, with reference to Shelley, from unconventional + -ity.


unconverted (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of convert (v.).


unconvinced (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + past participle of convince (v.). Unconvincing is recorded from 1650s.


uncool (adj.)

1953, in hipster slang, from un- (1) not + slang sense of cool (adj.).


uncooperative (adj.)

also unco&ouml;perative, 1847, from un- + cooperative (adj.). Related: Uncooperatively.


uncoordinated

1801, from un- (1) not + past participle of coordinate (v.).


uncorrupted (adj.)

c.1400, of organic matter, not putrefied, from un- (1) not + past participle of corrupt (v.). From
1560s of persons, not influenced by bribes.


uncorruptible (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + corruptible (adj.).


uncountable (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + count (v.) + -able.


uncounted (adj.)

c.1500, from un- (1) not + past participle of count (v.).


uncouple (v.)

c.1300, from un- (2) opposite of + couple (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ontcoppelen.
Related: Uncoupled; uncoupling.


uncouth (adj.)

Old English uncu&eth; unknown, strange, unusual; uncertain, unfamiliar; unfriendly, unkind, rough,
from un- (1) not + cu&eth; known, well-known, past participle of cunnan to know (see can (v.1)).
Meaning strange, crude, clumsy is first recorded 1510s. The compound (and the thing it describes)
widespread in IE languages, such as Latin ignorantem, Old Norse uku&eth;r, Gothic unkun&thorn;s,
Sanskrit ajnatah, Armenian ancanaut', Greek agnotos, Old Irish ingnad unknown.


uncover (v.)

early 14c., from un- (2) reverse of + cover (v.). Earliest use is figurative; literal sense is
attested from late 14c. Related: Uncovered; uncovering.


uncredited (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of credit (v.).


uncritical (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + critical. Similar formation in Dutch onkritisch, German unkritisch, Danish
unkritisk. Related: Uncritically.


unction (n.)

act of anointing as a religious rite, late 14c., from Latin unctionem (nominative unctio) anointing,
from unctus, past participle of ungere to anoint (see unguent).


unctious (adj.)

common variant of unctuous c.1600-1725.


unctuous (adj.)

late 14c., oily, having a greasy or soapy feeling when touched, from Old French unctueus, from
Medieval Latin unctuosus greasy, from Latin unctus act of anointing, from past participle stem of
unguere to anoint (see unguent).    Figurative sense of blandly ingratiating is first recorded 1742,
perhaps in part with a literal sense, but in part a sarcastic usage from unction in the meaning deep
spiritual feeling (1690s), such as comes from having been anointed in the rite of unction. Related:
Unctuously; unctuousness.


uncultivated (adj.)

1640s (figurative); 1680s (of plants); 1690s (of land), from un- (1) not + past participle of
cultivate (v.).


uncurbed (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of curb (v.).


uncurious (adj.)

1560s, not inquisitive, from un- (1) not + curious (adj.). From 1680s as not odd or strange.


uncurl (v.)

1580s, intransitive; 1590s, transitive, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + curl (v.).


uncut (adj.)

early 15c., not gashed or wounded, from un- (1) not + past participle of cut (v.). Of books, not
having the leaves slit open it is recorded from 1828; of plays, etc., without excisions, it is
attested from 1896.


undated (adj.)

left without indication of date, 1560s, from un- (1) not + past participle of date (v.1) assign a
date to. Compare similarly formed German undatirt, Dutch ongedateerd, Swedish odaterad.


undaunted (adj.)

mid-15c., with reference to horses, untamed, not broken in, from un- (1) not + past participle of
daunt (v.). In reference to persons, intrepid, it is recorded from 1580s.


undaunting (adj.)

1786, not quailing [OED], from un- (1) not + present participle of daunt (v.).


undead (adj.)

neither dead nor alive, c.1400, from un- (1) not + dead. As a noun meaning vampires and such, from
1904. Old English undeadlic (adv.) meant immortal, for all eternity.


undeceive (v.)

to free from deception, 1590s, from un- (2) opposite of + deceive (v.).


undeceived (adj.)

c.1400, reliable, accurate, certain, from un- (1) not + past participle of deceive (v.).


undecennial (adj.)

occurring every 11 years, 1858, in reference to solar activity cycle, from Latin undecim eleven +
ending from biennial, etc.


undecided (adj.)

1530s, not decided, unsettled, from un- (1) not + past participle of decide (v.).


undecipherable (adj.)

1758, from un- (1) not + decipherable (see decipher (v.)).


undecisive (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + decisive. The usual word is indecisive.


undefeated (adj.)

1701, from un- (1) not + past participle of defeat (v.).


undefended (adj.)

1560s, not defended, unprotected, from un- (1) not + past participle of defend (v.). Attested
earlier in a now-obsolete sense of unforbidden (late 14c.).


undefiled (adj.)

c.1300, undefylde, from un- (1) not + past participle of defile (v.). Originally of morals; sexual
sense is attested from mid-15c. Physical sense of not made dirty is from 1580s.


undefined (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of define (v.).


undelivered (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of deliver (v.).


undemanding (adj.)

1879, from un- (1) not + demanding (adj.).


undemonstrative (adj.)

1826, not characterized by outward expression of feelings, from un- (1) not + demonstrative (adj.).


undeniable (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + deny + -able. In 19c., often with a sense of undeniably good. Related:
Undeniably.


under (prep., adv.)

Old English under (prep.) beneath, among, before, in the presence of, in subjection to, under the
rule of, by means of, also, as an adverb, beneath, below, underneath, expressing position with
reference to that which is above, from Proto-Germanic *under- (cognates: Old Frisian under, Dutch
onder, Old High German untar, German unter, Old Norse undir, Gothic undar), from PIE *ndher- under
(cognates: Sanskrit adhah below; Avestan athara- lower; Latin infernus lower, infra below).
Productive as a prefix in Old English, as in German and Scandinavian (often forming words modeled on
Latin ones in sub-). Notion of inferior in rank, position, etc. was present in Old English. With
reference to standards, less than in age, price, value, etc., late 14c. As an adjective, lower in
position; lower in rank or degree from 13c. Also used in Old English as a preposition meaning
between, among, as still in under these circumstances, etc. (though this may be an entirely separate
root; see understand).   Under the weather indisposed is from 1810. Under the table is from 1921 in
the sense of very drunk, 1940s in sense of illegal. To get something under (one's) belt is from
1954; to keep something under (one's) hat secret is from 1885; to have something under (one's) nose
in plain sight is from 1540s; to speak under (one's) breath in a low voice is attested from 1832. To
be under (someone's) thumb entirely controlled (by that person) is recorded from 1754.


under-achiever (n.)

also underachiever, 1953, from under + agent noun from achieve (v.). Under-achievement is recorded
from 1951.


under-employed (adj.)

1908, not used to optimum capacity, originally in reference to working persons, from under + past
participle of employ (v.).


under-employment (n.)

also underemployment, 1909, from under + employment.


underage (adj.)

also under-age, 1590s, from under + age (n.).


underarm (adj.)

1816, underhand (in reference to a style of throwing), from under + arm (n.1). First attested 1908
in dressmaking sense of seams on the lower half of the arm-hole; as a euphemism for armpit, it is
attested from 1930s, popularized by advertisers.


underbelly (n.)

c.1600, from under + belly (n.). In figurative sense of most vulnerable part it is recorded from
Churchill's 1942 speech. Sometimes used erroneously or euphemistically in sense of seamy or sordid
part of anything.


underbid (v.)

1610s, from under + bid (v.). Related: Underbidding.


underbred (adj.)

of inferior breeding, vulgar, 1640s, from under + past participle of breed (v.). Of animals, not
pure bred, attested from 1890.


underbrush (n.)

shrub and small trees in a forest, 1775, from under + brush (n.2). Originally American English;
compare undergrowth, attested in the same sense from 1600.


undercarriage (n.)

1794, from under + carriage (n.). Meaning landing gear of an aircraft is recorded from 1911.


undercharge (v.)

1630s, from under + charge (v.).


underclass (n.)

subordinate social class, 1894, from under (adj.) + class (n.). A loan-translation of Swedish
underklass.


underclassman (n.)

sophomore or freshman, 1869, American English, from under (adj.) + class (n.) in the school form
sense + man (n.).


undercover (adj.)

1854, sheltered, from under + cover (n.). Sense of operating secretly attested from 1920.


undercroft (n.)

crypt of a church; underground vault, late 14c., from under + croft.


undercurrent (n.)

1660s, stream of water or air flowing beneath the surface or beneath another current, a hybrid
formed from under + current (n.). The figurative sense of suppressed or underlying character is
attested from 1817.


undercut (v.)

late 14c., to cut down or off, from under + cut (v.). In the commercial sense of sell at lower
prices (or work at lower wages) it is first attested 1884. Figurative sense of render unstable,
undermine is recorded from 1955, from earlier literal meaning cut so as to leave the upper portion
larger than the lower (1874).


underdeveloped (adj.)

1892, in photography, from under + past participle of develop (v.). In reference to countries or
regions, recorded from 1949.


underdog (n.)

the beaten dog in a fight, 1887, from under + dog (n.). Compare top dog dominant person in a
situation or hierarchy (see top (adj.)).    I'm a poor underdog  But tonight I will bark  With the
great Overdog  That romps through the dark.   [from Canis Major, Robert Frost, 1928]


underdone (adj.)

1680s, in reference to cooked meat, from under + done. Old English underdon (v.), Middle English
underdo meant to put under, to subject, subjugate.


underdressed (adj.)

also under-dressed, too plainly dressed, 1759, from under (adv.) + past participle of dress (v.).


underestimate (v.)

1812, to estimate at too low an amount, from under + estimate (v.). Meaning to rank too low,
undervalue is recorded from 1850. Related: Underestimated; underestimating.


underexposed (adj.)

1861, in photography, from under + past participle of expose (v.).


underfeed (v.)

1650s, from under + feed (v.). Related: Underfed; underfeeding.


underfoot (adv.)

c.1200, underfot under the feet, from under + foot (n.). Compare similarly formed Middle Dutch
ondervoete. As an adjective, attested from 1590s; in reference to persons, continually in the way,
it is recorded from 1891.


undergarment (n.)

1520s, from under + garment (n.).


undergird (v.)

1520s, from under + gird (v.). Related: Undergirded; undergirding.


undergo (v.)

Old English undergan obtain, get; undertake, from under + gan (see go (v.)). Compare similarly
formed Middle Dutch ondergaen, Old High German untarkun, German untergehen, Danish undergaa. Sense
of submit to, endure is attested from c.1300. Meaning to pass through (an alteration, etc.) is
attested from 1630s. Related: Undergone; underwent.


undergrad (n.)

short for undergraduate, 1827.


undergraduate (n.)

1620s, a hybrid formed from under + graduate (n.). British used fem. form undergraduette in 1920s-
30s. As an adjective, in the school sense, from 1680s.


underground (adv.)

1570s, below the surface, from under + ground (n.). As an adjective, attested from c.1600;
figurative sense of hidden, secret is attested from 1630s; adjectival meaning subculture is from
1953, from adjectival use in reference to World War II resistance movements against German
occupation, on analogy of the dominant culture and the Nazis. Noun sense of underground railway is
from 1887 (shortened from phrase underground railway, itself attested from 1834).


Underground Railroad (n.)

network of U.S. anti-slavery activists helping runaways elude capture, attested from 1847, but said
to date from 1831 and to have been coined in jest by bewildered trackers after their slaves vanished
without a trace. Originally mostly the term for escape networks in the (then) western states of the
U.S.


undergrowth (n.)

shrubs or small trees growing amid larger ones, c.1600, from under + growth.


underhand (adv.)

mid-14c., by secret means, stealthily, in a surreptitious manner, from under + hand (n.). Perhaps
the notion is of the hand turned over (thus concealing what it holds). Compare Middle Dutch
onderhanden by degrees, slowly, Dutch onderhandsch secret, private. The adjective is attested from
1540s. Old English under hand meant in subjection, in (one's) control or power.


underhanded (adj.)

in reference to a throw, etc., performed or done with the knuckles turned under, 1807, from under +
hand (n.). Compare underhand. As in secret, from 1825; as with too few people, from 1834. Related:
Underhandedly; underhandedness.


underlay (v.)

Old English under lecgan to support by placing something beneath; see under + lay (v.). Related:
Underlaid; underlaying. Compare similarly formed Old High German Related: untarleccan, German
unterlegen.


underlie (v.)

Old English under licgan to be subordinate to, to submit to; see under + lie (v.2). Meaning to lie
under or beneath is attested from c.1600; figurative sense of to be the basis of is attested from
1852 (implied in underlying). Similar formation in Old High German untarliggan; German unterliegen.


underline (v.)

1721, to mark underneath or below with a line, from under + line (v.). Similar formation in Dutch
onderlijnen. Related: Underlined; underlining. The noun is attested from 1888.


underling (n.)

late Old English, one who owes allegiance to a sovereign or ruler, from under + diminutive suffix
-ling.


underlying (adj.)

1610s, present participle adjective from underlie.


undermine (v.)

c.1300, undermyne, render unstable by digging at the foundation, from under + mine (v.). The
figurative sense injure by invisible, secret, or dishonorable means is attested from early 15c.
Similar formation in Dutch ondermijnen, Danish underminere, German unterminiren. The Old English
verb was underdelfan. Related: Undermined; undermining.


undern (n.)

an obsolete Old English and Middle English word for morning; in Old English originally third hour of
the day; 9 a.m. (corresponding to tierce). Hence underngeweorc, undernmete breakfast. Common
Germanic: Old Frisian unden, Old Saxon undorn, Middle Dutch onderen, Old High German untarn, Old
Norse undorn; of uncertain origin. By extension, period from 9 a.m. to noon; but from 13c. shifting
to midday, noon (as in undern-mete lunch, 14c.); and by late 15c. to late afternoon or early
evening.


underneath (adv.)

Old English underneo&eth;an, from under + neo&eth;an below (see beneath).


undernourished (adj.)

also under-nourished, 1820, from under + past participle of nourish (v.).


underpants (n.)

1931, from under + pants. Drove out drawers, knickers in this sense.


underpass (n.)

1904, American English, from under + pass (n.).


underpay (v.)

1817, from under + pay (v.). Related: underpaid (1762); underpaying.


underpin (v.)

support or prop, 1520s (figurative); 1530s (literal), from under + pin (v.). Related: Underpinned;
underpinning.


underpinning (n.)

late 15c., action of supporting or strengthening from beneath, from under + present participle of
pin (v.). Figurative sense of prop, support is recorded from 1580s.


underprivileged (adj.)

1896, from under + past participle of privilege (v.). Noun use (short for underprivileged persons)
is attested from 1935.


underrate (v.)

also under-rate, 1640s, to esteem at too little worth, from under + rate (v.). Related: Underrated;
underrating.


underscore (v.)

1771, to draw a line under, from under + score (v.). The figurative sense of to emphasize is
attested from 1891. Noun meaning a line drawn below (something) is recorded from 1901.


undersea (adj.)

1610s, from under + sea.


underserve (v.)

to serve insufficiently, 1710, from under + serve (v.). Related: Underserved; underserving.


undershirt (n.)

1640s, from under (adj.) + shirt (n.). Similar formation in North Frisian onnersj&uuml;rt, Danish
underskjorte. Old English had undersyrc (see sark (n.)).


undershoot (v.)

1660s, to shoot too low, from under + shoot (v.). In reference to aircraft or pilots, recorded from
1918. Undershot as a type of water wheel is recorded from c.1600.


underside (n.)

1680s, from under (adj.) + side (n.). Similar formation in Dutch onderzijde, Danish underside,
German unterseite.


undersign (v.)

1570s, from under + sign (v.). Related: Undersigned; undersigning.


understand (v.)

Old English understandan comprehend, grasp the idea of, probably literally stand in the midst of,
from under + standan to stand (see stand (v.)). If this is the meaning, the under is not the usual
word meaning beneath, but from Old English under, from PIE *nter- between, among (cognates: Sanskrit
antar among, between, Latin inter between, among, Greek entera intestines; see inter-). Related:
Understood; understanding   That is the suggestion in Barnhart, but other sources regard the among,
between, before, in the presence of sense of Old English prefix and preposition under as other
meanings of the same word. Among seems to be the sense in many Old English compounds that resemble
understand, such as underniman to receive, undersecan examine, investigate, scrutinize (literally
underseek), under&eth;encan consider, change one's mind, underginnan to begin. It also seems to be
the sense still in expressions such as under such circumstances.    Perhaps the ultimate sense is be
close to; compare Greek epistamai I know how, I know, literally I stand upon. Similar formations are
found in Old Frisian (understonda), Middle Danish (understande), while other Germanic languages use
compounds meaning stand before (German verstehen, represented in Old English by forstanden). For
this concept, most Indo-European languages use figurative extensions of compounds that literally
mean put together, or separate, or take, grasp (see comprehend). Old English oferstandan, Middle
English overstonden, literally over-stand seem to have been used only in literal senses. For to
stand under in a physical sense, Old English had undergestandan.


understandable (adj.)

late 14c., able to understand; late 15c., able to be understood, from understand + -able. Related:
Understandably.


understanding (n.)

Old English understanding comprehension, verbal noun from understand (v.). Meaning mutual agreement
is attested from 1803.


understate (v.)

1781, from under + state (v.). Related: Understated; understating.


understated (adj.)

1939, of clothing, fashions, writing, etc., figurative use of the past participle of understate
(v.).


understatement (n.)

1799, from under + statement.


understory (n.)

in reference to forest vegetation, also under-story, 1902, from under + story (n.).


understudy (v.)

also under-study, 1852, in the theatrical sense memorize a part so as to be capable of performing on
short notice it in the absence of the one to which it is assigned, from under + study (v.). The noun
is attested from 1848, translating Italian supplimento.


undertake (v.)

c.1200, to entrap; c.1300, to set about (to do), from under + take (v.). Similar formation in French
entreprendre to undertake, from entre between, among + prendre to take. The under in this word may
be the same one that also may form the first element of understand. Old English had underniman to
trap, accept (cognate with Dutch ondernemen, German unternehmen).


undertaker (n.)

c.1400, a contractor or projecter of any sort, agent noun from undertake (v.). The specialized sense
(1690s) emerged from funeral-undertaker.


undertaking (n.)

enterprise, early 15c., verbal noun from undertake (v.). An Old English word for this was
underfangenes.


undertone (n.)

1762, low or subdued tone, from under + tone (n.). Figurative sense of undercurrent of feelings,
etc., is attested from 1861.


undertow (n.)

1798, from under + tow (n.).


underutilize (v.)

also under-utilize, 1949, from under + utilize. Related: Underutilized; underutilizing.


undervalue (v.)

1590s, to rate as inferior in value (to), from under + value (v.). Sense of to estimate or esteem
too low is recorded from 1610s. Meaning to rate at too low a monetary value is attested from 1620s.
Related: Undervalued; undervaluing.


underwater (adj.)

1620s, from under + water (n.1). Of mortgages from 2008.


underway (adv.)

1749, of ships, having begun to move, from under + way (n.). In reference to projects, activities,
etc., it is attested from 1935.


underwear (n.)

undergarments, 1872, from under + wear (n.). So called because they are worn under one's clothing.


underweight (adj.)

1899, from under- + weight.


underwhelm (v.)

1953 (implied in underwhelming), a facetious play on overwhelm, with under. Related: Underwhelmed;
underwhelmingly.


underworld (n.)

c.1600, the lower world, Hades, place of departed souls, also the earth, the world below the skies,
as distinguished from heaven. Similar formation in German unterwelt, Dutch onderwereld, Danish
underverden. Meaning lower level of society is first recorded 1890; criminals and organized crime
collectively is attested from 1900.


underwrite (v.)

Old English underwritan write at the foot of; subscribe; see under + write (v.). A loan-translation
of Latin subscribere (see subscribe). Used literally at first; modern sense of to accept the risk of
insurance (1620s) is from notion of signing a marine insurance policy. Meaning to support by a
guarantee of money is recorded from 1890.


underwriter (n.)

1610s, subscriber, agent noun from underwrite (v.). Insurance sense is from 1620s.


undeserved (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of deserve (v.). Related: Undeservedly.


undeserving (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + present participle of deserve (v.).


undesirable (adj.)

1660s, not to be desired, objectionable, from un- (1) not + desirable. The noun meaning undesirable
person or thing is first attested 1883. Undesired not asked or invited is recorded from late 15c.


undetectable (adj.)

1789, from un- (1) not + detectable (see detect (v.)).


undetected (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of detect (v.).


undetermined (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of determine (v.).


undeterred (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of deter (v.).


undeveloped (adj.)

1736, from un- (1) not + past participle of develop (v.). In reference to film, it is attested from
1939.


undeviating (adj.)

1732, from un- (1) not + present participle of deviate.


undeviating (adj.)

1732, from un- (1) not + present participle of deviate (v.).


undies (n.)

1906, diminutive euphemistic abbreviation for women's underwear (or undergarments).


undifferentiated (adj.)

1862, from un- (1) not + past participle of differentiate (v.).


undigested (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + past participle of digest (v.). Figurative sense is recorded from c.1600.


undignified (adj.)

1680s, of clergy, not holding a position of dignity, from un- (1) not + dignified. Meaning lacking
in dignity of manner is attested from 1782.


undiluted (adj.)

1756, from un- (1) not + past participle of dilute (v.).


undiminished (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of diminish (v.).


undine (n.)

female water spirit, 1821, from Modern Latin Undina (1650s), coined by Paracelsus (De Nymphis) in
his alchemical system, from Latin unda a wave, billow (see water (n.1)). Popularized by German
romance Undine, eine Erz&auml;hlung (1811) by Baron F.H.C. La Motte Fouqu&eacute;. Undinism (1928)
was coined by sex researcher Havelock Ellis to describe the fetish for urine (which Ellis had);
nowadays it would be called urophilia.


undisciplined (adj.)

late 14c., untrained, from un- (1) not + past participle of discipline (v.). Similar formation in
German undisciplinirt, Swedish odisciplinerad. Specific meaning not subject to military discipline
is attested from 1718.


undisclosed (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + past participle of disclose (v.).


undiscovered (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + past participle of discover (v.).


undisguised (adj.)

c.1500, in reference to things, from un- (1) not + past participle of disguise (v.). Of persons,
attested from 1670s.


undismayed (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of dismay (v.).


undisputable (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + disputable (see dispute (v.)). The usual word is indisputable. Related:
Undisputably.


undisputed (adj.)

1560s, not argued with, from un- (1) not + past participle of dispute (v.). Meaning not called into
question is attested from 1620s.


undistinguishable

1580s, from un- (1) â&euro;&oelig;notâ&euro;? + distinguishable.


undistinguished (adj.)

1590s, not kept distinct, from un- (1) not + distinguished. Meaning not elevated above others is
attested from c.1600.


undisturbed (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of disturb (v.).


undivided (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of divide (v.).


undivulged (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of divulge (v.).


undo (v.)

Old English undon to unfasten and open (a window or door), to unfasten by releasing from a fixed
position; to cancel, discharge, abrogate, reverse what has been done, put back in a former
condition; bring to ruin, destroy, from un- (2) opposite of + do (v.). Related: Undone; undoing.


undocumented (adj.)

1883, from un- (1) not + past participle of document (v.).


undomesticated (adj.)

1834, from un- (1) not + past participle of domesticate (v.). Undomestic not caring for home life is
recorded from 1754.


undone (adj.)

not accomplished, c.1300, from un- (1) not + done. The same word meaning destroyed is recorded from
mid-14c., past participle adjective from undo.


undoubtable (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + doubt (v.) + -able. Related: Undoubtably.


undoubted (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of doubt (v.). Related: Undoubtedly.


undreamed (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of dream (v.).


undress (v.)

1590s, to shed one's clothing, from un- (2) opposite of + dress (v.). Transitive sense of to strip
off (someone's) clothing is recorded from 1610s. Related: Undressed; undressing.


undress (n.)

state of partial or incomplete dress, 1680s, from undress (v.). Meaning ordinary dress is from 1748.


undressed (adj.)

naked (or nearly so), 1610s, past participle adjective from undress (v.).


undue (adj.)

late 14c., not owing or payable; unjustly demanded, also not appropriate, unseasonable, also
excessive, from un- (1) not + past participle of due (v.). Formed on model of Old French indeu,
Latin indebitus.


undulant (adj.)

1830, from Latin undulantem (nominative undulans), from unda wave (see water (n.1)).


undulate (v.)

to move in waves, 1660s, back-formation from undulation. Related: undulated, undulating.


undulation (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin *undulatio, from Late Latin undulatus wavy, undulated, from undula
wavelet, diminutive of Latin unda wave (see water (n.1)).


unduly (adv.)

late 14c., without due moderation; improperly, unsuitably; see undue + -ly (2). From early 15c. as
unjustly, wrongfully.


undying (adj.)

c.1300, immortal, from un- (1) not + present participle of die (v.). Figurative sense, of feelings,
etc., is recorded from c.1765.


une (v.)

to unite, c.1400, from Latin unire, from unus one (see one).


unearned (adj.)

c.1200, from un- (1) not + past participle of earn (v.). Unearned income is recorded from 1889.


unearth (v.)

to dig up, mid-15c., from un- (2) opposite of + earth (v.) bury (a corpse) in the ground (c.1400,
from earth (n.)). Related: Unearthed; unearthing.


unearthly (adj.)

1610s, heavenly, sublime, from un- (1) not + earthly. Sense of ghostly, weird first recorded 1802.
Related: Unearthliness.


uneasy (adj.)

late 13c., not comforting, causing trouble, from un- (1) not + easy (adj.). Meaning disturbed in
mind is attested from 1670s. Related: Uneasily; uneasiness.


uneducated (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of educate (v.).


unemancipated (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of emancipate (v.).


unemotional (adj.)

1819, from un- (1) not + emotional (adj.). Related: Unemotionally.


unemployed (adj.)

1600, at leisure, not occupied, from un- (1) not + past participle of employ (v.). Meaning
temporarily out of work is from 1660s. The noun meaning unemployed persons collectively is from
1782.    No man has hired us   With pocketed hands   And lowered faces   We stand about in open
places   And shiver in unlit rooms ...     [T.S. Eliot, Choruses from the Rock]


unemployment (n.)

1887, from un- (1) not + employment.


unencumbered (adj.)

1722, from un- (1) not + past participle of encumber (v.).


unending (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + present participle of end (v.).


unendurable (adj.)

1620s, from un- (1) not + endurable. Related: Unendurably.


unenlightened (adj.)

1660s, not lit up, from un- (1) not + past participle of enlighten (v.). Meaning not mentally
illuminated is attested from 1650s.


unenthusiastic (adj.)

1805, from un- (1) not + enthusiastic (adj.). Related: Unenthusiastically.


unenviable (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + enviable (adj.). Related: Unenviably.


unequal (adj.)

1530s, unjust, unfair, from un- (1) not + equal (adj.). Meaning not the same in amount, size,
quality, etc. is recorded from 1560s (inequal in this sense is from late 14c.). Sense of inadequate,
insufficient (to some task) is attested from 1690s. Related: Unequally.


unequivocal (adj.)

1784, from un- (1) not + equivocal. Related: Unequivocally.


unerring (adj.)

1640s (implied in unerringly), from un- (1) not + verbal noun from err. Related: Unerringly.


UNESCO

acronym from United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which was created in
1945.


unethical (adj.)

1871, from un- (1) not + ethical. Related: Unethically.


uneven (adj.)

Old English unefen unequal, unlike, anomalous, irregular, from un- (1) not + even (adj.). Similar
formation in Old Frisian oniovn, Middle Dutch oneven, Old High German uneban, German uneben, Old
Norse ujafn. Meaning broken, rugged (in reference to terrain, etc.) is recorded from late 13c.
Related: Unevenly; unevenness.


uneventful (adj.)

1800, from un- (1) not + eventful. Related: Uneventfully.


unevitable (adj.)

from un- (1) not + evitable. The usual word is inevitable. Related: Unevitably.


unexamined (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of examine (v.).


unexceptionable (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + exceptionable.


unexceptional (adj.)

from un- (1) not + exceptional (adj.).


unexcusable (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + excusable. The usual word is inexcusable. Related: Unexcusably.


unexpected (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of expect (v.). Related: Unexpectedly.


unexperienced (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + past participle of experience (v.).


unexplainable (adj.)

1711, from un- (1) not + explain + -able. Related: Unexplainably.


unexplained (adj.)

1721, from un- (1) not + past participle of explain (v.).


unexplored (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + past participle of explore (v.).


unexpurgated (adj.)

1882, from un- (1) not + past participle of expurgate (v.).


unfading (adj.)

from un- (1) not + past participle of fade (v.).


unfailing (adj.)

late 14c., never coming to an end, unceasing, everlasting, inexhaustible, from un- (1) not + present
participle of fail (v.). Related: Unfailingly.


unfair (adj.)

Old English unf&aelig;gr unlovely, not beautiful, deformed, hideous, unlovable, from un- (1) not +
fair (adj.). Similar formation in Old Norse ufagr, Gothic unfagrs. Meaning wicked, evil, bad is
recorded from c.1300. Sense of not equitable, unjust is first recorded 1713. Related: Unfairly.


unfairness (n.)

Old English unf&aelig;gernes ugliness, disfigurement; see unfair + -ness.


unfaithful (adj.)

mid-14c., acting falsely, from un- (1) not + faithful. In Middle English it also had a sense of
infidel, unbelieving, irreligious (late 14c.). Sense of not faithful in marriage is attested from
1828. Related: Unfaithfully; unfaithfulness.


unfaltering (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + present participle of falter (v.). Related: Unfalteringly.


unfamiliar (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + familiar (adj.). Related: Unfamiliarly; unfamiliarity.


unfamous (adj.)

late 14c., not well known, obscure, from un- (1) not + famous (adj.). Also from late 14c. as notably
bad, a sense now in infamous.


unfashionable (adj.)

1560s, incapable of being shaped, from un- (1) not + fashionable. Meaning not in accordance with
prevailing fashion is attested from 1640s. Related: Unfashionably.


unfasten (v.)

early 13c., from un- (2) opposite of + fasten. Old English had unf&aelig;stnian to unfasten.
Related: Unfastened; unfastening.


unfathomable (adj.)

1610s, originally in the figurative sense, of feelings, conditions, etc., from un- (1) not +
fathomable. Literal sense attested from 1670s. Related: Unfathomably.


unfathomed (adj.)

1620s, from un- (1) not + past participle of fathom (v.).


unfavorable (adj.)

also unfavourable, mid-15c. (implied in unfavorably), from un- (1) not + favorable (adj.).    We
must not indulge in unfavorable views of mankind, since by doing it we make bad men believe that
they are no worse than others, and we teach the good that they are good in vain. [Walter Savage
Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


unfazed (adj.)

1933, American English, from un- (1) not + past participle of faze (v.).


unfeasible (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + feasible.


unfeeling (adj.)

late Old English had unfelende, having no sensation. Middle English had a verb unfeel be insensible,
fail to feel (early 14c.) as well as unfeelingness insensibility, loss of sensation, and unfeelingly
without understanding or direct knowledge (late 14c.), and a verbal noun unfeeling loss of
sensation, lack of feeling. However the word in its main modern meaning devoid of kindly or tender
feelings is from 1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of feel (v.). Related: Unfeelingly.


unfeigned (adj.)

late 14c., sincere, genuine, true, real, from un- (1) not + past participle of feign (v.).


unfelt (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of feel (v.).


unfetter (v.)

mid-14c., from un- (2) opposite of + fetter (v.). The figurative sense is recorded from late 14c.
Related: Unfettered; unfettering.


unfinished (adj.)

1550s, from un- (1) not + past participle of finish (v.).


unfit (adj.)

1540s, not suitable (in reference to things), from un- (1) not + fit (adj.). Related: Unfitness. In
reference to persons or human qualities, attested from 1550s.


unfit (v.)

to render unfit, 1610s, from unfit (adj.), or else from un- (2) reverse of + fit (v.). Related:
Unfitted; unfitting.


unflagging (adj.)

1715, from un- (1) not + present participle of flag (v.). Related: Unflaggingly.


unflappable (adj.)

1958, from un- (1) not + flap (v.) + -able. Originally used in reference to Harold Macmillan,
British P.M. 1957-63.


unflattering (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + gerundive of flatter. Related: Unflatteringly.


unfledged (adj.)

c.1600, of persons, immature, not experienced, from un- (1) not + past participle of fledge (v.).
Literal sense of not yet covered in feathers is recorded from 1610s.


unflinching (adj.)

1728, from un- (1) not + present participle adjective of flinch (v.). Related: Unflinchingly.


unfold (v.)

Old English unfealdan, to open or unwrap the folds of, also figuratively, to disclose, reveal,
explain, from un- (2) opposite of + fold (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ontvouden, German
entfalten. Intransitive sense is attested from late 14c. Related: Unfolded; unfolding.


unforced (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of force (v.).


unforeseeable (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + foreseeable (see foresee). Related: Unforeseeably.


unforeseen (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of foresee. Similar formation in Middle Dutch
onvoresien, Dutch onvoorzien, Middle High German unvorsen.


unforgettable (adj.)

1806, from un- (1) not + forgettable. Related: Unforgettably.


unforgivable (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + forgivable. In early use, especially with reference to the sin described
in Matt. xii:31. Related: Unforgivably.


unforgiven (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle adjective from forgive (v.). Old English had
unforgifen.


unforgiving (adj.)

1713, from un- (1) not + present participle adjective from forgive. Old English had unforgifende.


unforgotten (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + forgotten. Similar formation in German unvergessen.


unformed (adj.)

early 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle adjective from form (v.).


unfortunate (adj.)

mid-15c., unlucky, from un- (1) not + fortunate (adj.). Infortunate in same sense is from late 14c.
(along with a verb infortune to render unhappy). In late 18c.-early 19c., unfortunate woman was a
polite way to say prostitute. The noun meaning one who is not fortunate is recorded from 1630s.


unfortunately (adv.)

1540s, in an unfortunate manner, by ill-fortune, from unfortunate + -ly (2). The original meaning is
now rare; the main modern sense of sad to say, unhappily, unluckily, in parenthetical use, is
recorded from 1770s.


unfortune (n.)

misfortune, bad luck, early 15c., from un- (1) not + fortune (n.).


unfounded (adj.)

1640s, having no foundation or basis, from un- (1) not + past participle of found (v.1).


unfree (adj.)

c.1300, from un- (1) not + free (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch onvri, Old High German
unfri, German unfrei, Middle Danish ufri.


unfrequented (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of frequent (v.).


unfriend (v.)

in the Facebook sense, attested from November 2007, from un- (1) not + friend (v.). Unfriended is at
least as old as Shakespeare in the sense friendless. A noun unfriend enemy is recorded from late
13c., chiefly in Scottish, and was still in use in the 19th century.


unfriendly (adj.)

early 15c., not characteristic of friends, hostile, inimical, from un- (1) not + friendly. Similar
formation in Middle Dutch onvriendelijc, Middle High German unvriuntlich, German unfreundlich. Old
English had unferondlice unkindly. Related: Unfriendliness.


unfruitful (adj.)

late 14c., barren, from un- (1) not + fruitful. Originally literal; figurative sense is attested
from c.1400. Related: Unfruitfully; unfruitfulness.


unfulfilled (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of fulfill (v.).


unfunded (adj.)

1776, from un- (1) not + past participle of fund (v.).


unfunny (adj.)

1858, from un- (1) not + funny (adj.).


unfurl (v.)

1640s, from un- (2) opposite of + furl (v.). Related: unfurled, unfurling.


unfurnished (adj.)

1540s, not equipped, unprepared, from un- (1) not + past participle of furnish (v.). In reference to
houses, apartments, etc., not provided with furniture, it is recorded from 1580s.


ungainly (adj.)

1610s, unfit, improper, from Middle English ungeinliche, from ungein (late 14c.) inconvenient,
disagreeable, troublesome, from un- (1) not + gein kind, helpful; reliable; beneficial; suitable,
appropriate; convenient, from Old Norse gegn straight, direct, helpful, from Proto-Germanic *gagina
against (see again). Old English had ung&aelig;nge useless, vain.


ungentlemanly (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + gentlemanly.


ungird (v.)

Old English ongyrde, from un- (2) opposite of + gird (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch
ontgorden, Old High German ingurten, German entg&uuml;rten. Related: Ungirded; ungirding.


unglue (v.)

1540s, from un- (2) opposite of + glue (v.). Related: Unglued; ungluing. Unglued in figurative sense
is recorded from 1922.


ungodly (adj.)

late 14c., irreligious, not god-fearing, not in accordance with the laws of God, from un- (1) not +
godly (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ongodelijc, German ung&ouml;ttlich, Middle Swedish
ogudhlik. Colloquial sense of extremely annoying is recorded from 1887.


ungovernable (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + governable.


ungoverned (adj.)

from un- (1) not + past participle of govern (v.).


ungraceful (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + graceful. Related: ungracefully.


ungracious (adj.)

c.1200, ungrateful; early 14c., lacking God's grace; early 15c., rude, unmannerly, from un- (1) not
+ gracious (adj.). Related: Ungraciously.


ungrammatical (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + grammatical. Related: Ungrammatically.


ungrateful (adj.)

1550s, from un- (1) not + grateful. Related: Ungratefully.


ungual (adj.)

pertaining to a nail or claw, 1834, from Latin unguis a claw, nail of the finger or toe; cognate
with Greek onyx, Old English n&aelig;gel, Old Norse nagl nail; see nail (n.).


unguarded (adj.)

1590s, not furnished with a guard, from un- (1) not + guarded. Sense of not on one's guard, not
taking heed is attested from 1630s.


unguent (n.)

ointment, early 15c., from Latin unguentem ointment, from stem of unguere to anoint or smear with
ointment, from PIE root *ongw- to salve, anoint (cognates: Sanskrit anakti anoints, smears, Armenian
aucanem I anoint, Old Prussian anctan butter, Old High German ancho, German anke butter, Old Irish
imb, Welsh ymenyn butter).


unguided (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of guide (v.).


ungulate (adj.)

hoofed, 1802, from Late Latin ungulatus hoofed, from ungula hoof, claw, talon, diminutive (in form
but not sense) of unguis nail (see ungual). Ungulata, the order of hoofed mammals, is recorded from
1839.


unh-unh

sound expressing negation or denial, attested from 1951.


unhallowed (adj.)

not consecrated, Old English unhalgod, from un- (1) not + past participle of hallow (v.).


unhampered (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + past participle of hamper (v.).


unhand (v.)

c.1600, to release from one's grasp, from un- (2) opposite of + hand (v.).


unhappily (adv.)

late 14c., unfortunately, unluckily; early 15c., wretchedly, without happiness, from un- (i) not +
happily, or from unhappy + -ly (2.). Similar formation in Old Norse unheppiliga.


unhappiness (n.)

late 15c., misfortune, from unhappy + -ness. Meaning mental misery is from 1722.


unhappy (adj.)

c.1300, causing misfortune or trouble (to oneself or others), from un- (1) not + happy. Meaning
unfortunate, unlucky is recorded from late 14c.; sense of miserable, wretched is recorded from late
14c. (originally via misfortune or mishap).


unharmed (adj.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of harm (v.).


unharness (v.)

mid-15c., divest of armor, from un- (2) opposite of + harness (v.). Similar formation in Dutch
ontharnassen to disarm. Meaning to free (a horse) from harness is recorded from 1610s. Related:
Unharnessed; unharnessing.


unhealthy (adj.)

1590s, injurious to health, from un- (1) not + healthy (adj.). Earlier unhealthsome (1540s),
unhealthful (1570s). Of persons, sickly, it is attested from 1610s. Related: Unhealthily.


unheard (adj.)

c.1300 not detected by sense of hearing, from un- (1) not + past participle of hear. Meaning
unknown, new is attested from late 14c. (Old English had ungehered in this sense). Usually with of
since 1590s. Similar formation in Old Norse oheyr&eth;r, Danish uh&oslash;rt, Middle Dutch
ongehoort, Old High German ungehoret.


unheeded (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of heed (v.).


unhelpful (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + helpful. Related: Unhelpfully; unhelpfulness.


unheralded (adj.)

1845, from un- (1) not + past participle of herald (v.).


unhindered (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of hinder (v.).


unhinge (v.)

recorded earlier in the mental sense of to disorder the mind, etc. (1612) than in the literal one of
to take (a door, etc.) off its hinges (1616); from un- (2) opposite of + hinge (n.). Hinge as a verb
meaning to attach by a hinge is recorded only from 1758. Related: Unhinged; unhinging.


unhinged (adj.)

thrown into confusion, 1719, past participle adjective from unhinge.


unhistorical (adj.)

1610s, not in accordance with history, not being a part of recorded history, from un- (1) not +
historical. Unhistoric in this sense is from 1801. Related: Unhistorically.


unhitch (v.)

1620s, from un- (2) opposite of + hitch (v.). Related: Unhitched; unhitching.


unholy (adj.)

Old English unhalig, impious, profane, wicked, from un- (1) not + halig (see holy). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch onheilich, Old Norse uheilagr, Danish unhellig, Swedish ohelig. In
reference to actions, it is attested from late 14c. Colloquial sense of awful, dreadful is recorded
from 1842.


unhonored (adj.)

1510s, also unhonoured, from un- (1) not + past participle of honor (v.).


unhorse (v.)

late 14c., to throw (someone) from his horse, from un- (2) opposite of + horse (v.). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch ontorsen.


unhuman (adj.)

1540s, inhumane, cruel, from un- (1) not + human (adj.). Meaning destitute of human qualities;
superhuman is from 1782.


unhygienic (adj.)

1883, from un- (1) not + hygenic.


uni-

word-forming element meaning having one only, from Latin uni-, comb. form of unus (see one).


Uniate

pertaining to an Eastern Christian church that acknowledges the supremacy of the Pope, 1833, from
Russian uniyat, from unia unity, union, from Latin unus one (see one).


unicameral (adj.)

1853, from uni- one + Late Latin camera chamber (see camera) + -al (1).


UNICEF

by 1948, acronym from United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund, which was created in
1946 (the name was changed 1953 to United Nations Children's Fund but the acronym endured).


unicellular (adj.)

1858; see uni- + cellular.


unicorn (n.)

early 13c., from Old French unicorne, from Late Latin unicornus (Vulgate), from noun use of Latin
unicornis (adj.) having one horn, from uni- one (see uni-) + cornus horn (see horn (n.)).    The
Late Latin word translates Greek monoceros, itself rendering Hebrew re'em (Deut. xxxiii.17 and
elsewhere), which probably was a kind of wild ox. According to Pliny, a creature with a horse's
body, deer's head, elephant's feet, lion's tail, and one black horn two cubits long projecting from
its forehead. Compare German Einhorn, Welsh ungorn, Breton uncorn, Old Church Slavonic ino-rogu.


unicycle (n.)

1869, American English, from Latin uni- one (see uni-) + -cycle, from bicycle (from Greek kyklos
circle, wheel).


unidentifiable (adj.)

1859, from un- + identifiable.


unidentified (adj.)

1860, from un- (1) not + past participle of identify (v.).


unidirectional (adj.)

1883, from uni- + directional (see direction).


unification (n.)

1849, noun of action from unify (v.). Unification Church was founded 1954.


uniform (adj.)

1530s, of one form, from Middle French uniforme (14c.), from Latin uniformis having only one form or
shape, from uni- one (see uni-) + forma form (see form (n.)). Related: Uniformly.


uniform (n.)

distinctive clothes worn by one group, 1748, from French uniforme, from the adjective (see uniform
(adj.)).


uniform (v.)

1680s, to make alike, from uniform (adj.). Meaning to dress in a uniform is from 1861. Related:
Uniformed.


uniformitarian (n.)

1840 in geology, from uniformity + -arian.


uniformity (n.)

early 15c., from Old French uniformite (14c.) or directly from Late Latin uniformitatem (nominative
uniformitas) uniformity, from Latin uniformis (see uniform (adj.)).


unify (v.)

c.1500, to make into one, from Middle French unifier (14c.) or directly from Late Latin unificare
make one, from Latin uni- one (see uni-) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Related:
Unified; unifying. Unified (field) theory in physics is recorded from 1935.


unilateral (adj.)

1802, from Modern Latin unilateralis, from unum, neuter of unus one (see one) + latus (genitive
lateralis) side (see oblate (n.)). Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) may have been the first to use it in
the legal sense of made or entered into by one party. Related: Unilaterally. Unilateral disarmament
is recorded from 1929.    It is useless for the sheep to pass resolutions in favor of vegetarianism,
while the wolf remains of a different opinion. [William Ralph Inge, Outspoken Essays, 1919]


unilateralism (n.)

1926, from unilateral + -ism. Earliest usages seem to be in the sense of advocate of unilateral
disarmament. Meaning pursuit of a foreign policy without allies is attested by 1964.


unimaginable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + imaginable. Related: Unimaginably.


unimaginative (adj.)

1802, from un- (1) not + imaginative.


unimpaired (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of impair (v.). Rare before c.1760.


unimpeachable (adj.)

1784, from un- (1) not + impeachable. Related: Unimpeachably.


unimpeded (adj.)

1760, from un- (1) not + past participle of impede (v.).


unimportance (n.)

1751; see unimportant + -ance.


unimportant (adj.)

1750, from un- (1) not + important (adj.). Used earlier in a sense of unassuming, modest (1727).
Related: Unimportantly.


unimposing (adj.)

unimpressive, 1809, from un- (1) not + imposing.


unimpressed (adj.)

1861, not awed, from un- (1) not + past participle of impress (v.). Used earlier in a sense of not
subjected to restraint (1743). Unimpressive is recorded from 1796.


unimproved (adj.)

1660s, not made better, from un- (1) not + past participle of improve (v.). Sense of not developed
or taken advantage of (of land) is recorded from 1781.


unincorporated (adj.)

1715, from un- (1) not + past participle of incorporate (v.).


uninflected (adj.)

1713, from un- (1) not + past participle of inflect (v.).


uninfluenced (adj.)

1734, from un- (1) not + past participle of influence (v.).


uninformed (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of inform. Originally in reference to some specific matter
or subject; general sense of uneducated, ignorant is recorded from 1640s.


uninhabitable (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + inhabitable.


uninhabited (adj.)

1570s, from un- (1) not + past participle of inhabit (v.).


uninhibited (adj.)

1880, from un- (1) not + past participle of inhibit.


uninitiated (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + past participle of initiate (v.).


uninjured (adj.)

1570s, from un- (1) not + past participle of injure (v.).


uninquisitive (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + inquisitive.


uninspired (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + past participle of inspire (v.).


unintelligent (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + intelligent (adj.). Related: Unintelligently.


unintelligible (adj.)

1610s, incapable of being understood, from un- (1) not + intelligible. Related: Unintelligibly.


unintended (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of intend (v.).


unintentional (adj.)

1701, from un- (1) not + intentional (adj.). Related: Unintentionally.


uninterested (adj.)

1640s, unbiased, from un- (1) not + past participle of interest (v.). It later meant disinterested
(1660s); sense of unconcerned, indifferent is recorded from 1771. This is the correct word for what
often is miscalled disinterested.


uninteresting (adj.)

not capable of exciting interest, 1769, from un- (1) not + interesting.


uninterrupted (adj.)

c.1600, continuous; 1650s, undisturbed, from un- (1) not + past participle of interrupt. Related:
Uninterruptedly.


uninvite (v.)

countermand an invitation, 1660s, from un- (2) opposite of + invite (v.). Related: Uninvited;
uninviting.


uninvited (adj.)

not having been invited, 1630s, from un- (1) not + past participle of invite (v.).


uninviting (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) + inviting (adj.).


union (n.)

early 15c., action of joining one thing to another, also agreement, accord, also state of matrimony,
from Anglo-French unioun, Old French union (12c.), from Late Latin unionem (nominative unio)
oneness, unity, a uniting, also in Latin meaning a single pearl or onion, from unus one, from PIE
*oi-no- one, unique (see one).    Sense of action of uniting into one political body is attested
from 1540s. Meaning group of people or states is from 1650s. Short for trade union, it is recorded
from 1833. U.S. political sense is attested from 1775; used especially during the Civil War, in
reference to the remainder of the United States after the Southern secession.


Union Jack

1670s, from union + jack (n.); properly a small British union flag flown as the jack of a ship, but
it has long been in use as a general name for the union flag. The Union flag (1630s) was introduced
to symbolize the union of the crowns of England and Scotland (in 1603) and was formed of a
combination of the cross saltire of St. Andrew and the cross of St. George. The cross saltire of St.
Patrick was added 1801 upon the union of parliaments of Great Britain and Ireland.


unionize (v.)

1841, make into a union (transitive), from union + -ize. Sense form into a trade union is from 1887.
Related: Unionized; unionizing.


unipersonal (adj.)

1810, from uni- + personal (adj.).


unipolar (adj.)

1812, originally in electricity, from uni- + polar. Related: Unipolarity.


unique (adj.)

c.1600, single, solitary, from Middle French unique (16c.), from Latin unicus only, single, sole,
alone of its kind, from unus one (see one). Meaning forming the only one of its kind is attested
from 1610s; erroneous sense of remarkable, uncommon is attested from mid-19c. Related: Uniquely;
uniqueness.


unisex (adj.)

sexually indistinguishable or neutral, 1968, from uni- + sex (n.).


unisexual (adj.)

1802, of one sex, having only one sex, from uni- + sexual. Meaning of or for a single sex (of
schools, etc.) is from 1885. Meaning unisex is from 1970. Related: Unisexual.


unison (n.)

1570s, note having the same pitch as another; identity in pitch of two or more sounds; interval
between tones of the same pitch, especially the interval of an octave, from Middle French unisson
unison, accord of sound (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin unisonus having one sound, sounding
the same, from Late Latin unisonius in immediate sequence in the scale, monotonous, from Latin uni-
one (see one) + sonus sound (see sound (n.1)). Figurative sense of harmonious agreement is first
attested 1640s.


unit (n.)

1560s, single number regarded as an undivided whole, alteration of unity on the basis of digit.
Popularized in John Dee's English translation of Euclid, to express Greek monas (Dee says unity
formerly was used in this sense). Meaning single thing regarded as a member of a group is attested
from 1640s. Extended sense of a quantity adopted as a standard of measure is from 1738. Sense of
group of wards in a hospital is attested from 1893.


unitard (n.)

1961, from uni- one + ending from leotard.


unitarian (n.)

1680s, one who rejects the doctrine of the Trinity, from Modern Latin unitarius (1650s), from Latin
unitas (see unity) + -ian. Applied to Muslims and other non-Christian monotheists, but especially
(and with a capital -u-) of a Christian body originally founded upon the doctrine of unipersonality.
The American Unitarian Association formed in 1825. As an adjective from 1680s.


unitarianism (n.)

1690s, from unitarian + -ism.


unitary (adj.)

1847, characterized by unity or uniformity; 1865, of or relating to a unit; see unit + -ary.


unite (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), from Late Latin unitus, past participle of unire to unite, from Latin unus
one (see one). Intransitive sense from 1610s. Related: United; uniting.


united (adj.)

made into one, 1550s, past participle adjective from unite (v.).


United Kingdom

attested from 1706.


United Nations

1942, the Allied nations at war with the Axis powers; the international body (officially the United
Nations Organization) was chartered in 1945.    Such negotiation as may occur in New York is not
conducted within the walls of the tall building by the East River: it is carried out elsewhere, in
accordance with those principles of courtesy, confidence and discretion which must for ever remain
the only principles conducive to the peaceful settlement of disputes. [Harold Nicholson, The
Evolution of Diplomatic Method, 1954]


united states (n.)

attested from 1617, originally with reference to Holland; the North American confederation first so
called in 1776. United Provinces were the seven northern provinces of the Netherlands, allied from
1579, later developing into the kingdom of Holland.


uniter (n.)

1580s, agent noun from unite (v.).


unity (n.)

c.1300, state or property of being one, from Anglo-French unite, Old French unite uniqueness,
oneness (c.1200), from Latin unitatem (nominative unitas) oneness, sameness, agreement, from unus
one (see one).


univalve

of mollusks and shells, 1660s (noun and adjective), from uni- + valve.


universal (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the whole of something specified; occurring everywhere, from Old French
universel general, universal (12c.), from Latin universalis of or belonging to all, from universus
all together, whole, entire (see universe). In mechanics, a universal joint (1670s) is one which
allows free movement in any direction. Universal product code is recorded from 1974.


universalism (n.)

1805 in theology, the doctrine of universal salvation, from universal (adj.) + -ism. Universalist
one who, professing the Christian faith, believes in the eventual redemption of all humanity is
attested from 1620s.


universality (n.)

late 14c., from Old French universelite (14c.) or directly from Late Latin universalitas, from Latin
universalis universal (see universal).


universally (adv.)

late 14c., from universal + -ly (2).


universe (n.)

1580s, the whole world, cosmos, the totality of existing things, from Old French univers (12c.),
from Latin universum all things, everybody, all people, the whole world, noun use of neuter of
adjective universus all together, all in one, whole, entire, relating to all, literally turned into
one, from unus one (see one) + versus, past participle of vertere to turn (see versus).


university (n.)

c.1300, institution of higher learning, also body of persons constituting a university, from Anglo-
French universit&eacute;, Old French universite universality; academic community (13c.), from
Medieval Latin universitatem (nominative universitas), the whole, aggregate, in Late Latin
corporation, society, from universus whole, entire (see universe). In the academic sense, a
shortening of universitas magistrorum et scholarium community of masters and scholars; superseded
studium as the word for this. The Latin word also is the source of Spanish universidad, German
universit&#228;t, Russian universitet&#365;, etc.


univocal (adj.)

1540s, having one meaning only, from Latin univocus, from uni- (see uni-) + vox (see voice (n.)).
Related: Univocally.


unjoin (v.)

mid-14c., from un- (2) opposite of + join (v.). Related: Unjoined; unjoining.


unjust (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, sinful; perpetrating injustice, from un- (1) not + just (adj.). Of actions,
from c.1400. Related: Unjustly.


unjustifiable (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + justifiable. Related: Unjustifiably.


unjustified (adj.)

mid-14c., not punished or executed, from un- (1) not + past participle of justify (v.). Meaning not
proven to be right or proper is attested from 1680s.


unkempt (adj.)

1570s, from un- (1) not + kempt well-combed, neat, from variant past participle of Middle English
kemben to comb, from Old English cemban to comb, from Proto-Germanic *kambijan, from *kamb- comb
(see comb (n.)). Form unkembed is recorded from late 14c. The verb kemb is rare after 1400s, but its
negative past participle form endures.


unkept (adj.)

mid-14c., neglected, from un- (1) not + past participle of keep (v.). From late 14c. as disregarded;
1842 as not stored or retained.


unkillable (adj.)

1841, from un- (1) not + killable.


unkind (adj.)

Old English uncynde unnatural, not natural; see un- (1) not + kind (adj.). Meaning lacking in
kindness is recorded from mid-14c.


unkindly (adj.)

early 13c., not natural, unnatural, from un- (1) not + kindly (adj.). From c.1300 as without natural
affection, unfraternally. Old English had ungecyndelic.


unkindly (adv.)

c.1200, unsuitably, improperly, from un- (1) not + kindly (adv.). From mid-15c. as discourteously,
maliciously.


unkindness (n.)

c.1300, state or character of being unkind, lack of natural regard or proper consideration, from un-
(1) not + kindness (n.), or from unkind (adj.) + -ness. Meaning an unkind act is from c.1500.


unknit (v.)

Old English uncnyttan; see un- (2) reverse + knit (v.). Related: Unknitted; unknitting.


unknowable (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + knowable (adj.).


unknowing (adj.)

c.1300, without knowledge, ignorant, from un- (1) not + present participle of know (v.). Noun
meaning ignorance is mid-14c., especially in phrase cloud of unknowing, title of a medieval book of
Christian mysticism. Related: Unknowingly. A verb unknow fail to recognize is attested from late
14c.


unknown (adj.)

c.1300, strange, unfamiliar (of persons, places), from un- (1) not + past participle of know.
Compare Old English ungecnawen. In reference to facts, not discovered or found out, it attested from
early 14c. The noun meaning unknown person is recorded from 1590s; the unknown that which is unknown
is from 1650s.


unlace (v.)

c.1300, from un- (2) opposite of +  lace (v.). Related: Unlaced; unlacing.


unlade (v.)

remove the cargo from, Old English onhladen; see un- (2) reverse, opposite of + lade (v.). Related:
Unladen; unlading.


unladen (adj.)

1802, past participle adjective from unlade (v.).


unladylike (adj.)

1824, from un- (1) not + ladylike.


unlamented (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of lament (v.).


unlatch (v.)

1640s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + latch (v.).


unlawful (adj.)

contrary to law, illegal, c.1300, from un- (1) not + lawful. Unlawful assembly is recorded in
statutes from late 15c. Related: Unlawfully. Old English had a noun unlagu (unlaw) illegal action,
abuse of law.


unleaded (adj.)

1610s, having no lead, from un- (1) not + leaded (see lead (v.2)). In reference to gasoline, from
1965. In reference to printing, from 1902.


unlearn (v.)

mid-15c., from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + learn (v.).


unlearned (adj.)

c.1400, ignorant, from un- (1) not + learned (adj.). From 1530s as not acquired by learning, from
past participle of learn (v.). Old English had unl&aelig;red.


unleash (v.)

1670s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + leash (v.). Related: Unleashed; unleashing.


unleavened (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + past participle of leaven (v.).


unless (conj.)

mid-15c., earlier onlesse, from on lesse (than) on a less condition (than); see less. The first
syllable originally on, but the negative connotation and the lack of stress changed it to un-.
Except could once be used as a synonym for unless, but the words have now drawn entirely apart
[Century Dictionary].


unlettered (adj.)

mid-14c., not possessed of book-learning, from un- (1) not + lettered. An anglicized form of
illiterate. Similar formation in Middle Dutch ongelettert.


unlicensed (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + past participle of licence (v.).


unlike (adj.)

c.1200, not resembling, from un- (1) not + like (adj.). Similar formation in Old English ungelic,
Old Frisian unlik, Old Norse ulikr, Middle Danish ulige, German ungleich.


unlike (adv.)

c.1300, unevenly, from un- (1) not + like (adv.) (see like (adj.)). From 1590s as in a manner
differing.


unlikely (adj.)

late 14c., not likely to occur, from un- (1) not + likely (adj.). Similar formation in Old Norse
ulikligr, Middle Danish uligelig. Meaning not likely to be true is recorded from 1590s. Related:
Unlikeliness; unlikelihood.


unlikely (adv.)

mid-15c., improbably, from un- (1) not + likely (adv.) (see likely (adj.)).


unlimber (v.)

1760, to free (a gun) from its limber, usually for the purpose of bringing it into action, from un-
(2) opposite of + limber attach a gun to its limber (see limber (n.)). Figurative sense is attested
from 1864. Related: Unlimbered; unlimbering.


unlimited (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of limit (v.).


unlink (v.)

c.1600, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + past participle of link (v.). Related: Unlinked;
unlinking.


unlisted (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of list (v.). In reference to stocks, attested from 1905;
of phone numbers, from 1937 (American English).


unlivable (adj.)

1834, incapable of being lived in, from un- (1) not + livable.


unload (v.)

1520s, in reference to cargo, from un- (2) + load (v.). Figurative sense (in reference to feelings,
etc.) is recorded from 1590s. Used in reference to sales of stocks by 1870, hence U.S. colloquial
sense dispose of property the holding of which is risky (1881). Related: Unloaded; unloading.


unlock (v.)

c.1400, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + lock (v.). Figurative sense is attested from 1530s. Old
English had unlucan to unlock, open. Related: Unlocked; unlocking.


unlooked (adj.)

c.1300, neglected, from un- (1) not + past participle of look (v.). With for, unexpected, attested
from 1530s.


unloose (v.)

mid-14c., relax; late 14c., to set free, from un- (2), used here emphatically, + loose. Old English
had unliesan unloose, set free. Related: Unloosed; unloosing.


unloved (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of love (v.). A verb, unlove (with un- (2)) is
attested from late 14c. Old English unlofod meant unpraised.  He that can love unloved again,  Hath
better store of love than brain  [Robert Ayton (1570-1638)]


unlovely (adj.)

late 14c., not evoking feelings of love, from un- (1) not + lovely. Meaning ugly is recorded from
1390s.


unlucky (adj.)

1520s, marked by misfortune or failure, from un- (1) not + lucky (adj.). Similar formation in West
Frisian unlokkich, Mliddle Low German unluckich. Sense of boding ill is recorded from 1540s; that of
having bad luck is from 1550s; that of bringing bad luck is from 1580s. Related: Unluckily;
unluckiness.


unmade (adj.)

mid-13c., not yet made, unfinished, incomplete, from un- (1) not + past participle of make (v.).


unmake (v.)

late 14c., bring down, dethrone; early 15c., undo, destroy, reduce to an unmade state, from un- (2)
reverse, opposite of + make (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ontmaken, German entmachen.


unmaking (n.)

ruin, destruction, 1590s, verbal noun from unmake (v.).


unman (v.)

1590s, to deprive of the attributes of a human being, from un- (2) + verbal derivative of man (n.).
Meaning to deprive of manly courage is attested from c.1600; that of to emasculate is from 1680s.


unmanageable (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + manageable (adj.). Related: Unmanageably; unmanageableness.


unmanaged (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of manage (v.).


unmanly (adj.)

late 15c., degrading to a human,from un- (1) not + manly (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch
onmamlijc, German unm&auml;nnlich. Meaning not having the qualities or attributes of a man (as
opposed to a woman or child) is from 1540s. Old English had unmennisclic inhuman (adj.); unmann (n.)
monster; wicked man.


unmanned (adj.)

not furnished with a crew, 1540s, from un- (1) not + past participle of man (v).


unmannerly (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + mannerly (adj.).


unmarked (adj.)

c.1400, having been given no mark, from un- (1) not + past participle of mark (v.). Similar
formation in Old Norse umarka&eth;r. Meaning not noticed or observed is recorded from 1530s.


unmarketable (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + marketable (adj.).


unmarred (adj.)

c.1200, from un- (1) not + past participle of mar (v.).


unmarried (adj.)

c.1300, from un- (1) not + past participle of marry (v.). In former use most often applied to one
who has never married.


unmask (v.)

1580s in figurative sense, c.1600 in literal sense (transitive and intransitive), from un- (2)
reverse, opposite of + mask (v.). Related: Unmasked; unmasking.


unmastered (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + past participle of master (v.).


unmatched (adj.)

1580s, unrivaled, from un- (1) not + past participle of match (v.).


unmeaning (adj.)

having no signification, 1709, from un- (1) not + present participle of mean (v.).


unmeasurable (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + measurable (adj.). Related: Unmeasurably.


unmediated (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of mediate (v.).


unmeet (adj.)

Old English unm&aelig;te immoderate, excessive, from un- (1) not + meet (adj.). Similar formation in
Old High German unmazi. Meanings unfitting and unsuited (for some purpose) are from 1520s.


unmentionable (adj.)

1837, from un- (1) not + mentionable (adj.). Humorous use of unmentionables trousers is attested
from 1823; from 1910 as underwear, both on notion of articles of dress not to be mentioned in polite
circles.


unmerciful (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + merciful (adj.). Related: Unmercifully.


unmerited (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of merit (v.).    An ingenuous mind feels in unmerited
praise the bitterest reproof. If you reject it you are unhappy, if you accept it you are undone.
[Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


unmet (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of meet (v.).


unmindful (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + mindful (adj.).


unmistakable (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + mistake (v.) + -able. Related: Unmistakably.


unmitigated (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of mitigate (v.).


unmodified (adj.)

1792, from un- (1) not + past participle of modify (v.).


unmolested (adj.)

1530s, from un- (1) not + past participle of molest (v.).


unmoor (v.)

late 15c., to free from moorings, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + moor (v.). Related: Unmoored.


unmotivated (adj.)

lacking in motivation, by 1917, from un- (1) not + past participle of motivate. Meaning lacking in
motive is attested from 1871. Unmotived is from 1794.


unmounted (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of mount (v.).


unmovable (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + movable (adj.).


unmoved (adj.)

late 14c., not affected by emotion or excitement, from un- (1) not + past participle of move (v.).
Meaning fixed in position is from mid-15c.


unmuzzled (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of muzzle (v.), or past participle of unmuzzle (v.),
which is attested from c.1600.


unnamed (adj.)

c.1500, not mentioned by name. from un- (1) not + past participle of name (v.). Similar formation in
Old Frisian unnamed, Middle Dutch ongenaemt.


unnatural (adj.)

early 15c., not in accord with physical nature, from un- (1) not + natural (adj.). Meaning
artificial is attested from 1746; that of at variance with moral standards is from 1520s. Related:
Unnaturally; unnaturalness.


unnecessary (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + necessary (adj.). Related: Unnecessarily.


unneeded (adj.)

1725, from un- (1) not + past participle of need (v.).


unnerve (v.)

1620s, to destroy the strength of, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + nerve (v.). Meaning to
deprive of courage is recorded from 1704. Related: Unnerved; unnerving.


unnoticed (adj.)

1720, from un- (1) not + past participle of notice (v.).


unnumbered (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of number (v.).


unobjectionable (adj.)

1793, from un- (1) not + objectionable (adj.).


unobservant (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + observant (adj.).


unobserved (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of observe (v.).


unobstructed (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + past participle of obstruct (v.).


unobtainable (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + obtainable (adj.). Related: Unobtainability.


unobtrusive (adj.)

from un- (1) + obtrusive (adj.). Related: Unobtrusively; unobtrusiveness.


unoccupied (adj.)

late 14c., idle, from un- (1) not + past participle of occupy (v.). In reference to ground, etc.,
not possessed, not made use of, from early 15c.


unoffending (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + present participle of offend (v.).


unofficial (adj.)

1798, from un- (1) not + official (adj.). Related: Unofficially.


unopposed (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + past participle of oppose (v.).


unorganized (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + past participle of organize (v.).


unoriginal (adj.)

1660s, uncreated, without an origin, from un- (1) not + original (adj.). Meaning derivative, second-
hand is recorded from 1774. Related: Unoriginality.


unorthodox (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + orthodox (adj.).


unorthodoxy (n.)

1704, from unorthodox + -y (4).


unostentatious (adj.)

1747, from un- (1) not + ostentatious (adj.). Related: Unostentatiously.


unowned (adj.)

1610s, unpossessed, from un- (1) not + past participle of own (v.). From 1715 as unacknowledged.


unpack (v.)

late 15c., from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + pack (v.). Similar formation in Dutch ontpakken.
Related: Unpacked; unpacking.


unpaid (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to persons, from un- (1) not + past participle of pay (v.). Of debts,
attested from late 15c.


unpalatable (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + palatable (adj.). Related: Unpalatably.


unparalleled (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of parallel (v.). Unparallel as an adjective is recorded
from 1650s.


unpardonable (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + pardonable (adj.). Related: Unpardonably.


unpatriotic (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + patriotic.


unpaved (adj.)

1530s, from un- (1) not + past participle of pave (v.).


unpenetrable (adj.)

c.1400, from un- (1) not + penetrable (adj.). The usual word now is impenetrable.


unperceived (adj.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of perceive (v.).


unpersuasive (adj.)

1748, from un- (1) not + persuasive (adj.). Related: Unpersuasively.


unperturbed (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of perturb (v.).


unplace (v.)

from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + place (v.). Related: Unplaced; unplacing.


unplanned (adj.)

by 1804, from un- (1) not + past participle of plan (v.).


unpleasant (adj.)

1530s, from un- (1) not + pleasant (adj.). Related: Unpleasantly.


unpleasantness (n.)

1540s, state or quality of being unpleasant, from unpleasant + -ness. By 1835 as a slight quarrel, a
minor misunderstanding. The late unpleasantness as a humorously polite Southern description of the
American Civil War is attested from 1868.


unplug (v.)

1775, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + plug (v.). Related: Unplugged; unplugging.


unpolished (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of polish (v.). In reference to style, language, etc.,
attested from late 15c.


unpolluted (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of pollute (v.).


unpopular (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + popular (adj.). Related: Unpopularly.


unpopularity (n.)

1735, from un- (1) not + popularity (n.).


unpracticed (adj.)

also unpractised, 1550s, unexpert, of persons, from un- (1) not + past participle of practice (v.).
From 1530s as not done, untried.


unprecedented (adj.)

1620s, from un- (1) not + precedented. In common use from c.1760.


unpredictable (adj.)

1840, from un- (1) not + predictable (adj.). Related: Unpredictably; unpredictability.


unprejudiced (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of prejudice (v.).


unpremeditated (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of premeditate (v.).


unprepared (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + past participle of prepare (v.).


unprepossessing (adj.)

1816, from un- (1) not + prepossessing (adj.).


unpresentable (adj.)

1828, from un- (1) not + presentable (adj.).


unpretentious (adj.)

1859, from un- (1) not + pretentious (adj.). Related: Unpretentiously; unpretentiousness.


unpreventable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + preventable (adj.).


unprincipled (adj.)

1630s, not instructed (in something), from un- (1) not + principled (adj.). Meaning not honorable is
recorded from 1640s.


unproductive (adj.)

1756, from un- (1) not + productive (adj.). Related: Unproductively; unproductiveness.


unprofessional (adj.)

1806, from un- (1) not + professional (adj.).


unprofitable (adj.)

early 14c., from un- (1) not + profitable (adj.). Related: Unprofitably.


unpromising (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + promising (adj.).


unprompted (adj.)

from un- (1) not + past participle of prompt (v.).


unpronounceable (adj.)

1831, from un- (1) not + pronounceable (adj.).


unpropitious (adj.)

c.1600 (implied in unpropitiously), from un- (1) not + propitious (adj.).


unprotected (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of protect (v.).


unprovable (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + provable (adj.).


unproved (adj.)

not demonstrated to be true, 1530s, from un- (1) not + past participle of prove (v.).


unprovoked (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of provoke (v.).


unpublished (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of publish. In reference to an author, attested from
1934.


unpunctual (adj.)

1740, from un- (1) not + punctual (adj.).


unpunished (adj.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of punish (v.).


unqualified (adj.)

1550s, not having necessary qualifications, from un- (1) not + past participle of qualify (v.).
Meaning not modified or limited is recorded from 1796. As a verb, unqualify disqualify is from
1650s.


unquantifiable (adj.)

1888, from un- + quantifiable (adj.). Related: Unquantifiably.


unquenchable (adj.)

late 14c., of fire; 1560s, of thirst, from un- (1) not + quench (v.) + -able. Related: Unquenchably.


unquestionable (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + questionable (adj.). Related: Unquestionably.


unquestioned (adj.)

c.1600, not interrogated; 1620s, not to be opposed or disputed, from un- (1) not + past participle
of question (v.).


unquiet (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + quiet (adj.).


unquote (v.)

1915, in telegraphs, where punctuation had to be spelled out and quote and unquote were used in
place of the quotation marks; from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + quote (v.). Quote unquote together
to indicate quotation of the word or phrase to follow (often with ironic intent) is from 1942.


unravel (v.)

c.1600 (transitive), from un- (2) + ravel (v.). Intransitive from 1640s. The prefix is either
reversive or intensive, according as ravel is taken to mean 'tangle' or 'untangle' [Century
Dictionary]. Related: Unravelled; unravelling; unravellment.


unreachable (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + reachable (adj.).


unread (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of read (v.).


unreadable (adj.)

1787, of written material, dull, distasteful, from un- (1) not + readable (adj.). Meaning illegible
is from 1830.


unready (adj.)

mid-14c., not prepared, from un- (1) not + ready (adj.).    In English history, applied from c.1200
(Etheldredus Unrad) to Anglo-Saxon King &AElig;&eth;elr&aelig;d II (968-1016), where it preserves
Middle English unredi, a different adjective, from Old English unger&aelig;d ill-advised, rede-less,
no-counsel and plays on the king's name (which means good-counsel). Old English r&aelig;d advice,
counsel is related to read (v.). Rede counsel survived in poetic usage to 17c. An attempted revival
by Scott (19c.) failed, though it is used in Tolkien's Lord of the Rings.


unreal (adj.)

c.1600, not real, from un- (1) not + real (adj.). Meaning impractical, visionary is by 1660s. Slang
sense of wonderful, great is first recorded 1965.    Unreal City,  Under the brown fog of a winter
dawn,      A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,        I had not thought death had undone so
many.  [Eliot, The Waste Land, 1922]


unrealistic (adj.)

1865, from un- (1) not + realistic. Related: Unrealistically.


unreality (adj.)

1751, from un- (1) not + reality (n.).


unreason (n.)

c.1300, injustice; 1827, absense of reason, from un- (1) not + reason (n.).


unreasonable (adj.)

mid-14c., irrational, illogical, from un- (1) not + reasonable. From late 14c. as excessive, going
beyond what is sensible or realistic. Related: Unreasonably; unreasonableness.


unrecognizable (adj.)

1817, from un- (1) not + recognizable (see recognize (v.)). Related: Unrecognizably.


unreconciled (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of reconcile (v.).


unreconstructed (adj.)

1867, not reconciled to the outcome of the American Civil War, from un- (1) not + past participle of
reconstruct (v.). See Reconstruction.


unredeemed (adj.)

1540s, unsaved; 1805, not balanced by any good quality, from un- (1) not + past participle of redeem
(v.).


unredorded (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of record (v.).


unrefined (adj.)

1590s, not refined in manners, from un- (1) not + past participle of refine (v.). Meaning not free
from gross matter is recorded from 1610s.


unreformed (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + past participle of reform (v.).


unregenerate (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + regenerate (adj.).


unrelated (adj.)

1660s, not akin, from un- (1) not + past participle of relate (v.). Meaning not in any relationship
is attested from 1660s; that of not told is from 1764.


unrelenting (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + present participle of relent (v.). Related: Unrelentingly.


unreliable (adj.)

1835 (Fanny Kemble), from un- (1) not + reliable (adj.).


unrelieved (adj.)

monotonous, unvarying, 1764, from un- (1) not + past participle of relieve (v.).


unremarkable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + remarkable (adj.). Related: Unremarkably.


unremitted (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of remit (v.).


unremitting (adj.)

1728, from un- (1) not + present participle of remit (v.). Related: Unremittingly.


unrepairable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + repairable (adj.). Related: Unrepairably.


unrepentant (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + repentant (adj.).


unrequited (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + past participle of requite (v.). The earliest reference is to love.


unreserved (adj.)

1530s, not restricted or withheld, from un- (1) not + past participle of reserve (v.). From 1713 as
open, frank. Related: Unreservedly.


unresisting (adj.)

1620s, from un- (1) not + present participle of resist (v.).


unresolved (adj.)

1570s, undecided (of questions), from un- (1) not + past participle of resolve (v.). Meaning
uncertain in opinion is attested from 1590s.


unresponsive (adj.)

1660s, unable to reply, from un- (1) not + responsive (adj.). Meaning not responding is from 1775.
Related: Unresponsiveness.


unrest (n.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) not + rest (n.). Similar formation in West Frisian onrest, Middle Low German
unreste, German unrast, Middle Dutch onruste.


unrestrained (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of restrain (v.). Related: Unrestrainedly.


unrestricted (adj.)

1766, from un- (1) not + restricted.


unrewarded (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of reward (v.).


unrighteous (adj.)

1520s; see un- (1) not + righteous (adj.). In Middle English, the word was unrightwis, from Old
English unrihtwis. Related: Unrighteously; unrighteousness.


unripe (adj.)

Old English unripe premature (in reference to death), from un- (1) not + ripe (adj.). Meaning
immature, not fully developed (of fruit, etc.) is recorded from mid-13c. Similar formation in Middle
Dutch onrijp, Old High German unrifi, German unreif.


unrivalled (adj.)

also unrivaled, 1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of rival (v.).


unroll (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), from un- (2) + roll (v.). Intransitive sense from 1580s. Related: Unrolled;
unrolling.


unromantic (adj.)

1731, from un- (1) not + romantic (adj.).


unruffled (adj.)

1650s in figurative sense, from un- (1) not + past participle of ruffle (v.). Literal meaning, in
reference to feathers, leaves, etc., is recorded from 1816.


unruly (adj.)

disposed to resist lawful restraint, c.1400, from un- (1) not + obsolete ruly (adj.) amenable to
rule. Related: Unruliness.


unsafe (adj.)

1590s, involving risk or danger, from un- (1) not + safe (adj.).


unsaid (adj.)

Old English uns&aelig;d, from un- (1) not + past participle of say (v.). Similar formation in Middle
Dutch ongeseit, German ungesagt, Old Norse usag&eth;r.


unsalted (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of salt (v.). Similar formation in North Frisian
unsalted, Swedish osaltad, Danish usaltet.


unsanitary (adj.)

1871, from un- (1) not + sanitary (adj.).


unsatiable (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + satiable (adj.). Since 17c. the usual form is insatiable.


unsatisfactory (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + satisfactory (adj.). Related: Unsatisfactorily; unsatisfactoriness.


unsatisfied (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + satisfied (adj.).


unsaturated (adj.)

1756, from un- (1) not + past participle of saturate (v.).


unsavory (adj.)

also unsavoury, early 13c., tasteless, insipid, from un- (1) not + savory (adj.). Meaning unpleasant
or disagreeable to the taste is attested from late 14c.; of persons, from c.1400. Related:
Unsavoriness.


unscathed (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of scathe (v.). Mainly in Scottish before 19c. Similar
formation in Old Norse osta&eth;a&eth;r, Swedish oskadad.


unschooled (adj.)

1580s, untrained, from un- (1) not + past participle of school (v.). A verb unschool is attested
from 1820.


unscramble (v.)

restore to order, 1911, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + scramble (v.). The original use is in a
quip attributed to U.S. financier J.P. Morgan (1837-1913) about the impossibility of unscrambling an
omelet.    Mr. Morgan is credited with the aphorism that the recent trust decisions are like an
order to a cook to unscramble the eggs which have just been prepared. [Proceedings of the Academy of
Political Science, January 1912]    Related: Unscrambled; unscrambling.


unscriptural (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + scriptural (adj.).


unscrupulous (adj.)

1803, from un- (1) not + scrupulous (adj.). Related: Unscrupulously; unscrupulousness.


unseal (v.)

early 15c., from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + seal (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch
ontsegelen, Old High German intsigilan. Related: Unsealed (late 14c.).


unsearchable (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + searchable (adj.).


unseasonable (adj.)

mid-15c., inopportune, from un- (1) not + seasonable (adj.). In reference to weather, not
appropriate to the time of year, it is recorded from 1510s. Related: Unseasonably.


unseasoned (adj.)

1580s, not made palatable by seasoning, from un- (1) not + past participle of season (v.). Meaning
not habituated by experience is recorded from c.1600.


unseat (v.)

1590s, to throw down from a seat (especially on horseback), from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + seat
(v.). Meaning to deprive of rank or office is attested from 1610s; especially of elected office in a
representative body from 1834. Related: Unseated; unseating.


unsecure (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + secure (adj.). A useful differentiation from insecure since the latter
word acquired a psychological sense.


unsecured (adj.)

1780, from un- (1) not + past participle of secure (v.).


unseeded (adj.)

1775, not sown, from un- (1) not + past participle of seed (v.). From 1932 in the sports sense.


unseemly (adj.)

early 14c., unfitting, indecent, from un- (1) not + seemly (adj.). Similar formation in Old Norse
usoemiligr. Related: Unseemliness.


unseen (adj.)

early 13c., from un- (1) not + seen. Similar formation in Old English ungesewen, Middle Dutch
ongesien, Dutch ongezien, Old High German unges&#235;han, German ungesehen, Old Norse usenn.


unselfish (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + selfish (adj.). Similar formation in Danish uselvisk, Swedish
osj&auml;lfvisk. Related: Unselfishly; unselfishness.


unsentimental (adj.)

1752, from un- (1) not + sentimental (adj.). Related: Unsentimentally.


unseparable (adj.)

late 14c. from un- (1) not + separable (adj.). The usual word now is inseparable.


unsettle (v.)

1590s, undo from a fixed position, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + settle (v.). Of the mind,
feelings, etc., attested from 1640s. Related: Unsettled; unsettling.


unsettled (adj.)

1590s, not peaceful, not firmly established, from unsettle (v.) or else from un- (1) not + past
participle of settle (v.). Meaning not occupied by settlers is attested from 1724.


unsex (v.)

deprive of the qualities considered typical of one's gender, c.1600, from un- (2) reverse, opposite
of + sex (n.). Related: Unsexed; unsexing.


unshakable (adj.)

1610s; see un- (1) not + shake (v.) + -able. Of beliefs, etc., from 1670s.


unshaken (adj.)

mid-15c., not agitated, from un- (1) not + shaken. Meaning not moved from a firm position is
recorded from 1540s.


unsheathe (v.)

late 14c., from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + sheathe (v.). Related: Unsheathed; unsheathing.


unshod (adj.)

without shoes, Old English unscod; see un- (1) not + shod (adj.). Old English also had a verb
unscogan to unshoe.


unshorn (adj.)

Old English unscoren; see un- (1) not + shorn (adj.).


unsightly (adj.)

1540s, displeasing to the eye, from un- (1) not + sight (n.) + -ly (1). Similar formation in Middle
Dutch onsichtlijc invisible; ugly, Middle High German unsihtlih invisible. Related: Unsightliness.
Middle English sightlie is attested from mid-15c. but only in the sense visible; unsightly is
attested in Middle English only as an adverb meaning invisibly (late 15c.). Sightly as pleasing to
the eye is from 1560s. Middle English also had unsighty difficult or displeasing to look at (early
15c., from sighty attractive, late 14c.), also unsightily in the same sense (c.1400).


unsinkable (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + sinkable (see sink (v.)).


unskilled (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + skill.


unskillful (adj.)

also unskilful, late 14c., foolish, from un- (1) not + skillful (adj.). Meaning inexpert is from
1560s. Related: Unskillfully.


unsmiling (adj.)

1730, from un- (1) not + present participle of smile (v.).


unsociable (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + sociable (adj.).


unsold (adj.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of sell (v.).


unsolicited (adj.)

1580s, unpetitioned, not approached with a request, from un- (1) not + past participle of solicit
(v.). Meaning not asked for, unsought is from 1680s.


unsolved (adj.)

1660s, from un- (1) not + past participle of solve (v.).


unsophisticated (adj.)

1620s, unmixed, from un- (1) not + sophisticated (adj.). Meaning ingenuous, natural, inexperienced
is recorded from 1660s.


unsorted (adj.)

1530s, from un- (1) not + past participle of sort (v.).


unsought (adj.)

early 13c., from un- (1) not + past participle of seek (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch
ongesocht, Dutch ongezocht, Middle High German ungesuochet, German ungesucht.


unsound (adj.)

early 14c., of persons, diseased, wounded, from un- (1) not + sound (adj.). Similar formation in
Middle Low German unsund, Middle Dutch ongesont, German ungesund. Meaning morally corrupt is
recorded from c.1300; that of not mentally healthy is from 1540s. Sense of not based on reasoning or
fact is attested from 1590s. Related: Unsoundly; unsoundness.


unsparing (adj.)

showing no mercy, 1580s, from un- (1) not + sparing, attested from late 14c. as a present participle
adjective from spare (v.). Meaning profuse is from 1660s. Related: Unsparingly.


unspeakable (adj.)

c.1400, inexpressible, from un- (1) not + speakable (see speak (v.)). Meaning indescribably bad or
wicked is recorded from mid-15c. Related: Unspeakably.


unspoiled (adj.)

c.1500, not plundered, from un- (1) not + past participle of spoil (v.). Meaning not deteriorated is
attested from 1732. A verb unspoil is attested from c.1400, but it meant despoil.


unspoken (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of speak (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch
ongesproken, Middle Low German ungesproken.


unsporting (adj.)

1822, from un- (1) not + sporting (adj.).


unsportsmanlike (adj.)

1754, from un- (1) not + sportsmanlike.


unstable (adj.)

early 13c., apt to move, from un- (1) not + stable (adj.). Similar formation in Middle High German
unstabel. Meaning liable to fall is recorded from c.1300; sense of fickle is attested from late 13c.
An Old English word for this was feallendlic, which might have become *fally.


unstack (v.)

1836, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + stack (v.). Related: Unstacked; unstacking.


unsteady (adj.)

1590s, not firm or secure in position, from un- (1) not + steady (adj.). Similar formation in Old
Frisian unstadich, German unst&auml;tig, Middle Dutch onstadich. Meaning marked by irregularity is
from 1680s. Related: Unsteadily (1550s).


unsteady (v.)

make unsteady, 1530s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + steady (v.). Related: Unsteadied;
unsteadying.


unstick (v.)

1706, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + stick (v.). Related: Unsticking.


unstinted (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of stint (v.).


unstinting (adj.)

late 14c., unceasing, from un- (1) not + present participle of stint (v.). Meaning lavish attested
by 1834.


unstop (v.)

remove the stopper from, late 14c., from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + stop (v.). Related:
Unstopped; unstopping.


unstoppable (adj.)

1827; see un- (1) not + stop (v.) + -able.


unstressed (adj.)

1879, from un- (1) not + past participle of stress (v.).


unstring (v.)

1610s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + string (v.). Related: Unstringing.


unstrung (adj.)

1590s, with strings relaxed (of a harp, etc.), from un- (1) not + past participle of string (v.).
Transferred sense of weakened, unnerved is recorded from 1690s.


unstuck (adj.)

1840, unpierced; 1860, unglued, from un- (1) not + past participle of stick (v.).


unstudied (adj.)

late 14c., not made a subject of study, from un- (1) not + past participle of study (v.). From 1650s
as natural, not artificial.


unsubscribe (v.)

1570s (implied in unsubscribed), from un- (2) reverse of + subscribe (v.). Related: unsubscribing.


unsubsidized (adj.)

1756, from un- (1) not + past participle of subsidize (v.).


unsubstantial (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + substantial (adj.).


unsubstantiated (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of substantiate (v.).


unsuccessful (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + successful (adj.). Related: Unsuccessfully. A noun unsuccess lack of
success is recorded from 1580s.


unsuitable (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + suitable (adj.). Related: Unsuitably; unsuitability.


unsuited (adj.)

unfit, 1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of suit (v.).


unsullied (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of sully (v.).


unsung (adj.)

early 15c., not uttered in a song, from un- (1) not + past participle of sing (v.). Similar
formation in German ungesungen. Meaning not celebrated is recorded from 1660s.


unsupervised (adj.)

1845, from un- (1) not + past participle of supervise (v.).


unsupported (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of support (v.).


unsure (adj.)

c.1400, not safe against attack, also lacking certainty, from un- (1) not + sure (adj.).


unsurmountable (adj.)

incapable of being overcome, 1701, from un- (1) not + surmountable.


unsurpassable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + surpassable (see surpass (v.)).


unsurpassed (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of surpass (v.).


unsuspected (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + past participle of suspect (v.).


unsuspecting (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + present participle of suspect (v.).


unsustainable (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + sustainable (adj.).


unswayed (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of sway (v.).


unsweetened (n.)

1775, not having been sweetened, from un- (1) not + past participle of sweeten (v.); or else, if the
sense is with sweetness removed, from unsweeten (v.), which is attested from 1610s.


unswerving (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + present participle of swerve (v.).


unsympathetic (adj.)

1785, from un- (1) not + sympathetic (adj.).


unsystematic (adj.)

1770, from un- (1) not + systematic (adj.).


untainted (adj.)

1580s, in the moral sense; c.1600 in the physical sense; from un- (1) not + past participle of taint
(v.). Earlier was untained (mid-15c.), from a Middle English variant of taint (v.).


untamed (adj.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of tame (v.). Similar formation in Old English untemed,
Old Norse utamdr, Old High German ungizamot.


untangible (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + tangible (adj.).


untangle (v.)

1540s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + tangle (v.). Related: Untangled; untangling.


untapped (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of tap (v.). Figurative use from c.1890.


untaught (adj.)

mid-14c., not instructed or educated, from un- (1) not + taught. Hence spontaneous, natural (mid-
15c.).


untempered (adj.)

mid-15c., not properly mixed, undiluted, from un- (1) not + past participle of temper (v.). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch ongetempert, Middle High German ungetempert. Earlier as unrestrained (late
14c.), also, of a musical instrument, not properly tuned; meaning unhardened is from 1820.


untenable (adj.)

1640s, indefensible, incapable of being held against attack, from un- (1) not + tenable (adj.).
Figurative sense is recorded from 1690s.


untenanted (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + tenanted (see tenant (n.)).


untether (v.)

1775, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + tether (v.). Related: Untethered; untethering.


untethered (adj.)

1775, past participle adjective from untether (v.).


unthaw (v.)

1590s, to thaw, from un- (2) opposite of + thaw (v.). Related: Unthawed; unthawing. Unthawed also
sometimes is used with a sense frozen (1610s.).


unthinkable (adj.)

early 15c., too large to be conceived, unimaginable, from un- (1) not + think (v.) + -able. Meaning
incapable of being framed by thought is recorded from mid-15c.


unthinking (adj.)

1670s, unreflecting; 1680s, heedless, from un- (1) not + present participle of think (v.).


unthrifty (adj.)

late 14c., unprofitable, useless, from un- (1) not + thrifty (adj.), or else from Middle English
noun unthrift profligacy, late 14c., earlier evil practice, wicked act (c.1300).


untidy (adj.)

early 13c., untimely, unseasonable, unsuitable, from un- (1) not + tidy (adj.). Similar formation in
West Frisian ontidich, Middle Dutch ontidich, Dutch ontijdig, Old High German unzitich, German
unzeitig, Norwegian utidig untimely, unseasonable, unfavorable. Meaning poorly cared for, not neat
is recorded from mid-14c.


untidy (v.)

make untidy, 1891, from untidy (adj.). Related: Untidied; untidying.


untie (v.)

Old English untigan loosen, unchain, from un- (2) opposite of + tie (v.). Related: Untied; untying.


until (prep.)

c.1200, from till (prep.). The first element is un- as far as, up to (also in  unto), from Old Norse
*und as far as, up to, from Proto-Germanic *und- (cognates: Old English o&eth; up to, as far as, Old
Frisian, Old Saxon, Gothic und), from PIE *nti-, from root *ant- front, forehead (see ante). The two
syllables have the same meaning. Originally also used of persons and places. As a conjunction from
c.1300. Similar formation in Swedish intill, Danish indtil. The Modern German equivalent, bis (Old
High German biaz), is a similar compound, of Old High German bi by, at, to and zu to.


untilled (adj.)

late 13c., from un- (1) not + past participle of till (v.).


untimely (adj.)

1530s, coming before the proper or usual time, from un- (1) not + timely (adj.). Similar formation
in Middle Danish utimelig, of weather, etc. Old English had untidlic unseasonable. Related:
Untimeliness.


untitled (adj.)

1610s, unnamed, from un- (1) not + past participle of title (v.). Meaning having no right is from
1660s; that of undistinguished by an aristocratic title is from 1798.


unto (prep.)

mid-13c., perhaps a modification of until, with southern to in place of northern equivalent till. Or
perhaps a contraction of native *und to, formed on the model of until from Old English *un- up to,
as far as, cognate of the first element in until. Very rare in standard writers of the 18th c.,
according to OED, and since then chiefly in dignified, archaic, or Biblical styles.


untold (adj.)

Old English unteald, not counted or reckoned, from un- (1) not + past participle of tell (v.) in its
original numerical sense. Similar formation in Middle Dutch ongetellet, German ungezahlt, Old Norse
utali&eth;r. Meaning not related or recounted is recorded from late 14c.


untouchable (adj.)

1560s, immaterial, from un- (1) not + touchable (see touch (v.)). Meaning that legally cannot be
interfered with is recorded from 1734. Meaning too loathsome or defiling to be touched is recorded
from 1873. The noun, in reference to a hereditary low caste of India, is attested from 1909; the
term and the restrictions were made illegal in India in 1947.


untouched (adj.)

late 14c., not been physically contacted, from un- (1) not + past participle of touch (v.). Meaning
unharmed, uninjured is from c.1400; that of not used at all is from 1530s; sense of unmoved
emotionally is from 1610s.


untoward (adj.)

1520s, not having inclination (to or for something), also difficult to manage, unruly, from un- (1)
not + toward (adj.).


untrained (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + past participle of train (v.).


untrammeled (adj.)

also untrammelled, 1795, from un- (1) not + past participle of trammel (v.).


untreatable (adj.)

late 14c., unmanageable, from un- (1) not + treatable (see treat (v.)). In medicine, of diseases,
conditions, etc., by 1865.


untried (adj.)

1510s, not proven or tested, from un- (1) not + tried.


untrodden (adj.)

c.1300, from un- (1) not + past participle of tread (v.).


untroubled (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of trouble (v.).


untrue (adj.)

Old English untreowe unfaithful (of persons), from un- (1) not + true (adj.). Similar formation in
Middle Dutch ongetrouwe, Middle Low German ungetruwe, Old High German ungitriuwi, Old Norse utryggr.
Meaning contrary to facts is attested from c.1300.


untrustworthy (adj.)

1846, from un- (1) not + trustworthy. Related: Untrustworthiness.


untruth (n.)

Old English untreow&thorn; unfaithfulness, treachery, from un- (1) not + truth (n.). Similar
formation in Old Norse utryg&eth;. Meaning falsehood is attested from mid-15c., as is that of a lie.
Related: Untruthful.


unturned (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + past participle of turn (v.).


untwist (v.)

1530s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + twist (v.). Related: Untwisted; untwisting.


unusable (adj.)

1825, from un- (1) not + usable (adj.).


unused (adj.)

c.1300, unaccustomed, from un- (1) not + past participle of use (v.). Meaning not employed is
recorded from late 14c.


unusual (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + usual (adj.). Related: Unusually.


unutterable (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + utterable (see utter (v.)). As a noun, from 1788; unutterables as a
euphemism for trousers is recorded by 1843.


unvanquished (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of vanquish (v.).


unvarnished (adj.)

c.1600, of statements, not embellished, from un- (1) not + past participle of varnish (v.). Literal
sense of not covered in varnish is recorded from 1758.


unvarying (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + present participle of vary (v.).


unveil (v.)

1590s, in reference to sight, to make clear, from un- (2) opposite of + veil (v.). Sense of to
display or reveal (something) is from 1650s. Related: Unveiled; unveiling.


unwanted (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + past participle of want (v.).


unwarranted (adj.)

1570s, from un- (1) not + past participle of warrant (v.).


unwary (adj.)

by 1570s, possibly late 14c., from un- (1) not + wary (adj.). Old English had unw&aelig;r
incautious, unw&aelig;rlic. Related: Unwarily.


unwashed (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of wash (v.). Replaced Middle English unwashen, from
Old English unw&aelig;scen. Noun sense of the lower class is attested from 1830.


unwavering (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + present participle of waver (v.).


unwearied (adj.)

mid-13c., from Old English ungewerigod, from un- (1) not + past participle of weary (v.).


unwed (adj.)

1510s, from un- (1) not + past participle of wed (v.). Unwedded unmarried; celibate is from c.1200.


unwelcome (adj.)

early 14c., from un- (1) not + welcome (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch onwillecome, German
unwillkommen.


unwell (adj.)

mid-15c., somewhat ill, from un- (1) not + well (adj.). Similar formation in North Frisian unwel,
German unwohl.


unwholesome (adj.)

c.1200, from un- (1) not + wholesome (adj.). Similar formation in Flemish onheylsaem, German
unheilsam, Old Norse uheilsamr.


unwieldy (adj.)

late 14c., lacking strength, powerless, from un- (1) not + obsolete wieldy, from Old English wielde
active, vigorous, from Proto-Germanic *walth- have power (see wield (v.)). Meaning moving
ungracefully is recorded from 1520s; in reference to weapons, difficult to handle, awkward by virtue
of size or shape it is attested from 1540s. Related: Unwieldiness.


unwilling (adj.)

early 15c., altered from or re-formed to replace Middle English unwilland, from Old English
unwillende; see un- (1) not + willing (adj.); see -ing (2). Related: Unwillingly; unwillingness.


unwind (v.)

early 14c., to undo (a bandage, wrapping, etc.), from un- (2) opposite of + wind (v.1). Similar
formation in Old English unwindan unveil, uncover, Dutch ontwinden, Old High German intwindan.
Reflexive sense is recorded from 1740; figurative sense of to release oneself from tensions, to
relax is by 1938. Related: Unwound; unwinding.


unwise (adj.)

Old English unwis, from un- (1) not + wise (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch onwijs, Old
High German unwis, German unweise, Old Norse uviss, Gothic unweis.


unwisely (adv.)

Old English unwislice foolishly; see unwise + -ly (2).


unwitting (adj.)

late 14c., altered from or re-formed to replace unwitand, from Old English unwitende ignorant, from
un- (1) not + witting (adj.); see -ing (2). Similar formation in Old High German unwizzanti, German
unwissend, Old Norse uvitandi, Gothic unwitands. Rare after c.1600; revived c.1800. Related:
Unwittingly.


unwonted (adj.)

not usual, 1550s, from un- (1) not + wonted. Earlier (and more correctly) unwont (c.1400).


unworkable (adj.)

1784, from un- (1) not + workable (adj.).


unworldly (adj.)

1707, from un- (1) not + worldly (adj.). Related: Unworldliness.


unworthy (adj.)

mid-13c., unwur&eth;i, from un- (1) not + worthy (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch
onwerdich, Dutch onwaardig, Middle Low German unwerdich, Old High German unwirdig, Old Norse
uver&eth;ugr. Old English had unweor&eth;lic. Related: Unworthiness.


unwound (adj.)

no longer wound, 1707, from un- (1) not + past participle of wind (v.).


unwrap (v.)

late 14c., from un- (2) opposite of + wrap (v.). Related: Unwrapped; unwrapping.


unwritten (adj.)

mid-14c., from un- (1) not + past participle of write (v.). Similar formation in Old English
unwriten, Old Norse uritinn.


unyielding (adj.)

1590s of persons; 1650s, of substances; from un- (1) not + yielding (see yield (v.)).


unzip (v.)

1939, from un- (2) opposite of + zip (v.). Related: Unzipped; unzipping.


up (adv.)

Old English up, uppe, from Proto-Germanic *upp- up (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon up up, upward,
Old Norse upp; Danish, Dutch op; Old High German uf, German auf up; Gothic iup up, upward, uf on,
upon, under; Old High German oba, German ob over, above, on, upon), from PIE root *upo up from below
(cognates: Sanskrit upa near, under, up to, on, Greek hypo under, below, Latin sub under; see sub-).
As a preposition, to a higher place from c.1500; also along, through (1510s), toward (1590s). Often
used elliptically for go up, come up, rise up, etc. Up the river in jail first recorded 1891,
originally in reference to Sing Sing, which is up the Hudson from New York City. To drive someone up
the wall (1951) is from the notion of the behavior of lunatics or caged animals. Insulting retort up
yours (scil. ass) attested by late 19c.


up (v.)

1550s, to drive and catch (swans), from up (adv.). Intransitive meaning get up, rise to one's feet
(as in up and leave) is recorded from 1640s. Sense of to move upward is recorded from 1737. Meaning
increase (as in up the price of oil) is attested from 1915. Compare Old English verb uppian to rise
up, swell. Related: Upped; upping. Upping block is attested from 1796.


up (n.)

that which is up, 1530s, from up (adv.). Phrase on the up-(and-up) honest, straightforward first
attested 1863, American English.


up (adj.)

c.1300, dwelling inland or upland, from up (adv.). Meaning going up is from 1784. From 1815 as
excited, exhilarated, happy, hence enthusiastic, optimistic. Up-and-coming promising is from 1848.
Musical up-tempo (adj.) is recorded from 1948.


up-

prefix with various senses, from Old English up (adv.), corresponding to similar prefixes in other
Germanic languages.


up-and-down (adj.)

1610s, from adverbial phrase up and down (c.1200); see up (adv.) + down (adv.).


up-country (n.)

interior regions, 1680s, from up- + country (n.). As an adjective from 1810; as an adverb from 1864.


up-current (adj.)

1909, from up- + current (n.).


up-market (adj.)

1972, from up- + market (n.).


up-river (prep.)

1773, from up + river. As an adverb from 1848.


up-to-date (adv.)

1840, right to the present time, from phrase up to date, probably originally from bookkeeping. As an
adjective from 1865. Meaning having the latest facts is recorded from 1889; that of having current
styles and tastes is from 1891.


Upanishad (n.)

one of a class of speculative treatises in Sanskrit literature, 1805, from Sanskrit upa-nishad,
literally a sitting down beside. From upa near to (see up (adv.)) + ni-shad to sit or lie down, from
ni downward (from PIE *ni-, see nether) + -sad sitting, From PIE *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


upas (n.)

legendary poisonous tree of Java, 1783, via Dutch, from Malay upas poison, in pohun upas poison
tree. As the name of an actual tree (Antiaris toxicaria) yielding poisonous sap, from 1814.


upbeat (adj.)

with a positive mood, 1947, apparently from on the upbeat improving, getting better, attested from
1934 and a favorite of Billboard headline-writers in the early 1940s, from the musical noun upbeat
(1869), referring to the beat of a bar at which the conductor's baton is in a raised position; from
up (adv.) + beat (n.). The optimistic sense apparently for no other reason than that it sounds like
a happy word (the musical upbeat is no more inherently positive than any other beat).


upbraid (v.)

Old English upbregdan bring forth as a ground for censure, from up (adv.) + bregdan move quickly,
intertwine (see braid (v.)). Similar formation in Middle Swedish upbrygdha. Meaning scold is first
attested late 13c. Related: Upbraided; upbraiding.


upbringing (n.)

1510s, act of rearing a young person, from up (adv.) + bringing (see bring (v.)). Mainly in Scottish
in 16c.; in general use from c.1870, according to OED. A verb upbring (past participle upbrought)
was in Middle English in a sense raise, rear, bring up, nurture (c.1300), but in Middle English
upbringing is attested only as act of introducing (c.1400).


upchuck (v.)

to vomit, by 1960, American English slang, from up (adv.) + chuck (v.) to throw.


upcoming (adj.)

1848, rising; 1949, forthcoming, from up (adv.) + coming (see come (v.)). It was a noun in Middle
English, meaning action of ascending (mid-14c.), also attack, onslaught (c.1300).


update (v.)

1944, in reference to information, 1952 in reference to persons, from up (adv.) + date (v.1).
Related: Updated; updating. The noun is attested from 1967.


updraft (n.)

also updraught, rising air current, 1909, from up (adj.) + draft (n.).


upend (v.)

also up-end, set on end, 1823, from up + end. Related: Upended; upending.


upfield (adv.)

1951, from up (adv.) + field (n.).


upfront (adj.)

1932 (two words) in the front, from up + front (n.). Meaning honest, open; paid in advance is from
1967.


upgather (v.)

also up-gather, 1580s, from verbal phrase, from up (adv.) + gather (v.). Related: Upgathered;
upgathering.


upgrade (n.)

also up-grade, 1847, upward slope, from up (adj.) + grade (n.). The meaning upgraded version is
recorded from 1980.


upgrade (v.)

increase to a higher grade or rank, 1904 (transitive); 1950 (intransitive), from up (adv.) + grade
(v.). Related: Upgraded; upgrading.


upheaval (n.)

1838, in geology, from verb upheave (c.1300, from up (adv.) + heave (v.)) + -al (2). Figurative
sense, with reference to convulsions of society, etc., recorded from 1850. Similarly formed verbs
are Old Frisian upheva, Old High German ufhevan, German aufheben.


upheld

past participle of uphold (q.v.).


uphill (adj.)

1610s, from up + hill. As an adverb from c.1600. Grose's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue (1785) has
Uphills, false dice that run high.


uphold (v.)

c.1200, support, sustain, from up (adv.) + hold (v.). Similar formation in Old Frisian upholda,
Middle Dutch ophouden, German aufhalten. Meaning maintain in good condition or repair is from 1570s.
Related: Upheld; upholding.


upholster (v.)

1853, back-formation from upholsterer. Related: Upholstered; upholstering.


upholsterer (n.)

tradesman who finishes or repairs articles of furniture (1610s), from upholdester (early 15c.; early
14c. as a surname), formed with diminutive (originally fem.) suffix -ster + obsolete Middle English
noun upholder dealer in small goods (c.1300), from upholden to repair, uphold, keep from falling or
sinking (in this case, by stuffing); see uphold (v.).


upholstery (n.)

upholsterer's work, furniture covered with textile materials, interior fittings made from textiles,
1640s; see upholster + -y (4).


upkeep (n.)

maintenance; cost of maintenance, 1849, from up (adv.) + keep (v.).


upland (n.)

interior district of a country, Old English upland the country (as opposed to the town), from up- +
land (n.). As an adjective from 14c. Related: Uplandish (Old English uplendisc rural rustic);
uplander. Jock Upaland was a 16c.-17c. term for a rustic.


uplift (v.)

mid-14c., from up (adv.) + lift (v.). Related: Uplifted; uplifting.


uplift (n.)

1845, from up (adj.) + lift (n.).


uplink (n.)

1968, from up- + link (n.).


upload (v.)

by 1980, from up (adv.) + load (v.). Related: Uploaded; uploading.


upon (prep.)

early 12c., from Old English uppan (prep.) on, upon, up to, against, from up (adv.) + on (prep.);
probably influenced by Scandinavian sources such as Old Norse upp a.


upon (adv.)

Old English upon; see up (adv.) + on (prep.).


upper (adj.)

c.1300, originally comparative of up (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch upper, Dutch opper,
Low German upper, Norwegian yppare. Upper hand advantage is late 15c., probably from wrestling.
Upperclassman is recorded from 1871.   Upper crust is attested from mid-15c. in reference to the top
crust of a loaf of bread, 1836 in reference to society. Upper middle class (adj.) is recorded from
1835. Upper ten thousand (1844) was common mid-19c. for wealthier and more aristocratic part of a
large community; hence uppertendom.


upper (n.)

part of a shoe above the sole, 1789, from upper (adj.). Sense of stimulant drug is from 1968, agent
noun from up (v.).


uppercut (n.)

in pugilism, a close-in strike upward with the fist, 1831, from upper + cut (n.). Perhaps the image
is of chopping a tree by making cuts up (as well as down) in the trunk.    It was on a side hill,
and I observed a boy, who appeared to be about fifteen years of age, opposite the house felling a
large tree; he had cut a few chips from the under side, and was then making the principal incision
on the upper. ... I said to the boy, Well Sir, I see that you make the upper cut. That is the true
cut, said the boy; for if you will take the axe and try below, you will find that the tree will
crowd down upon your chips, and you can't get it down in double the time. [Theodore Sedgwick, Hints
to My Countrymen, 1826]


uppermost (adj.)

mid-15c., from upper (adj.) + -most.


uppish (adj.)

1670s, lavish, from up (adv.) + -ish. Sense of conceited, arrogant, proudly self-assertive attested
from 1734. Related: Uppishly; uppishness.


uppity (adj.)

1880, American English, from up + -ity; originally used by blacks of other blacks felt to be too
self-assertive (first recorded use is in Uncle Remus).


upraise (v.)

c.1300, from up (adv.) + raise (v.). Related: Upraised; upraising.


upright (adj.)

Old English upriht erect, face-upward; see up (adv.) + right (adj.1). Similar compounds are found in
other Germanic languages (Old Frisian upriucht, Middle Dutch oprecht, Old High German ufreht, German
aufrecht, Old Norse uprettr). Figurative sense of good, honest, adhering to rectitude is first
attested 1520s.    As an adverb, Old English uprihte. As a noun, 1560s in the sense a vertical
front; c.1700 as a vertical timber in framing; 1742 in the sense something standing erect. Meaning
an upright piano is from 1860.    THREE-PENNY UPRIGHT. A retailer of love, who, for the sum
mentioned, dispenses her favours standing against a wall. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]
<hr />   The bent-over rear-entry posture they are talking about, of course, is kubda, the three-
obol position at the bottom-end of a prostitute's price-range. [James N. Davidson, Courtesans and
Fishcakes: The Consuming Passions of Classical Athens, 1997]


uprise (v.)

c.1300, stand up; get out of bed; ascend to a higher level, from up (adv.) + rise (v.). Similar
formation in West Frisian oprize, Middle Dutch oprisen, Dutch oprijzen.


uprising (n.)

mid-13c., action of rising from death or the grave, resurrection, from up (adv.) + rising (n.).
Meaning action of rising from bed is recorded from c.1300; sense of insurrection, popular revolt
first attested 1580s.


uproar (n.)

1520s, outbreak of disorder, revolt, commotion, used by Tindale and later Coverdale as a loan-
translation of German Aufruhr or Dutch oproer tumult, riot, literally a stirring up, in German and
Dutch bibles (as in Acts xxi:38). From German auf (Middle Dutch op) up (see up (adv.)) + ruhr
(Middle Dutch roer) a stirring, motion, related to Old English hreran to move, stir, shake (see rare
(adj.2)). Meaning noisy shouting is first recorded 1540s, probably by mistaken association with
unrelated roar.


uproarious (adj.)

1791, from uproar + -ous. Related: Uproariously.


uproot (v.)

1590s (implied in uprooted), in the figurative sense, from up (adv.) + root (v.). The literal sense
is first recorded 1690s. Related: Uprooted; uprooting.


upscale (adj.)

1966, at the higher end of a scale, superior, a commercial word, from up (adv.) + scale (v.3).


upset (v.)

mid-15c., to set up, fix, from up (adv.) + set (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch opsetten set
up, propose, German aufsetzen. Modern sense of overturn, capsize (1803) is that of obsolete overset.
In reference to the stomach, from 1834. Meaning to throw into mental discomposure is from 1805.
Related: Upsetting.


upset (n.)

early 15c., insurrection, from upset (v.). Meaning overturning of a vehicle or boat is recorded from
1804.


upset (adj.)

early 14c., erected, past participle adjective from upset (v.). From 1805 as distressed.


upshot (n.)

1530s, from up (adj.) + shot (n.); originally, the final shot in an archery match, hence the
figurative sense of result, issue, conclusion (c.1600).


upside (n.)

1610s, upper side or surface, from up (adj.) + side (n.). Adverbial phrase upside (someone's) head
in reference to a blow to the head is recorded from 1970, U.S. black slang.


upside down (adv.)

late 15c., earlier upsadoun (late 14c.), up so down (c.1300); the so perhaps meaning as if. As an
adjective from 1866.


upsilon (n.)

20th letter of the Greek alphabet, 1640s, from Greek u psilon, literally a mere (or bare) 'u;'  so
called in later Greek in reference to its sound. The exact reason is variously explained, but it
seems to have had something to do with distinguishing it from diphthongs.


upskirt (adj.)

by 1997, from up (adv.) + skirt (n.). As a verb by 2008.    Upskirt videos, usually taken using low-
hanging bags, feature up-close-and-personal crotch shots of leggy, panty-clad young women. [Weekly
World News, Sept. 29, 1998]


upstage (adv.)

1870, in theatrical jargon, to the rear of the stage, from up (adv.) + stage (n.). The notion in the
verb (1921) is of drawing attention to oneself (and away from a fellow actor) by moving upstage, so
that the other actor must face away from the audience.


upstairs (adv.)

1590s, from up (adv.) + stairs (see stair). As an adjective from 1782. The noun is first attested
1872. Adjectival meaning characteristic of upstairs life (in private rooms of a household, as
opposed to servants' quarters) is recorded from 1942.    He [Halifax] had said he had known many
kicked down stairs, but he never knew any kicked up stairs before. [Gilbert Burnet, supplement to
History of My own Time, from his original memoirs, c.1697]


upstanding (adj.)

14c., altered from or replacing Old English upstandene, in the literal sense, from up (adv.) +
standing (see stand (v.)); see -ing (2). Figurative sense of honest is attested from 1863. A verb
upstand stand up, be erect, rise is recorded from c.1200.


upstart (n.)

1550s, one newly risen from a humble position to one of power, importance, or rank, a parvenu, also
start-up, from up (adv.) + start (v.) in the sense of jump, spring, rise. As an adjective from
1560s. Compare the archaic verb upstart to spring to one's feet, attested from c.1300.


upstate (adv.)

1901, American English, from up (adv.) + state (n.).


upstream (adv.)

also up-stream, 1680s, from up (adv.) + stream (n.). As an adjective from 1838.


upsurge (n.)

1916, from up (adv.) + surge (n.).


upswing (n.)

1922, in golf, from up (adv.) + swing (n.). Sense in economics is attested from 1934.


upsy-daisy (adv.)

1711, up-a-daisy, baby talk extension of up (adv.). Compare lackadaisical. A word upsee was in use
in English late 17c. in phrases such as upsee-Dutch in the Dutch style (of drinking), from Dutch op
zijn, and also occasionally as an adverb, extremely, and could have had an influence on this word.


uptake (n.)

capacity for understanding, perceptive power, 1816, from up (adv.) + take (v.). Compare Middle
English verb uptake to pick or take up (c.1300). Meaning pipe leading up from the smoke box of a
steam boiler to the chimney is from 1839.


uptick (n.)

upward trend, 1962, an economist's term, from up (adv.) + tick (v.), in reference to some recording
mechanism.


uptight (adj.)

tense, slang, 1934, from up- + tight (adj.). Meaning straight-laced first recorded 1969. It was used
in a sense of excellent in jazz slang c.1962.


uptown (adv.)

1802, to or in the higher or upper portion of a town, from up (adv.) + town (n.). As an adjective
from 1838. As this usually was the residential portion of a town (especially a port) the word had
overtones of residential quarter as opposed to commercial and industrial district. As a noun from
1946, often meaning more prosperous area of town.


upturn (n.)

1868, upturned part, from up (adv.) + turn (n.). Meaning improvement (especially in economics) is
from 1930.


upward (adv.)

also upwards, Old English upweard, upweardes up, upward, toward heaven; see up (adv.) + -ward.
Similar formation in Middle Low German upwart, Middle Dutch opwaert, Dutch opwaart, Middle High
German ufwart. As an adjective from c.1600 (also in Old English). Phrase upward mobility first
recorded 1949; mainly restricted to sociologists' jargon until 1960s.


upwelling (adj.)

1854, from up (adv.) + present participle of well (v.). As a noun from 1868. A verb upwell is
attested from 1885.


upwind (adv.)

also up-wind, 1838, from up (adv.) + wind (n.1). Originally a nautical term. As an adjective from
1942.


ur-

prefix meaning original, earliest, primitive, from German ur- out of, original, from Proto-Germanic
*uz- out, from PIE *ud- up, out (see out (adv.)) At first only in words borrowed from German (such
as ursprache hypothetical primitive language); since mid-20c. a living prefix in English. Compare
also Urschleim under protoplasm and Urquell under Pilsner.


uracil (n.)

pyramidine base, coined in German, 1885, perhaps from urea + German Acets&auml;ure acetic acid (or
possibly acrylic) + chemical suffix -il.


Ural

mountain range between Europe and Asia (the river is named for the mountains), of uncertain origin.
Perhaps from Vogul urala mountain peak or from Tatar ural boundary.


Urania

name of the Muse of astronomy and celestial forces, from Latin Urania, from Greek Ourania, fem. of
ouranios, literally heavenly, from ouranos (see Uranus).


uranian (adj.)

homosexual, 1893, from the reference to Aphrodite in Plato's Symposium; Urania Heavenly (Greek
Ourania; see Uranus) being an epithet of Aphrodite as born of Uranus and also as distinguished from
the vulgar Venus of commonplace lust.    But the son of the heavenly Aphrodite is sprung from a
mother in whose birth the female has no part, but she is from the male only; this is that love which
is of youths only, and the goddess being older has nothing of wantonness. Those who are inspired by
this love turn to the male, and delight in him who is the more valiant and intelligent nature; any
one may recognize the pure enthusiasts in the very character of their attachments. [B. Jowett,
transl., 1874]    Also as a noun, a homosexual person (1908). Related uranism homosexuality (1893).


Uranian (adj.)

pertaining to the planet Uranus, 1844, from comb. form of Uranus + -ian.


uranium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1797, named 1789 in Modern Latin by its discoverer, German chemist and
mineralogist Martin Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817), for the recently found planet Uranus (q.v.).


Uranus

first planet discovered that was not known in ancient times, named for the god of Heaven, husband of
Gaia, the Earth, from Latin Uranus, from Greek Ouranos literally heaven, the sky; in Greek
cosmology, the god who personifies the heavens, father of the titans.    The planet was discovered
and identified as such in 1781 by Sir William Herschel (it had been observed before, but mistaken
for a star; in 1690 John Flamsteed cataloged it as 34 Tauri); Herschel proposed calling it Georgium
Sidus, literally George's Star, in honour of his patron, King George III of England.  I cannot but
wish to take this opportunity of expressing my sense of gratitude, by giving the name of Georgium
Sidus ... to a star which (with respect to us) first began to shine under His auspicious reign. [Sir
William Herschel, 1783]  The planet was known in English in 1780s as the Georgian Planet; French
astronomers began calling Herschel, and ultimately German astronomer Johann Bode proposed Uranus as
in conformity with other planet names. However, the name didn't come into common usage until c.1850.


urban (adj.)

characteristic of city life, pertaining to cities or towns, 1610s (but rare before 1830s), from
Latin urbanus of or pertaining to a city or city life; in Rome, also in city fashion, polished,
refined, cultivated, courteous, but also sometimes witty, facetious, bold, impudent; as a noun, city
dweller, from urbs (genitive urbis) city, walled town, of unknown origin.    The word gradually
emerged in this sense as urbane became restricted to manners and styles of expression. In late 20c.
American English gradually acquiring a suggestion of African-American. Urban renewal, euphemistic
for slum clearance, is attested from 1955, American English. Urban sprawl recorded by 1958. Urban
legend attested by 1980.


Urban

masc. proper name, from Latin urbanus refined, courteous, literally of a city (see urban).


urbane (adj.)

1530s, of or relating to cities or towns, from Middle French urbain (14c.) and directly from Latin
urbanus belonging to a city, also citified, elegant (see urban). The meaning having the manners of
townspeople, courteous, refined is from 1620s, from a secondary sense in classical Latin. Urbanity
in this sense is recorded from 1530s. For sense connection and differentiation of form, compare
human/humane; german/germane.


urbanisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of urbanization. For spelling, see -ize.


urbanism (n.)

1885, from urban + -ism.


urbanite (n.)

1897, from urban + -ite.


urbanity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French urbanit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin urbanitatem (nominative
urbanitas) city life; life in Rome; refinement, city fashion or manners, elegance, courtesy, also
wit, raillery, trickery, from urbanus (see urban).


urbanization (n.)

1888, noun of action from urbanize.


urbanize (v.)

1640s, to make more civil; 1884 to make into a city, from urban + -ize; in the latter sense from
French urbaniser (1873). Related: Urbanized; urbanizing.


urceolate (adj.)

1760, with -ate (1) + Latin urceolus, diminutive of urceus pitcher, of uncertain origin (see urn).


urchin (n.)

c.1300, yrichon hedgehog, from Old North French *irechon (cognates: Picard irechon, Walloon ireson,
Hainaut hirchon), from Old French herichun hedgehog (Modern French h&eacute;risson), formed with
diminutive suffix -on + Vulgar Latin *hericionem, from Latin ericius hedgehog, enlarged form of er,
originally *her, from PIE root *ghers- to bristle (cognates: Greek kheros hedgehog; see horror).
Still used for hedgehog in non-standard speech in Cumbria, Yorkshire, Shropshire. Applied throughout
16c. to people whose appearance or behavior suggested hedgehogs, from hunchbacks (1520s) to goblins
(1580s) to bad girls (1530s); meaning poorly or raggedly clothed youngster emerged 1550s, but was
not in frequent use until after c.1780. Sea urchin is recorded from 1590s (a 19c. Newfoundland name
for them was whore's eggs); Johnson describes it as a kind of crabfish that has prickles instead of
feet.


Urdu

official language of Pakistan, 1796, from Hindustani urdu camp, from Turkish ordu (source of horde);
short for zaban-i-urdu language of the camp. Compare Dzongkha, a variant of Tibetan and the official
language of Bhutan, literally the language of the fortress. So named because it grew up since the
eleventh century in the camps of the Mohammedan conquerors of India as a means of communication
between them and the subject population of central Hindustan. [Century Dictionary]


ure (n.)

effect, operation, practice, early 15c., from Old French uevre (13c., Modern French oeuvre), from
Latin opera (see opera).


urea (n.)

compound found in the urine of animals, 1806, Latinized from French ur&eacute;e (1803), from Greek
ouron urine (see urine).


uremia (n.)

1857, Modern Latin, from Greek ouron urine (see urine) + haima blood (see -emia).


ureter (n.)

1570s, from medical Latin ureter, from Greek oureter urinary duct of the kidneys, from ourein to
urinate, from ouron (see urine). Related: Uretral.


urethane (n.)

1838, from French ur&eacute;thane (1833), coined by Dumas, apparently from urea + ether + -ane as a
generic chemical suffix.


urethra (n.)

canal through which urine is discharged from the bladder, 1630s, from Late Latin urethra, from Greek
ourethra the passage for urine, coined by Hippocrates from ourein to urinate, from ouron (see
urine). Related: Urethral.


urethritis (n.)

1823, medical Latin, from urethra + -itis.


uretic (adj.)

1849, from Late Latin ureticus, from Greek ouretikos, from ourein (see urine).


urge (v.)

1550s, from Latin urgere to press hard, push forward, force, drive, compel, stimulate, from PIE root
*wreg- to push, shove, drive (cognates: Lithuanian verziu tie, fasten, squeeze, vargas need,
distress, vergas slave; Old Church Slavonic vragu enemy; Gothic wrikan persecute, Old English wrecan
drive, hunt, pursue). Related: Urged; urging.


urge (n.)

1610s, act of urging, from urge (v.). Marked as rare in Century Dictionary (1902); in frequent use
from c.1910 [OED].


urgency (n.)

1530s, probably from urgent + -cy.


urgent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French urgent pressing, impelling (14c.), from Latin urgentem (nominative
urgens), present participle of urgere to press hard, urge (see urge (v.)). Related: Urgently.


Uriah

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, the Hittite husband of Bathsheba; of non-Hebrew (possibly
Horite) origin, but explained by folk etymology as Hebrew Uriyyah, literally flame of the Lord.
Uriah Heep, character from Dickens' David Copperfield (1850) sometimes is invoked as the type of a
hypocritically humble person.


uric (adj.)

pertaining to or obtained from urine, 1797, from French urique, from urine (see urine). Uric acid
attested from 1800.


urinal (n.)

c.1200, glass vial to receive urine for medical inspection, from Old French urinal, from Late Latin
urinal, from urinalis (adj.) relating to urine, from Latin urina (see urine). Meaning chamber pot is
from late 15c. Modern sense of fixture for urinating (for men) is attested from 1851.


urinalysis (n.)

1889, from urine + analysis.


urinary (adj.)

1570s, from Modern Latin urinarius, from Latin urina (see urine).


urinate (v.)

1590s, back-formation from urination or else from Medieval Latin urinatus, past participle of
urinare, from urina (see urine). Related: Urinated; urinating.


urination (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin urinationem (nominative urinatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of urinare (v.), from urina (see urine.


urine (n.)

c.1300, from Old French orine, urine (12c.) and directly from Latin urina urine, from PIE *ur-
(cognates: Greek ouron urine), variant of root *we-r- water, liquid, milk (cognates: Sanskrit var
water, Avestan var rain, Lithuanian jures sea, Old English w&aelig;r, Old Norse ver sea, Old Norse
ur drizzling rain), related to *eue-dh-r (see udder).


URL

by 1990, initialism (acronym) from uniform resource locator.


urn (n.)

late 14c., large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead, from Latin urna a jar, vessel
of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead (also used as a ballot box and for
drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus pitcher, jug, and from the same source
as Greek hyrke earthen vessel. But another theory connects it to Latin urere to burn (compare bust
(n.1)).


uro-

word-forming element meaning urine, from comb. form of Greek ouron urine (see urine).


urogenital (adj.)

1838, from uro- + genital. Form urinogenital is attested from 1836.


urologist (n.)

1873; see urology + -ist.


urology (n.)

1753, from uro- + -logy.


Ursa

in constellation names, Old English, from Latin ursa she-bear (see ursine).


urschleim (n.)

1921, from German Urschleim original mucus, from ur- (see ur-) + Schleim (see slime (n.)).


ursine (adj.)

pertaining to a bear, 1550s, from Latin ursinus of or resembling a bear, from ursus a bear, cognate
with Greek arktos, from PIE *rtko- (see Arctic).


ursprache (n.)

proto-language, 1908, from German Ursprache, from ur- (see ur-) + sprache speech (see speech).


Ursula

fem. proper name, from Latin Ursula, diminutive of ursa she-bear (see ursine). The Ursuline order of
Catholic women was founded as Brescia in 1537 and named for Saint Ursula.


urticaria (n.)

nettle-rash, medical Latin, from Latin urtica nettle, stinging nettle (figuratively spur, incentive,
stimulant), from urere to burn, from PIE root *eus- to burn (see ember). Related: Urticarial.


Uruguay

country named for river that flows past it, which is from a native name in an extinct language, said
to represent uru bird + guay tail, perhaps a reference to some totemic animal. Related: Uruguayan.


us (pron.)

Old English us (cognate with Old Saxon, Old Frisian us, Old Norse, Swedish oss, Dutch ons, German
uns), accusative and dative plural of we, from PIE *nes- (2), forming oblique cases of the first
person plural personal pronoun (cognates: Sanskrit nas, Avestan na, Hittite nash us; Greek no we
two; Latin nos we, us; Old Church Slavonic ny us, nasu our; Old Irish ni, Welsh ni we, us). The -n-
is preserved in Germanic in Dutch ons, German uns.


US

also U.S., abbreviation of United States, attested from 1834. U.S.A. for United States of America is
recorded from 1885; before that it generally meant U.S. Army.


USA

also U.S.A., abbreviation of United States of America, in use by 1814 in addresses, etc.; not common
otherwise before c.1920. Before then it often also meant United States Army.


usable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French usable available, in use (14c.), from user (see use (v.)). Not a common
word before c.1840, when probably it was re-formed from use (v.) + -able. Related: Usably.


usage (n.)

c.1300, established practice, custom, from Anglo-French and Old French usage custom, habit,
experience; taxes levied, from us, from Latin usus use, custom (see use (v.)). From late 14c. as
service, use, act of using something.


usb

initialism (acronym) for universal serial bus, by 1994.


use (v.)

c.1200, employ for a purpose, from Old French user employ, make use of, practice, frequent, from
Vulgar Latin *usare use, frequentative form of past participle stem of Latin uti make use of, profit
by, take advantage of, enjoy, apply, consume, in Old Latin oeti use, employ, exercise, perform, of
uncertain origin. Related: Used; using. Replaced Old English brucan (see brook (v.)). From late 14c.
as take advantage of.


use (n.)

c.1200, act of employing, from Anglo-French and Old French us custom, practice, usage, from Latin
usus use, custom, practice, employment, skill, habit, from past participle stem of uti (see use
(v.)).


used (adj.)

second-hand, 1590s, past participle adjective from use (v.). To be used to accustomed, familiar is
recorded by late 14c. Verbal phrase used to formerly did or was (as in I used to love her)
represents a construction attested from c.1300, and common from c.1400, from use (intransitive) be
accustomed, practice customarily, but now surviving only in past tense form. The pronunciation is
affected by the t- of to. Used-to-be (n.) one who has outlived his fame is from 1853.


useful (adj.)

1590s, from use (n.) + -full. Related: Usefully; usefulness.


useless (adj.)

1590s, from use (n.) + -less. Related: Uselessly; uselessness.


user (n.)

c.1400, agent noun from use (v.). Of narcotics, from 1935; of computers, from 1967. User-friendly
(1977) is said in some sources to have been coined by software designer Harlan Crowder as early as
1972.


username (n.)

by 1982, from user + name (n.).


usher (n.)

late 13c., servant who has charge of doors and admits people to a chamber, hall, etc., from Anglo-
French usser (12c.), Old French ussier, uissier porter, doorman, from Vulgar Latin *ustiarius
doorkeeper, variant of Latin ostiarius door-keeper, from ostium door, entrance, from os mouth, from
PIE *os- mouth (see oral). Fem. form usherette is attested from 1913, American English.


usher (v.)

1590s, conduct, escort, admit ceremoniously, from usher (n.). Related: Ushered; ushering.


USSR

also U.S.S.R., initialism (acronym) of Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, by 1926.


Ustashi

Croatian separatise movement, 1932, from Croatian Usta&#353;e, plural of Usta&#353;a insurgent,
rebel.


usual (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French usuel current, in currency (of money), valid (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin usualis ordinary, from Latin usus custom (see use (v.)). The usual suspects is from a
line delivered by Claude Rains (as a French police inspector) in Casablanca (1942).


usually (adv.)

late 15c., from usual + -ly (2).


usufruct (n.)

right to the use and profits of the property of another without damaging it, 1610s (implied in
usufructuary), from Late Latin usufructus, in full usus et fructus use and enjoyment, from Latin
usus a use (see use (n.)) + fructus enjoyment, literally fruit (see fruit). Attested earlier in
delatinized form usufruit (late 15c.).


usurer (n.)

late 13c., one who lends money at interest, but later especially one who lends money at an
exorbitant rate of interest, from Anglo-French usurer, Old French usurier, usureor, from Medieval
Latin usurarius money-lender, usurer, from Latin usurarius (adj.) pertaining to interest; that pays
interest, from usura (see usury).


usurious (adj.)

c.1600, from usury + -ous. Related: Usuriously.


usurp (v.)

early 14c., from Old French usurper to (wrongfully) appropriate (14c.), from Latin usurpare make use
of, seize for use, in later Latin to assume unlawfully, trespass on, from usus a use (see use (v.))
+ rapere to seize (see rapid (adj.)). Related: Usurped; usurping.


usurpation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French usurpacion, from Latin usurpationem (nominative usurpatio) a taking into
use, noun of action from past participle stem of usurpare (see usurp).


usurper (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from usurp (v.).


usury (n.)

c.1300, practice of lending money at interest, later, at excessive rates of interest, from Medieval
Latin usuria, alteration of Latin usura payment for the use of money, interest, literally a usage,
use, enjoyment, from usus, from stem of uti (see use (v.)). From mid-15c. as premium paid for the
use of money, interest, especially exorbitant interest.


Utah

U.S. teritory organized 1850 (admitted as a state 1896), from Spanish yuta, name of the indigenous
Uto-Aztecan people of the Great Basin (Modern English Ute), perhaps from Western Apache (Athabaskan)
yudah high (in reference to living in the mountains).


Ute

1826; see Utah.


utensil (n.)

late 14c., from Old French utensile implement (14c., Modern French ustensile), from Latin utensilia
materials, things for use, noun use of neuter plural of utensilis (adj.) fit for use, of use,
useful, from uti (see use (v.)).


uterine (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to the womb (from early 15c. as having the same birth-mother), from Old French
uterin, from Late Latin uterinus pertaining to the womb, also born of the same mother, from Latin
uterus womb (see uterus).


utero-

before vowels uter-, word-forming element, from comb. form of Latin uterus (see uterus).


uterus (n.)

female organ of gestation, womb, late 14c., from Latin uterus womb, belly (plural uteri), from PIE
root *udero- abdomen, womb, stomach (cognates: Sanskrit udaram belly, Greek hystera womb, Lithuanian
vederas sausage, intestines, stomach, lower abdomen, Old Church Slavonic vedro bucket, barrel,
Russian vedro).


Utgard

abode of the giants in Norse mythology, from Old Norse Utgar&eth;ar, from ut out (see out (adv.)) +
gar&eth;r yard (see yard (n.1)).


utile (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French utile useful (13c.), from Latin utilis useful, beneficial, profitable,
from uti (see use (v.)).


utilisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of utilization (q.v.). For spelling, see -ize.


utilitarian (n.)

1781, coined by Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) from utility + -arian on the model of + unitarian, etc.
One guided by the doctrine of the greatest happiness for the greatest number. From 1802 as an
adjective; in the general sense having regard to utility rather than beauty, from 1847.


utilitarianism (n.)

1827, from utilitarian + -ism. The doctrine that the end of all action should be the greatest
happiness of the greatest number.


utility (n.)

late 14c., fact of being useful, from Old French utilite usefulness (13c., Modern French +
utilit&#233;), earlier utilitet (12c.), from Latin utilitatem (nominative utilitas) usefulness,
serviceableness, profit, from utilis usable, from uti (see use (v.)). Meaning a useful thing is from
late 15c. As a shortened form of public utility it is recorded from 1930.


utilization (n.)

1847, noun of action from utilize. Compare French utilisation.


utilize (v.)

1794, from French utiliser, from Italian utilizzare, from utile usable, from Latin utilis usable,
from uti (see use (v.)).   Utilize is fast antiquating improve, in the sense of 'turn to account.'
[Fitzedward Hall, Modern English, 1873]


utmost (adj.)

Old English utmest (Anglian) outermost, double superlative of ut out (see out (adv.)) + -most.
Meaning being of the greatest or highest degree is from early 14c.


utopia (n.)

1551, from Modern Latin Utopia, literally nowhere, coined by Thomas More (and used as title of his
book, 1516, about an imaginary island enjoying the utmost perfection in legal, social, and political
systems), from Greek ou not + topos place (see topos). Extended to any perfect place by 1610s.
Commonly, but incorrectly, taken as from Greek eu- good (see eu-) an error reinforced by the
introduction of dystopia.


utopian (adj.)

1550s, with reference to More's fictional country; 1610s as extravagantly ideal, impossibly
visionary, from utopia + -an. As a noun meaning visionary idealist it is recorded by 1832 (also in
this sense was utopiast, 1845).


utopianism (n.)

1783, from utopian + -ism.


utter (adj.)

Old English utera, uterra, outer, exterior, external,  from Proto-Germanic *utizon (cognates: Old
Norse utar, Old Frisian uttra, Middle Dutch utere, Dutch uiter-, Old High German uzar, German
&auml;u&szlig;er outer), comparative adjective from ut (see out (adv.)). Meaning complete, total
(i.e. going to the utmost point) is from early 15c.


utter (v.)

speak, say, c.1400, in part from Middle Dutch uteren or Middle Low German utern to turn out, show,
speak, from uter outer, comparative adjective from ut out  (see utter (adj.)); in part from Middle
English verb outen to disclose, from Old English utan to put out, from ut (see out (v.)). Compare
German &auml;ussern to utter, express, from aus out; and colloquial phrase out with it speak up!
Formerly also used as a commercial verb (as release is now). Related: Uttered; uttering.


utterance (n.)

that which is uttered, c.1400, from utter (v.) + -ance.


utterly (adv.)

early 13c., truly, plainly, outspokenly, from utter (v.) + -ly (1);  meaning to an absolute degree
is late 14c., from utter (adj.)). Cf similarly formed German &#228;usserlich. Old English uterlic
(adj.) meant external.


uttermost (adj.)

late 14c., from utter (adj.) + -most. More recent than utmost. Compare utmost. Middle English also
had uttermore (late 14c.), now, alas, no longer with us.


UV

abbreviation of ultraviolet, by 1928.


uvea (n.)

late 14c., from medical Latin uvea, from Latin uva grape; uvula (see uvula). Partial loan-
translation of Greek hrago-eides (khiton) (the covering) resembling berries or grapes (Galen).
Related: Uveal.


uvula (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin uvula, from Latin uvola small bunch of grapes, diminutive of uva grape,
from PIE root *og- fruit, berry. So called from fancied resemblance of the organ to small grapes.
Related: Uvular.


uxorial (adj.)

of or pertaining to a wife, 1800, from Latin uxoris (see uxorious) + -al (1). Sometimes is used in
the sense of uxorius.


uxoricide (n.)

1854, the murder of one's wife; 1860, one who kills his wife, from Latin uxor wife (see uxorious) +
-cide. Related: Uxoricidal.


uxorious (adj.)

excessively fond of or submissive to one's wife, 1590s, from Latin uxorius of or pertaining to a
wife, also devoted to a wife or ruled by a wife, from uxor (genitive uxoris) wife, according to
Watkins from PIE *uk-sor- 'she who gets accustomed (to a new household)' after patrilocal marriage.


Uzi

1959, trademark name for Israeli-made submachine gun, developed by Usiel Gal
(1923â&euro;&ldquo;2002), and manufactured by IMI.


