-ville

suffix sporadically in vogue since c.1840 in U.S. colloquial word formation (such as dullsville,
palookaville), abstracted from the -ville in place names (Louisville, Greenville, etc.), from Old
French ville town, from Latin villa (see villa).


-vorous

word-forming element meaning eating, from Latin -vorous, from stem of vorare to devour (see
voracity).


V

In Middle English, -u- and -v- were used interchangeably, though with a preference for v- as the
initial letter (vnder, vain, etc.) and -u- elsewhere (full, euer, etc.). The distinction into
consonant and vowel identities was established in English by 1630, under influence of continental
printers, but into 19c. some dictionaries and other catalogues continued to list -u- and -v- words
as a single series.    No native Anglo-Saxon words begin in v- except those (vane, vat, vixen)
altered by the southwestern England habit of replacing initial f- with v- (and initial s- with z-).
Confusion of -v- and -w- also was a characteristic of 16c. Cockney accents.    As a Roman numeral,
five. In German rocket weapons systems of World War II, it stood for Vergeltungswaffe reprisal
weapon. V-eight as a type of motor engine is recorded from 1929 (V-engine is attested from 1909), so
called for the arrangement. The V for victory hand sign was conceived January 1941 by Belgian
politician and resistance leader Victor de Laveleye, to signify French victoire and Flemish vrijheid
(freedom). It was broadcast into Europe by Radio Belgi&#235;/Radio Belgique and popularized by the
BBC by June 1941, from which time it became a universal allied gesture.


V.D. (n.)

1920, short for venereal disease (see venereal).


v.i.

abbreviation of Latin vide infra, literally see below.


vac

1709 as a colloquial shortening of vacation (n.); 1942 as a colloquial shortening of vacuum (v.);
1974 as a colloquial shortening of vacuum cleaner.


vacancy (n.)

1570s, a vacating; c.1600, state of being vacant, from Late Latin vacantia, from Latin vacans empty,
unoccupied, present participle of vacare be empty (see vain). From 1690s as a vacant office or post;
meaning available room at a hotel is recorded from 1953. Related: Vacance (1530s); vacancies.


vacant (adj.)

c.1300, not filled, held, or occupied, from Old French vacant idle, unoccupied (of an office, etc.),
from Latin vacantem (nominative vacans), empty, unoccupied, present participle of vacare to be empty
(see vain). Meaning characterized by absence of mental occupation is from 1570s. Related: Vacantly.


vacate (v.)

1640s, to make void, to annul, from Latin vacatus, past participle of vacare be empty, be void (see
vain). Meaning to leave, give up, quit (a place) is attested from 1791. Related: Vacated; vacating.


vacation (n.)

late 14c., freedom from obligations, leisure, release (from some activity or occupation), from Old
French vacacion vacancy, vacant position (14c.) and directly from Latin vacationem (nominative
vacatio) leisure, freedom, exemption, a being free from duty, immunity earned by service, noun of
state from past participle stem of vacare be empty, free, or at leisure (see vain).    Meanings
state of being unoccupied, process of vacating in English are early 15c. Meaning formal suspension
of activity, time in which there is an intermission of usual employment (in reference to schools,
courts, etc.) is recorded from mid-15c. As the U.S. equivalent of what in Britain is called a
holiday, it is attested from 1878.


vacation (v.)

1866, from vacation (n.). Related: Vacationed; vacationing.


vaccinate (v.)

1803, to inoculate with a vaccine, originally with cowpox for the purpose of procuring immunity from
smallpox, back-formation from vaccination. Related: Vaccinated; vaccinating.


vaccination (n.)

1800, used by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) for the technique he devised of preventing
smallpox by injecting people with the cowpox virus (variolae vaccinae), from vaccine (adj.)
pertaining to cows, from cows (1798), from Latin vaccinus from cows, from vacca cow (Latin bos cow
being originally ox, a loan word from a rural dialect according to Buck, who cites Umbrian bue). The
use of the term for diseases other than smallpox is due to Pasteur [OED].


vaccine (n.)

matter used in vaccination, 1846, from French vaccin, noun use of adjective, from Latin vaccina,
fem. of vaccinus pertaining to a cow (see vaccination). Related: Vaccinal; vaccinic.


vacillate (v.)

1590s, to sway unsteadily, from Latin vacillatus, past participle of vacillare sway to and fro;
hesitate (see vacillation). Meaning to waver between two opinions or courses is recorded from 1620s.
Related: Vacillated; vacillates; vacillating.


vacillation (n.)

c.1400, hesitation, uncertainty, from Latin vacillationem (nominative vacillatio) a reeling,
wavering, noun of action from past participle stem of vacillare sway to and fro, waver, hesitate, be
untrustworthy, of uncertain origin. Originally in reference to opinion or conduct; literal sense is
recorded from 1630s.


vacuity (n.)

late 14c., hollow space, from Latin vacuitas empty space, emptiness, absence, vacancy, freedom, from
vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)). Originally in anatomy. Meaning vacancy of mind or thought is
attested from 1590s.


vacuole (n.)

small cavity or vesicle, 1853, from French vacuole, from Medieval Latin vacuola, formed as a
diminutive of Latin vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)).


vacuous (adj.)

1640s, empty (implied in vacuousness), from Latin vacuus empty, void, free (see vacuum (n.)).
Figurative sense of empty of ideas, without intelligent expression is from 1848. Related: Vacuously.


vacuum (v.)

to clean with a vacuum cleaner, 1919, from vacuum (n.). Related: Vacuumed; vacuuming.


vacuum (n.)

1540s, emptiness of space, from Latin vacuum an empty space, vacant place, a void, noun use of
neuter of vacuus empty, unoccupied, devoid of, figuratively free, unoccupied, related to vacare be
empty (see vain). Properly a loan-translation of Greek kenon, literally that which is empty. Meaning
a space emptied of air is attested from 1650s. Vacuum tube glass thermionic device is attested from
1859. Vacuum cleaner is from 1903; shortened form vacuum (n.) first recorded 1910.    The
metaphysicians of Elea, Parmenides and Melissus, started the notion that a vacuum was impossible,
and this became a favorite doctrine with Aristotle. All the scholastics upheld the maxim that nature
abhors a vacuum. [Century Dictionary]


vade

Latin, imperative singular of vadere to go (see vamoose).


vade-mecum (n.)

a pocket manual, handbook, 1620s, Latin, literally go with me; from imperative of vadere to go (see
vamoose) + me me + cum with.


vae victis

Latin, literally woe to the vanquished, from Livy, History V.xlviii.9.


vagabond (adj.)

early 15c. (earlier vacabond, c.1400), from Old French vagabond, vacabond wandering, unsteady
(14c.), from Late Latin vagabundus wandering, strolling about, from Latin vagari wander (from vagus
wandering, undecided; see vague) + gerundive suffix -bundus.


vagabond (n.)

c.1400, earlier wagabund (in a criminal indictment from 1311); see vagabond (adj.). Despite the
earliest use, in Middle English often merely one who is without a settled home, a vagrant but not
necessarily in a bad sense. Notion of idle, disreputable person predominated from 17c.


vagal (adj.)

pertaining to the vagus, 1846, from vagus + -al (1).


vagary (n.)

1570s, a wandering, a roaming journey, from Italian vagare or directly from Latin vagari to wander,
stroll about, roam, be unsettled, spread abroad, from vagus roving, wandering (see vague). The
infinitive appears to have been adopted in English as a noun and conformed to nouns in -ary, but
this can hardly be explained except as an orig. university use [Century Dictionary]. Current meaning
of eccentric notion or conduct (1620s) is from notion of mental wandering. Related: Vagaries.


vagina (n.)

sexual passage of the female from the vulva to the uterus, 1680s, medical Latin, from specialized
use of Latin vagina sheath, scabbard, covering; sheath of an ear of grain, hull, husk (plural
vaginae), from PIE *wag-ina- (cognates: Lithuanian vo&#382;iu ro cover with a hollow thing), from
root *wag- to break, split, bite. Probably the ancient notion is of a sheath made from a split piece
of wood (see sheath). A modern medical word; the Latin word was not used in an anatomical sense in
classical times. Anthropological vagina dentata is attested from 1902.


vaginal (adj.)

1726, pertaining to a sheath, from vagina + -al (1). From 1800 as pertaining to the vagina of a
female. Related: Vaginally.


vaginismus (n.)

spasmodic narrowing of the orifice of the vagina, 1861, medical Latin, from vagina + -ismus (see
-ism).


vaginitis (n.)

inflammation of the vagina, 1833, medical Latin; see vagina + -itis.


vagitus (n.)

crying of a newborn child, 1650s, from Latin vagitus a crying, squalling, from vagire (see sough
(v.)).


vagrancy (n.)

life of idle begging, 1706, from vagrant + -cy. Earlier in a figurative sense, mental wandering
(1640s). By late 18c. used in law as a catch-all for miscellaneous petty offenses against public
order.


vagrant (n.)

mid-15c., person who lacks regular employment, one without fixed abode, a tramp, probably from
Anglo-French vageraunt, also wacrant, walcrant, which is said in many sources to be a noun use of
the past participle of Old French walcrer to wander, from Frankish (Germanic) *walken, from the same
source as Old Norse valka wander and English walk (v.).    Under this theory the word was influenced
by Old French vagant, vagaunt wandering, from Latin vagantem (nominative vagans), past participle of
vagari to wander, stroll about (see vagary). But on another theory the Anglo-French word ultimately
is from Old French vagant, with an intrusive -r-. Middle English also had vagaunt wandering, without
fixed abode (late 14c.), from Old French vagant.


vagrant (adj.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French vagarant, waucrant, and sharing with it the history to be found under
vagrant (n.). Dogberry's corruption vagrom (Much Ado about Nothing) persisted through 19c. in
learned jocularity.


vague (adj.)

uncertain as to specifics, 1540s, from Middle French vague empty, vacant; wild, uncultivated;
wandering (13c.), from Latin vagus strolling, wandering, rambling, figuratively vacillating,
uncertain, of unknown origin. Related: Vagueness.


vaguely (adv.)

1748, from vague + -ly (2).


vagus (n.)

plural vagi, 1840, pneumogastric nerve, the long, widely distributed nerve from the brain to the
upper body, from Latin vagus wandering, straying (see vague).


vail (n.)

advantage, profit, early 15c., from vail (v.) to be of use or service (c.1300), from Old French
vail, from valoir to be of value or worth (see value (n.)).


vain (adj.)

c.1300, devoid of real value, idle, unprofitable, from Old French vain, vein worthless, void,
invalid, feeble; conceited (12c.), from Latin vanus empty, void, figuratively idle, fruitless, from
PIE *wa-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (cognates: Old English wanian to lessen,
wan deficient; Old Norse vanta to lack; Latin vacare to be empty, vastus empty, waste; Avestan va-
lack, Persian vang empty, poor; Sanskrit una- deficient, Armenian unain empty).    Meaning
conceited, elated with a high opinion of oneself first recorded 1690s in English; earlier silly,
idle, foolish (late 14c.). Phrase in vain to no effect (c.1300, after Latin in vanum) preserves the
original sense. Related: Vainly; vainness. Compare also vainglory.


vainglorious (adj.)

early 15c., from vainglory + -ous, or from Old French vain glorios boastful, swaggering. Related:
Vaingloriously; vaingloriousness. Groce (Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd ed., 1796)
has vain-glorious man One who boasts without reason, or, as the canters say, pisses more than he
drinks.


vainglory (n.)

c.1200, worthless glory, undue pomp or show, waynglori, from Old French vaine glorie, from Medieval
Latin vana gloria (see vain + glory (n.)).


vair (n.)

squirrel fur, or some other kind of fur in use in the Middle Ages, c.1300, from Old French vair two-
toned squirrel fur; fur garments (12c.), from Latin varium, masculine accusative singular of varius
parti-colored (see vary). Gray or black above and white below.


valance (n.)

piece of hanging, decorative drapery, mid-15c., of uncertain origin, probably from Anglo-French
*valaunce, valence, from valer go down, let down, variant of Old French avaler descend, go down; or
possibly from the plural of Old French avalant, from present participle of avaler go down. The
notion is of something hanging down. Not now considered to be from the name of Valence in
southwestern France, which is from the Roman personal name Valentius. Related: Valenced.


vale (n.)

river-land between two ranges of hills, early 14c., from Old French val valley, vale (12c.), from
Latin vallem (nominative vallis, valles) valley  (see valley). Now little used except in poetry
[Century Dictionary]. Vale of years old age is from Othello. Vale of tears this world as a place of
trouble is attested from 1550s.


valediction (n.)

a farewell, a bidding farewell, 1610s, from past participle stem of Latin valedicere bid farewell,
take leave, from vale farewell!, second person singular imperative of valere be well, be strong (see
valiant) + dicere to say (see diction).


valedictorian (n.)

student who pronounces the oration at commencement exercises of his or her class, 1832, American
English, from valedictory + -ian. As an adjective from 1834.


valedictory (adj.)

1650s, pertaining or relating to leave-taking, from Latin valedictum (past participle of valedicere;
see valediction) + -ory. As a noun meaning valedictory address from 1779.


valence (n.)

early 15c., extract, preparation, from Latin valentia strength, capacity, from valentem (nominative
valens) strong, stout, vigorous, powerful, present participle of valere be strong (see valiant).
Meaning relative combining capacity of an element is recorded from 1884, from German Valenz (1868),
from the Latin word. Related: Valency.


Valencia

place in Spain, Roman Valentia Edetanorum fort of the Edetani, a local people name; the first
element from Latin valentia strength (see valence (n.)).


Valentine (n.)

mid-15c., sweetheart chosen on St. Valentine's Day, from Late Latin Valentinus, the name of two
early Italian saints (from Latin valentia strength, capacity; see valence). Choosing a sweetheart on
this day originated 14c. as a custom in English and French court circles. Meaning letter or card
sent to a sweetheart first recorded 1824. The romantic association of the day is said to be from it
being around the time when birds choose their mates.    For this was on seynt Volantynys day  Whan
euery bryd cometh there to chese his make.  [Chaucer, Parlement of Foules, c.1381]    Probably the
date was the informal first day of spring in whatever French region invented the custom (many
surviving medieval calendars reckon the start of spring on the 7th or 22nd of February). No evidence
connects it with the Roman Lupercalia (an 18c. theory) or to any romantic or avian quality in either
of the saints. The custom of sending special cards or letters on this date flourished in England
c.1840-1870, declined around the turn of the 20th century, and revived 1920s.    To speak of the
particular Customs of the English Britons, I shall begin with Valentine's Day, Feb. 14. when young
Men and Maidens get their several Names writ down upon Scrolls of Paper rolled up, and lay 'em
asunder, the Men drawing the Maidens Names, and these the Mens; upon which, the Men salute their
chosen Valentines and present them with Gloves, &amp;c.; This Custom (which sometimes introduces a
Match) is grounded upon the Instinct of Animals, which about this Time of the Year, feeling a new
Heat by the approach of the Sun, begin to couple. [The Present State of Great Britain and Ireland
London, 1723]


Valentino (n.)

gigolo, good-looking romantic man, 1927, from Italian-born U.S. movie actor Rudolph Valentino
(1895-1926), who was adored by female fans. His full name was Rodolfo Guglielmi di Valentino, from
the Latin masc. proper name Valentinus (see Valentine).


valerian (n.)

plant of Eurasia, cultivated for its medicinal root, late 14c., from Old French valeriane wild
valerian (13c.), apparently from feminine singular of Latin adjective Valerianus, from the personal
name Valerius (see Valerie); but Weekley writes, some of the German and Scand. forms of the name
point rather to connection with the saga-hero Wieland.


Valerie

fem. proper name, French, from Latin Valeria, fem. of Valerius, name of a Roman gens, from valere to
be strong (see valiant).


valet (n.)

personal man-servant, mid-14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French valet, variant of vaslet
man's servant, workman's assistant, originally squire, young man, youth of noble birth (12c.), from
Gallo-Roman *vassellittus young nobleman, squire, page, diminutive of Medieval Latin vassallus, from
vassus servant (see vassal). Modern sense is usually short for valet de chambre; the general sense
of male household servant of the meaner sort going with the variant form varlet. First recorded use
of valet parking is from 1959.


valetudinarian (n.)

one who is constantly concerned with his own ailments, 1703, from valetudinary (1580s), from Latin
valetudinarius, from valetudo state of health (either good or bad), from valere be strong (see
valiant) + -tudo, abstract noun suffix (see -tude). Valetudinary (adj.) sickly is recorded from
1580s.


valgus (adj.)

deformity in which a bone or joint is twisted outward from the center of the body; form of club-
foot, 1800, from Latin valgus bandy-legged, bow-legged, having the legs bent outward. Said to be
probably related to Sanskrit valgati to move up and down, Old English wealcan to roll, move to and
fro (see walk (v.)), perhaps on the notion of go irregularly or to and fro [Tucker]. Yet the main
characteristic of 'bow-legged' is the crookedness of the legs, not 'going up and down' or 'to and
fro' [de Vaan] and there are phonetic difficulties. A classical word used in a different sense in
modern medicine; also see varus.


Valhalla (n.)

heavenly hall in which Odin receives the souls of heroes slain in battle, 1696 (in Archdeacon
Nicolson's English Historical Library), from Old Norse Valh&ouml;ll hall of the battle-slain; first
element from valr those slain in battle, from Proto-Germanic *walaz (cognates: Old English w&aelig;l
slaughter, bodies of the slain, Old High German wal battlefield, slaughter), from PIE root *wele-
(2) to strike, wound (cognates: Avestan vareta- seized, prisoner, Latin veles ghosts of the dead,
Old Irish fuil blood, Welsh gwel wound). Second element is from h&ouml;ll hall, from PIE root *kel-
(2) to conceal (see cell). Reintroduced by 18c. antiquaries. Figurative sense is from 1845.


valiance (n.)

valiant character (obsolete or archaic), mid-15c., earlier vailance (late 14c.), from Anglo-French
vaillaunce, valiauns (c.1300) or Old French vaillance value, price; merit, worth; virtue, fine
qualities; courage, valor (12c.), from Old French valiant (see valiant).


valiant (adj.)

early 14c. (late 12c. in surnames), brave, courageous, intrepid in danger, from Anglo-French
vaylant, and Old French vaillant stalwart, brave, present participle adjective from valoir be
worthy, originally be strong, from Latin valere be strong, be well, be worth, have power, be able,
be in health, from PIE root *wal- be strong (cognates: Old English wealdan to rule, Old High German
-walt, -wald power (in personal names), Old Norse valdr ruler, Old Church Slavonic vlasti to rule
over, Lithuanian valdyti to have power, Celtic *walos- ruler, Old Irish flaith dominion, Welsh gallu
to be able). As a noun, valiant person, from c.1600. Related: Valiantly.


valid (adj.)

1570s, having force in law, legally binding, from Middle French valide (16c.), from Latin validus
strong, effective, powerful, active, from valere be strong (see valiant). The meaning sufficiently
supported by facts or authority, well-grounded is first recorded 1640s.


validate (v.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin validatus, past participle of validare to make valid, from validus (see
valid). Related: Validated; validating.


validation (n.)

act of giving validity, 1650s, noun of action from validate.


validity (n.)

1540s, from Middle French validit&eacute; or directly from Late Latin validitatem (nominative
validitas) strength, from Latin validus (see valid).


valise (n.)

1610s, suitcase, soldier's kit bag, from Middle French valise (16c.), from Italian valigia, of
uncertain origin. Attested in Medieval Latin forms valisia (early 15c.), valixia (late 13c.). The
name is generally given to a leather case of moderate size, opening wide on a hinge or like a
portfolio .... [Century Dictionary]


Valium (n.)

1961, proprietary name (Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., Nutley, N.J.) of diazepam (reg. U.S.), of unknown
origin.


Valkyr (n.)

see Valkyrie.


Valkyrie (n.)

1768, one of 12 war-maidens who escorted the brave dead to Valhalla, from Old Norse valkyrja,
literally chooser of the slain, from valr those slain in battle (see Valhalla) + kyrja chooser, from
ablaut root of kjosa to choose, from Proto-Germanic *keusan, from PIE *geus- to taste, choose (see
gusto). Old English form was W&aelig;lcyrie, but they seem not to have figured as largely in Anglo-
Saxon tales as in Scandinavian. German Walk&uuml;re (Wagner) is from Norse. Related: Valkyrian.


valley (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French valey, Old French valee a valley (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *vallata, from
Latin vallis valley, of unknown origin. Valley Girl (in reference to San Fernando Valley of
California) was popularized 1982 in song by Frank Zappa and his daughter. Valley of Death (Psalm
xxiii:4) was rendered in Middle English as Helldale (mid-13c.).


valor (n.)

c.1300, value, worth, from Old French valor, valour valor, moral worth, merit, courage, virtue
(12c.), from Late Latin valorem (nominative valor) value, worth (in Medieval Latin strength, valor),
from stem of Latin valere be strong, be worth (see valiant). The meaning courage is first recorded
1580s, from Italian valore, from the same Late Latin word. (The Middle English word also had a sense
of worth or worthiness in respect of manly qualities).


valorization (n.)

1906, from valor value (late 15c.), variant of valour (see valor).


valorize (v.)

1908, from valor (see valorization) + -ize.


valorous (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French valeureux, from valeur (see valor). Related: Valorously; valorousness.


valour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of valor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


valuable (adj.)

of great value or price, 1580s, from value (v.) + -able. As a noun, a valuable thing, from 1775 (in
modern use often in plural). Related: Valuably.


valuables (n.)

see valuable.


valuation (n.)

1520s, from Middle French valuation, noun of action from valuer, from Old French valoir (see value
(n.)).


value (n.)

c.1300, price equal to the intrinsic worth of a thing; late 14c., degree to which something is
useful or estimable, from Old French value worth, price, moral worth; standing, reuptation (13c.),
noun use of fem. past participle of valoir be worth, from Latin valere be strong, be well; be of
value, be worth (see valiant). The meaning social principle is attested from 1918, supposedly
borrowed from the language of painting. Value judgment (1889) is a loan-translation of German
Werturteil.


value (v.)

mid-15c., estimate the value of, also think highly of, probably from value (n.). Related: Valued,
valuing.


valueless (adj.)

1590s, from value (n.) + -less. Related: Valuelessness.


values (n.)

principles, standards, 1918, from plural of value (n.).


valve (n.)

late 14c., one of the halves of a folding door, from Latin valva (plural valvae) section of a
folding or revolving door, literally that which turns, related to volvere to roll (see volvox).
Sense extended 1610s to membranous fold regulating flow of bodily fluids; 1650s to mechanical device
that works like an anatomical valve; and 1660s in zoology to halves of a hinged shell. Related:
Valved.


vambrace (n.)

armor or guard for the forearm, early 14c., from Anglo-French vant-bras, from Old French avant-bras,
from avant before, in front of  (see avant) + bras an arm (see brace (n.)).


vamoose (v.)

to decamp, be off, 1834, from Spanish vamos let us go, from Latin vadamus, first person plural
indicative of vadere to go, to walk, go hastily, from PIE root *wadh- (2) to go (cognates: Old
English wadan to go, Latin vadum ford; see wade (v.)).


vamp (v.)

extemporize on a piano, 1789, from vamp (n.1) upper part of a shoe or boot, via verbal sense of
provide a stocking (later a shoe) with a new vamp (1590s), then patch up, repair (compare revamp).
Related: Vamped; vamping.


vamp (n.2)

seductive woman who exploits men, 1911, short for vampire. First attested use is earlier than the
release of the Fox film A Fool There Was (January 1915), with sultry Theda Bara in the role of The
Vampire. The movie was based on a play of that name that had been on Broadway in 1909 (title and
concept from a Kipling poem, The Vampire, inspired by a Burne-Jones painting). The stage lead seems
to have been played by Kathryn Kaelred and Bernice Golden Henderson. At any rate, Bara (born
Theodosia Goodman) remains the classic vamp and the word's wide currency is attributable to her
performance.    A fool there was and he made his prayer       (Even as you and I!)  To a rag and a
bone and a hank of hair       (We called her the woman who did not care)  But the fool, he called
her his lady fair       (Even as you and I.)  [Kipling, The Vampire]


vamp (n.1)

upper of a shoe or boot, 1650s, earlier part of a stocking that covers the foot and ankle (c.1200),
from Anglo-French *vaump&eacute;, from Old French avantpi&eacute; vamp of a shoe, from avant in
front (see avant) + pi&eacute; foot, from Latin pes (see foot (n.)).


vampire (n.)

spectral being in a human body who maintains semblance of life by leaving the grave at night to suck
the warm blood of the living as they sleep, 1734, from French vampire (18c.) or German Vampir (1732,
in an account of Hungarian vampires), from Hungarian vampir, from Old Church Slavonic opiri
(cognates: Serbian vampir, Bulgarian vapir, Ukrainian uper), said by Slavic linguist Franc
Miklo&#353;i&#269; to be ultimtely from Kazan Tatar ubyr witch, but Max Vasmer, an expert in this
linguistic area, finds that phonetically doubtful. An Eastern European creature popularized in
English by late 19c. gothic novels, however there are scattered English accounts of night-walking,
blood-gorged, plague-spreading undead corpses from as far back as 1196. Figurative sense of person
who preys on others is from 1741. Applied 1774 by French biologist Buffon to a species of South
American blood-sucking bat. Related: Vampiric.


vampirism (n.)

1737, from vampire + -ism.


van (n.1)

front part of an army or other advancing group, c.1600, shortening of vanguard.


van (n.2)

covered truck or wagon, 1829, shortening of caravan. Century Dictionary suggests this was perhaps
regarded as *carry-van.


Van Allen

name of radiation belts around the Earth (and certain other planets), 1959, from U.S. physicist
James A. Van Allen (1914-2006), who reported them in 1958.


van de Graaff

in reference to an electrostatic charge generator, 1934, named for U.S. physicist R.J. van de Graaff
(1901-1967).


vanadium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1833, named 1830 by Swedish chemist Nils Gabriel Sefstr&ouml;m (1787-1845),
from Old Norse Vanadis, one of the names of the Norse beauty goddess Freyja (perhaps from PIE *wen-
(1) to desire, strive for, which would connect it to Venus); the metal perhaps so called for of its
colorful compounds (an earlier name for it was erythronium, for the redness of its salts when
heated). Related: Vanadous; vanadious.


Vancouver

Canadian city, settled 1865, named for the island, which was named for English navigator George
Vancouver (1757-1798) who sailed with Capt. Cook and surveyed the Pacific coast in this area in
1792.


vandal (n.)

1660s, willful destroyer of what is beautiful or venerable, from Vandals, name of the Germanic tribe
that sacked Rome in 455 under Genseric, from Latin Vandalus (plural Vandali), from the tribe's name
for itself (Old English Wendlas), perhaps from Proto-Germanic *wandljaz wanderer. The literal
historical sense in English is recorded from 1550s.    There does not seem to be in the story of the
capture of Rome by the Vandals any justification for the charge of willful and objectless
destruction of public buildings which is implied in the word 'vandalism.' It is probable that this
charge grew out of the fierce persecution which was carried on by [the Vandal king] Gaiseric and his
son against the Catholic Christians, and which is the darkest stain on their characters.
[Encyclopaedia Britannica, 13th ed., 1926]


vandalism (n.)

1794, from French vandalisme, first used by Henri Gr&eacute;goire, Bishop of Blois, in a report
decrying the pillage and destruction of art in the course of the French Revolution; see vandal +
-ism.


vandalize (v.)

by 1797, from vandal + -ize. Related: Vandalized; vandalizing. A past participle vandald is recorded
from 1640s..


vandyke (n.)

short, pointed beard, 1894, from the style shown on portraits by Flemish painter Anton Van Dyck
(1599-1641); earlier a type of collar with a deep cut edge (1755) also from a style depicted in his
paintings.


vane (n.)

plate metal wind indicator, early 15c., southern England alteration (see V) of fane flag, banner.


Vanessa

fem. proper name, also the name of a butterfly genus. As a name, not much used in U.S. before 1950.
It appears to have been coined by Swift c.1711 as a pseudonym for Esther Vanhomrigh, who was
romantically attached to him, and composed of elements of her name. He used it in private
correspondence and published it in the poem Cadenus and Vanessa (1713).    The name Cadenus is an
anagram of Decanus; that of Vanessa is formed much in the same way, by placing the first syllable of
her sir-name before her christian-name, Hessy. [William Monck Mason, History and Antiquities of the
Collegiate and Cathedral Church of St. Patrick, Near Dublin, 1820]    As the name of a genus of
butterflies that includes the Red Admiral and the Painted Lady, it dates to 1808, chosen by Danish
entomologist Johan Christian Fabricius (1745-1808) for unknown reasons. He has no obvious connection
to Swift, and the theory that it was intended for *Phanessa, from Greek phanes a mystical divinity
in the Orphic system does no honor to his classical learning.


vanguard (n.)

mid-15c., vaunt garde, from Middle French avant-garde, from avant in front (see avant) + garde guard
(see guard (n.)). Communist revolutionary sense is recorded from 1928.


vanilla (n.)

1660s, pod of the vanilla plant, from Spanish vainilla vanilla plant, literally little pod,
diminutive of vaina sheath, from Latin vagina sheath of an ear of grain, hull of a plant (see
vagina). So called from the shape of the pods. European discovery 1521 by Hernando Cortes' soldiers
on reconnaissance in southeastern Mexico. Meaning flavoring extracted from the vanilla bean is
attested by 1728. Meaning conventional, of ordinary sexual preferences is 1970s, from notion of
whiteness and the common choice of vanilla ice cream.


vanillin (n.)

substance prepared from fruit of the vanilla plant, 1859, from vanilla + -in (2).


vaniloquence (n.)

idle talk, 1620s, from Latin vaniloquentia, from vanus idle, empty (see vain) + loquens, from loqui
to speak (see locution).


vanish (v.)

disappear quickly, c.1300, from shortened form of esvaniss-, stem of Old French esvanir disappear;
cause to disappear, from Vulgar Latin *exvanire, from Latin evanescere disappear, pass away, die
out, from ex- out (see ex-) + vanescere vanish, inchoative verb from vanus empty (see vain).
Related: Vanished; vanishing; vanishingly. Vanishing point in perspective drawing is recorded from
1797.


vanity (n.)

c.1200, that which is vain, futile, or worthless, from Old French vanite self-conceit; futility;
lack of resolve (12c.), from Latin vanitatem (nominative vanitas) emptiness, aimlessness; falsity,
figuratively vainglory, foolish pride, from vanus empty, vain, idle (see vain). Meaning self-
conceited in English is attested from mid-14c. Vanity table is attested from 1936. Vanity Fair is
from Pilgrim's Progress (1678).


vanquish (v.)

mid-14c., to defeat in battle, conquer, from Old French venquis-, extended stem of veintre to
defeat, from Latin vincere defeat (see victor). Influenced in Middle English by Middle French
vainquiss-, present stem of vainquir conquer, from Old French vainkir, alteration of veintre.
Related: Vanquished; vanquishing.


vantage (n.)

early 14c., advantage, profit, from Anglo-French vantage, from Old French avantage advantage,
profit, superiority (see advantage). Vantage point favorable position attested from 1865; a similar
notion was in earlier vantage ground (1610s).


vapid (adj.)

1650s, flat, insipid (of drinks), from Latin vapidus flat, insipid, literally that has exhaled its
vapor, related to vappa stale wine, and probably to vapor vapor. Applied from 1758 to talk and
writing deemed dull and lifeless. Related: Vapidly; vapidness.


vapidity (n.)

1721, from vapid + -ity.


vapor (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French vapour, Old French vapor moisture, vapor (13c., Modern French vapeur)
and directly from Latin vaporem (nominative vapor) a warm exhalation, steam, heat, of unknown
origin. Vapors fit of fainting, hysteria, etc. is 1660s, from medieval notion of exhalations from
the stomach or other organs affecting the brain.


vaporetto (n.)

Venetian public transit canal-motorboat, 1926, from Italian vaporetto, diminutive of vapore steam,
from Latin vapor (see vapor (n.)).


vaporization (n.)

also vaporisation, 1788, noun of action from vaporize. In same sense Middle English had vaporacioun
(late 14c.).


vaporize (v.)

1630s, to smoke (tobacco), from vapor + -ize. Later convert into vapor, cause to become vapor
(1803), and spray with fine mist (1900). Intransitive sense become vaporous is from 1828. Related:
Vaporized; vaporizing. An earlier verb was simply vapor (c.1400, transitive and intransitive), from
Latin vaporare.


vaporizer (n.)

1846, agent noun from vaporize.


vaporous (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin vaporosus full of steam, from Latin vaporus, from vapor (see vapor).


vapour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of vapor; see -or.


vappa (n.)

wine that has lost its flavor, c.1600, from Latin vappa wine without flavor, figuratively a good-
for-nothing (see vapid).


vaquero (n.)

1826, from Spanish, literally cowboy, from vaca cow, from Latin vacca (see vaccination).


Varangian (n.)

one of the Northmen who ravaged the Baltic coast in 9c. and by tradition overran part of western
Russia and founded a dynasty there, 1788, from Medieval Latin Varangus, from Byzantine Greek
Barangos, a name ultimately (via Slavic) from Old Norse v&aelig;ringi a Scandinavian, properly a
confederate, from var- pledge, faith, related to Old English w&aelig;r agreement, treaty, promise,
Old High German wara faithfulness (see very). Attested in Old Russian as variagi; surviving in
Russian varyag a pedlar, Ukrainian varjah a big strong man.


variability (n.)

1771, from variable (Latin variabilis) + -ity.


variable (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, apt to change, fickle, from Old French variable various, changeable, fickle,
from Late Latin variabilis changeable, from variare to change (see vary). Of weather, seasons, etc.,
attested from late 15c.; of stars, from 1788.


variable (n.)

quantity that can vary in value, 1816, from variable (adj.) in mathematical sense of quantitatively
indeterminate (1710). Related: Variably; variability.


variance (n.)

late 14c., fact of undergoing change, from Old French variance change, alteration; doubt, hesitation
and directly from Latin variantia, from stem of variare to change (see vary). Meaning state of
disagreement is recorded from early 15c. The U.S. zoning sense of official dispensation from a
building regulation is recorded from 1925.


variant (n.)

:something substantially the same, but in different form, 1848, from variant (adj.).


variant (adj.)

late 14c., tending to change, from Old French variant and directly from Latin variantem (nominative
varians), present participle of variare to change (see vary).


variate (n.)

in statistics, 1899, from adjective variate (mid-15c.), from Latin variatus, past participle of
variare (see vary).


variation (n.)

late 14c., difference, divergence, from Old French variacion variety, diversity and directly from
Latin variationem (nominative variatio) a difference, variation, change, from past participle stem
of variare to change (see vary). The musical sense is attested from 1801. Related: Variational.


varicella (n.)

chicken-pox, medical Latin, 1764, irregular diminutive of variola (see variola). Related:
Varicellous.


varices (n.)

plural of varix dilated vein (c.1400), from PIE root *wer- (1) high raised spot or other bodily
infirmity (see vary (v.)).


varicocele (n.)

tumor in the scrotum, 1736, medical Latin, from Latin varic-, comb. form of varix dilated vein (see
varices) + Latinized form of Greek kele tumor.


varicolored (adj.)

diversified in color, motley, also vari-colored, 1660s, from Latin varius (see vary) + English
colored (adj.).


varicose (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin varicosus with dilated veins, from varix (genitive varicis) dilated vein,
probably related to varus bent outward, bow-legged (see varus).


varied (adj.)

changed, early 15c., past participle adjective from vary (v.). From 1580s as differing from one
another; as characterized by variety, from 1732.


variegate (v.)

1650s give variety to, from Late Latin variegatus made of various sorts or colors, past participle
of variegare diversify with different colors, from varius spotted, changing, varying (see vary) +
root of agere to drive (see act). Meaning mark with different colors is from 1660s (implied in
Variegated). Related: vareiegating.


varietal (adj.)

having the characteristics of a variety, 1849, a biologists' word, from variety + -al (1). In
reference to wines, made from a single variety of grape, first attested 1941, American English. As a
noun, in this sense, attested from 1955. Related: Varietally.


variety (n.)

1530s, change of fortunes, from Middle French vari&eacute;t&eacute; and directly from Latin
varietatem (nominative varietas) difference, diversity; a kind, variety, species, sort, from varius
various (see vary). Meaning diversity, absence of monotony is from 1540s; that of collection of
different things is from 1550s; sense of something different from others is from 1610s. In reference
to music hall or theatrical performances of a mixed nature, first recorded 1868, American English.


variform (adj.)

1660s, from Latin varius (see vary) + forma (see form (n.)).


varify (v.)

to make varied, c.1600, from Latin vari-, stem of varius different, diverse (see vary) + -fy.
Related: Varified; varifying.


variola (n.)

smallpox, 1771, medical Latin diminutive of Latin varius changing, various, in this case speckled,
spotted (see vary).


variorum (adj.)

an edition (especially of the complete works of a classical author) with notes of various
commentators or editors, 1728, genitive masculine plural of Latin varius different, diverse (see
vary), in phrase editio cum notis variorum. Its use with reference to an edition of an author's
works containing variant readings (1955) is deplored by some scholars [OED].


various (adj.)

early 15c., characterized by variety, from Middle French varieux and directly from Latin varius
changing, different, diverse (see vary). Meaning different from one another, having a diversity of
features is recorded from 1630s. Related: Variously.


varlet (n.)

mid-15c., servant, attendant of a knight, from Middle French varlet (14c.), variant of vaslet,
originally squire, young man, from Old French vassal (see vassal). The meaning rascal, rogue is
1540s.


varmint (n.)

1530s, varment; the chiefly American English dialectal form varmint is attested from 1829; variant
of vermin. Meaning objectionable or troublesome person is recorded from 1773.


varnish (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French vernis varnish (12c.), from Medieval Latin vernix odorous resin, of
uncertain origin, perhaps from Late Greek verenike, from Greek Berenike, name of an ancient city in
Libya (modern Bengasi) credited with the first use of varnishes. The town is named for Berenike II,
queen of Egypt (see Berenice). Figurative sense of specious gloss, pretense, is recorded from 1560s.


varnish (v.)

late 14c.; see varnish (n.). Related: Varnished; varnishing. Century Dictionary defines varnishing
day as A day before the opening of a picture exhibition on which exhibitors have the privilege of
retouching or varnishing their pictures after they have been placed on the walls. The custom is said
to date to the early years of 19c.


varsity (adj.)

1825, university, variant of earlier versity (1670s), shortened form of university. Compare varsal
(1690s), short for universal; varmint from vermin; and Grose's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue
(1788) has vardy as slang for verdict. Used in English universities, and affected to some extent in
American colleges [Century Dictionary].


varus (n.)

foot deformity in which the feet are extroverted, so that the inner ankle rests on the ground, while
the sole of the foot is more or less turned outwards, 1800, from Latin varus bent, bent outwards,
turned awry, crooked, specifically with legs bent inward, knock-kneed, of uncertain origin.    If
the original meaning was 'with the legs opened', varus might be compared with vanus and vastus, and
reflect *wa-ro- 'going apart, letting go'. In any case, none of the other etymologies proposed seems
plausible. [de Vaan]    The use of classical varus and valgus, which denoted deformities of the
legs, in modern medicine to describe deformities of the feet, was criticized by learned writers (see
Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, July 1838).


varve (n.)

annual deposit of silt in a lake bed, 1912, from Swedish varv turn, layer, related to Old Norse
hverfa, Old English hwerfan to turn round (see wharf).


varvel (n.)

metal ring attached to the end of a hawk's jess and connecting it to the leash, 1530s, from Old
French vervelle falcon's leg fetter (14c.), from Vulgar Latin derivation of Latin vertibulum joint.
Related: Varvels.


vary (v.)

mid-14c. (transitive); late 14c. (intransitive), from Old French variier be changed, go astray;
change, alter, transform and directly from Latin variare change, alter, make different, from varius
varied, different, spotted; perhaps related to varus bent, crooked, knock-kneed, and varix varicose
vein, from a PIE root *wer- (1) high raised spot or other bodily infirmity (cognates: Old English
wearte wart, Swedish varbulde pus swelling, Latin verruca wart). Related: Varied; varying.


vas (n.)

in anatomy, a tube, duct, or conduit for conveying blood, lymph, semen, etc., plural vasa, Latin,
literally vessel. Vas deferens (plural vasa defferentia) is from 1570s.


vascular (adj.)

1670s, in anatomy, pertaining to conveyance or circulation of fluids, from Modern Latin vascularis
of or pertaining to vessels or tubes, from Latin vasculum a small vessel, diminutive of vas vessel.


vasculature (n.)

1934, from Latin vascularis (see vascular) on model of musculature.


vasculitis (n.)

1872, from Latin vasculum, diminutive of vas + -itis.


vase (n.)

late 14c., from Old French vas, vase receptacle, container, from Latin vas (plural vasa) container,
vessel. American English preserves the original English pronunciation (Swift rhymes it with face,
Byron with place and grace), while British English shifted mid-19c. to preference for a
pronunciation that rhymes with bras.


vasectomy (n.)

1896, from Modern Latin vas (deferens) + -ectomy a cutting.


Vaseline (n.)

1872, trademark for an ointment made from petroleum and marketed by Chesebrough Manufacturing Co.,
coined from German Wasser water + Greek elaion oil + scientific-sounded ending -ine. Robert A.
Chesebrough was of the opinion that petroleum was a product of the underground decomposition of
water.    The name is of mixed origin, being derived from Wasser, water, and elaion [Greek in the
original], oil (water-oil), and indicates the belief of the discoverer that petroleum, the mother of
Vaseline, is produced by the agency of heat and pressure from the carbon of certain rocks, and the
hydrogen of water. [The Monthly Review of Dental Surgery, February 1877]


vasoconstriction (n.)

1899, from comb. form of vas + constriction.


vasodilation (n.)

1896, from vasopressor, from vaso-, comb. form of Latin vas container, vessel (see vas) + dilation.
Related: Vasodilator (1881).


vasopressin (n.)

1928, from vasopressor causing the constriction of (blood) vessels) (from vaso-, comb. form of Latin
vas container, vessel; see vas) + -in (2).


vassal (n.)

early 14c. (c.1200 as a surname) tenant who pledges fealty to a lord, from Old French vassal
subject, subordinate, servant (12c.), from Medieval Latin vassallus manservant, domestic, retainer,
extended from vassus servant, from Old Celtic *wasso- young man, squire (cognates: Welsh gwas youth,
servant, Breton goaz servant, vassal, man, Irish foss servant). The adjective is recorded from
1580s.


vassalage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French vassalage, vasselage the service of a vassal, from vassal (see vassal).


vast (adj.)

1570s, being of great extent or size, from Middle French vaste, from Latin vastus immense,
extensive, huge, also desolate, unoccupied, empty. The two meanings probably originally attached to
two separate words, one with a long -a- one with a short -a-, that merged in early Latin (see waste
(v.)). Meaning very great in quantity or number is from 1630s; that of very great in degree is from
1670s. Very popular early 18c. as an intensifier. Related: Vastly; vastness; vasty.


vat (n.)

c.1200, large tub or cistern, especially one for holding liquors in an immature state [Century
Dictionary], southern variant (see V) of Old English f&aelig;t container, vat, from Proto-Germanic
*fatan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse fat, Old Frisian fet, Middle Dutch, Dutch vat, Old High
German faz, German fa&szlig;), from PIE root *ped- (2) container (cognates: Lithuanian puodas pot).


vaterland (n.)

1852, from German Vaterland, from Vater (see father (n.)) + Land (see land (n.)).


vates (n.)

1620s, poet or bard, specifically Celtic divinely inspired poet (1728), from Latin vates sooth-
sayer, prophet, seer, from a Celtic source akin to Old Irish faith poet, Welsh gwawd poem, from PIE
root *wet- (1) to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse (cognates: Old English wod mad, frenzied, god-
name Woden; see wood (adj.)). Hence vaticination oracular prediction (c.1600).


vatic (adj.)

pertaining to a prophet, c.1600, from Latin vates (see vates) + -ic.


Vatican

1550s, from Latin mons Vaticanus, Roman hill on which Papal palace stands. Said to be an Etruscan
loan-word, not related to vates sooth-sayer.


vaticinate (v.)

to prophecy, foretell, 1620s, from Latin vaticinatus, past participle of vaticinari, from vates (see
vates) + formative element -cinus. Related: Vaticinated; vaticinating; Vaticinal.


vaticination (n.)

c.1600, from Latin vaticinationem (nominative vaticinatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of vaticinari (see vaticinate).


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


vaudevillian (n.)

performer in vaudeville shows, 1900, from vaudeville + -ian.


Vaughan

from Welsh fychan, mutation of bychan small.


vault (n.1)

arched roof or ceiling, c.1300, vaute, from Old French voute arch, vaulting, vaulted roof or
chamber, from Vulgar Latin *volta, contraction of *volvita, noun use of fem. of *volvitus,
alteration of Latin volutus bowed, arched, past participle of volvere to turn, turn around, roll
(see volvox). The -l- appeared in English c.1400, an etymological insertion in imitation of earlier
forms (compare fault (n.)).


vault (v.1)

jump or leap over, especially by aid of the hands or a pole, 1530s, transitive (implied in
vaulting); 1560s, intransitive, from Middle French volter to gambol, leap, from Italian voltare to
turn, from Vulgar Latin *volvitare to turn, leap, frequentative of Latin volvere to turn, turn
around, roll (see volvox). Related: Vaulted; vaulting.


vault (n.2)

a leap, especially using the hands or a pole, 1570s, from vault (v.1).


vault (v.2)

to form with a vault or arched roof, late 14c., from Old French vaulter, volter, from voute arch,
vaulted roof (see vault (n.1)). Related: Vaulted; vaulting.


vaunt (v.)

early 15c., speak vainly or proudly, from Anglo-French vaunter, Old French vanter to praise, speak
highly of, from Medieval Latin vanitare to boast, frequentative of Latin vanare to utter empty
words, from vanus idle, empty (see vain). Also short for avaunten to boast (see vaunt (n.)).
Related: Vaunted; vaunting.


vaunt (n.)

boasting utterance, c.1400, short for avaunt a boast (late 14c.), from avaunten to boast (c.1300),
from Old French avanter boast about, boast of, glory in.


Vauxhall

popular pleasure garden on south bank of Thames in London, c.1661-1859; the name is Middle English
Faukeshale (late 13c.), Hall or manor of a man called Falkes, an Old French personal name.


VC (n.)

also V.C., U.S. military abbreviation of Viet Cong, by 1964; also see Charlie.


VCR (n.)

1971, initialism (acronym) from videocassette recorder (see videocassette).


VE Day (n.)

initialism (acronym) for  Victory in Europe, from September 1944 (see victory).


veal (n.)

late 14c., calf meat as food, from Anglo-French vel, Old French veel a calf (12c., Modern French
veau), earlier vedel, from Latin vitellus a little calf, diminutive of vitulus calf, perhaps
originally yearling, if related, as some think, to Sanskrit vatsah calf, literally yearling; Gothic
wi&thorn;rus, Old English we&eth;er (see wether; also see veteran).


vector (n.)

quantity having magnitude and direction, 1846; earlier line joining a fixed point and a variable
point, 1704, from Latin vector one who carries or conveys, carrier (also one who rides), agent noun
from past participle stem of vehere carry, convey (see vehicle). Related: Vectorial.


Veda (n.)

ancient sacred Hindu book, 1734, from Sanskrit veda, literally knowledge, understanding, especially
sacred knowledge, from root vid- to know, from PIE root *weid- to see (related to wit, and to
Avestan vaeda I know, Latin videre to see; see vision (n.)). The books are the Rig-, Yajur-, Sama-,
and Atharva-veda.


vedette (n.)

mounted sentinel placed in advance of an outpost, 1680s, from French vedette (16c.), from Italian
(Florentine) vedetta watch tower, peep hole, probably from vedere to see, from Latin videre to see
(see vision).


Vedic (adj.)

pertaining to the Vedas, 1845, from Veda + -ic.


vee (n.)

1869, to denote the shape of the letter V. As a type of engine, by 1915.


veejay (n.)

1982, from pronunciation of V.J., from video, on model of deejay (see disk).


veep (n.)

1949, American English, apparently coined from V.P., abbreviation of vice president, perhaps modeled
on jeep, which was then in vogue. Introduced by Alben W. Barkley (1877-1956), Harry Truman's vice
president. According to the Saturday Evening Post, his grandchildren, finding Vice-President too
long, call him that. The magazines quickly picked it up, especially when the 71-year-old Barkley
married a 38-year-old widow (dubbed the Veepess).    Barkley says word Veep is not copyrighted, and
any vice president who wants to can use it. But he hopes not many will. [U.S. Department of State
wireless bulletin, 1949]    Time, tongue in cheek, suggested the president should be Peep, the
Secretary of State Steep, and the Secretary of Labor Sleep.


veer (v.)

1580s, to change direction (originally of the wind; 1610s of a ship), from Middle French virer to
turn (12c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps (Diez) from the Latin stem vir- in viriae (plural)
bracelets. Gamillscheg finds von Wartburg's derivation of it from a Vulgar Latin contraction of
Latin vibrare to shake to be nicht m&#246;glich. Related: veered, veering.


veg

since 1898 as an abbreviation of vegetarian; 1918 of vegetable. As a verb, colloquially short for
vegetate, by 1985 (usually with out).


Vega (n.)

1638, bright northern star, the alpha of Lyra, from Arabic (Al Nasr) al Waqi translated variously as
the eagle of the desert or the falling vulture (or bird).


vegan (n.)

1944, from vegetable (n.) + -an; coined by English vegetarian Donald Watson (1910-2005) to
distinguish those who abstain from all animal products (eggs, cheese, etc.) from those who merely
refuse to eat the animals.


vegetable (adj.)

early 15c., capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous; also neither animal nor mineral, of the
plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant, from Old French vegetable living, fit to live, and
directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis growing, flourishing, from Late Latin vegetabilis
animating, enlivening, from Latin vegetare to enliven, from vegetus vigorous, enlivened, active,
sprightly, from vegere to be alive, active, to quicken, from PIE *weg- (2) be strong, lively, source
of watch (v.), vigor, velocity, and possibly witch (see wake (v.)). The meaning resembling that of a
vegetable, dull, uneventful; having life such as a plant has is attested from 1854 (see vegetable
(n.)).


vegetable (n.)

mid-15c., non-animal life, originally any plant, from vegetable (adj.); specific sense of plant
cultivated for food, edible herb or root is first recorded 1767. Meaning person who leads a
monotonous life is recorded from 1921; sense of one totally incapacitated mentally and physically is
from 1976.     The Old English word was wyrt (see wort). The commonest source of words for
vegetables in Indo-European languages are derivatives of words for green or growing (compare
Italian, Spanish verdura, Irish glasraidh, Danish gr&oslash;ntsager). For a different association,
compare Greek lakhana, related to lakhaino to dig.


vegetal (adj.)

c.1400, from Medieval Latin *vegetalis, from Latin vegetare (see vegetable (adj.)).


vegetarian (n.)

1839, irregular formation from vegetable (n.) + -arian, as in agrarian, etc. The general use of the
word appears to have been largely due to the formation of the Vegetarian Society in Ramsgate in 1847
[OED]. As an adjective from 1849.


vegetarianism (n.)

1848, from vegetarian + -ism.


vegetate (v.)

c.1600, to grow as plants do, perhaps a back-formation from vegetation, or from Latin vegetatus,
past participle of vegetare to enliven, to animate (see vegetable (adj.)). Sense of to lead a dull,
empty, or stagnant life is from 1740. Related: Vegetated; vegetating.


vegetation (n.)

1560s, act of vegetating, from Middle French v&eacute;g&eacute;tation and directly from Medieval
Latin vegetationem (nominative vegetatio) a quickening, action of growing, from vegetare grow,
quicken (see vegetable). Meaning plant life first recorded 1727.


vegetative (adj.)

late 14c., endowed with the power of growth, from Old French vegetatif (naturally) growing, from
Medieval Latin vegetativus, from vegetat-, past participle stem of vegetare (see vegetable (adj.)).
Middle English transferred sense was characterized by growth. Modern pathological sense of brain-
dead, lacking intellectual activity, mentally inert is from 1893, via notion of having only such
functions which perform involuntarily or unconsciously and thus are likened to the processes of
vegetable growth.


veggie (n.)

slang shortening of vegetable (n.), 1976; earlier vegie (1955). Related: Veggies.


vehemence (n.)

c.1400, from Old French vehemence, veemence forcefulness, violence, rashness or directly from Latin
vehementia eagerness, strength, from stem of vehere (see vehement). Related: Vehemency.


vehement (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French vehement, veement impetuous, ardent (12c.), from Latin vehementem
(nominative vehemens) impetuous, eager, violent, furious, ardent, carried away, perhaps [Barnhart]
from a lost present middle participle of vehere to carry (see vehicle). The other theory is that it
represents vehe- lacking, wanting + mens mind. Related: Vehemently.


vehicle (n.)

1610s, a medium through which a drug or medicine is administered, also any means of conveying or
transmitting, from French v&eacute;hicule (16c.), from Latin vehiculum means of transport, vehicle,
carriage, conveyance, from vehere to bear, carry, convey, from PIE *wegh- to go, transport in a
vehicle (cognates: Old English wegan to carry; Old Norse vegr, Old High German weg way; Middle Dutch
wagen wagon; see wagon). Sense of cart or other conveyance in English first recorded 1650s.


vehicular (adj.)

pertaining to vehicles, 1610s, from Late Latin vehicularis, from vehiculum a vehicle (see vehicle).


veil (n.)

c.1200, nun's head covering, from Anglo-French and Old North French veil (12c., Modern French voile)
a head-covering, also a sail, a curtain, from Latin vela, plural of velum sail, curtain, covering,
from PIE root *weg- (1) to weave a web. Vela was mistaken in Vulgar Latin for a feminine singular
noun. To take the veil become a nun is attested from early 14c.


veil (v.)

late 14c., from Old French veler, voiller (12c.), from Latin velare to cover, veil, from velum a
cloth, covering, curtain, veil, literally a sail (see veil (n.)). Figurative sense of to conceal,
mask, disguise (something immaterial) is recorded from 1530s. Related: Veiled; veiling.


vein (n.)

c.1300, from Old French veine vein, artery, pulse (12c.), from Latin vena a blood vessel, also a
water course, a vein of metal, a person's natural ability or interest, of unknown origin. The mining
sense is attested in English from late 14c. (Greek phleps vein had the same secondary sense).
Figurative sense of strain or intermixture (of some quality) is recorded from 1560s; that of a humor
or mood, natural tendency is first recorded 1570s.


velar (adj.)

1726, from Latin velaris, from velum sail, curtain (see veil (n.)). Originally an architect's term
for a type of cupola resembling a swelling sail; phonetics sense is from 1876, on notion of
pertaining to the velum, the anatomist's name for the soft palate (velum in this sense is attested
from 1771, in full velum palati). The noun meaning a velar guttural is recorded from 1886.


Velcro (n.)

1958, proprietary name (Britain), from French vel(ours) cro(ch&eacute;) hooked velvet.    Here is a
nonmetallic fastener with no mechanical parts. It is simply two strips of nylon, one woven with
thousands of tiny protruding hooks, the other with loops. Pressed together, they catch like a burr
to clothing, can't be parted except by peeling. American Velcro, Manchester, N.H., makes them to
hold anything from pants to upholstery. [Popular Science, December 1958]


veld (n.)

see veldt.


veldt (n.)

also veld, South African grassland, 1785, from Afrikaans, from older Dutch veld field; related to
English field (n.).


velleity (n.)

volition in the weakest form; an indolent or inactive wish, 1610s, from Medieval Latin stem of
velleitas (from Latin velle to wish, will; see will (v.)) + -ity.


vellum (n.)

early 15c., from Old French velin parchment made from calfskin (13c.), from vel, veel calf (see
veal).


velocipede (n.)

1819, wheeled vehicle propelled by alternate thrusts of each foot on the ground, 1819, from French
v&eacute;locip&egrave;de (19c.), from Latin velox (genitive velocis) swift, speedy (see velocity) +
pedem, accusative of pes foot (see foot (n.)). The mechanical ancestor of the bicycle, it was
tinkered with and improved; the name continued for some time and was applied to an early kind of
modern bicycle or tricycle from 1849. See bicycle (n.).    The Velocipede has been introduced into
England, under letters patent, by Mr. Johnson, a coachmaker in Long-Acre, by whom it has been
greatly improved, both in lightness and strength. The road from Ipswich to Whitton, says the Bury
paper, is travelled every evening by several pedestrian hobby-horses; no less than six are seen at a
time, and the distance, which is 3 miles, is performed in 15 minutes. [The Athenaeum, May 1, 1819]


velociraptor (n.)

1924, from Latin velox (genitive velocis) swift, speedy (see velocity) + raptor robber (see raptor).
Fossil remains discovered in 1923 in the red Djadochta sandstone at Shabarakh Usu in Mongolia.
The first (Fig. 1) of the typical megalosaurian type, although of small size, seems to have been an
alert, swift-moving carnivorous dinosaur to which the generic name Velociraptor is applied. [Henry
Fairfield Osborn, Three New Therapoda, Protoceratops Zone, Central Mongolia, in American Museum
Novitates, Nov., 7, 1924]


velocity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin velocitatem (nominative velocitas) swiftness, speed, from velox (genitive
velocis) swift, speedy, rapid, quick, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to vehere carry (see
vehicle), or from the same root as vigil.


velodrome (n.)

building for bicycle races, 1892, from French v&eacute;lodrome, from v&eacute;lo, colloquial
abbreviation of v&eacute;locip&egrave;de (see velocipede) + -drome, as in hippodrome.


velour (n.)

1706, also velure, velours, from French velours velvet, from Old French velor, alteration of velos
velvet, from Old Proven&ccedil;al velos, from Latin villosus (adj.) shaggy, hairy, rough (in
Medieval Latin velvet), from villus shaggy hair, tuft of hair (see velvet).


Velox (n.)

type of photographic print paper made by a process patented 1893 by Leo Baekeland, who sold it to
George Eastman in 1899 for $1 million and used the money to build the laboratory where he made great
discoveries in plastics (see Bakelite).


velum (n.)

the soft palate, 1771, from Latin velum a sail, awning, curtain, covering (see veil (n.)).


velvet (n.)

early 14c., probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al veluet, from Vulgar Latin *villutittus, diminutive of
Vulgar Latin *villutus velvet, literally shaggy cloth, from Latin villus shaggy hair, nap of cloth,
tuft of hair, probably a dialectal variant of vellus fleece, from PIE *wel-no-, suffixed form of
root *wel- (4) to tear, pull (see svelte).


velveteen (n.)

imitation velvet (made with cotton in place of silk), 1776, from velvet + commercial suffix -een
(variant of -ine).


velvety (adj.)

1712, from velvet + -y (2). Related: Velvetiness.


ven.

abbreviation of venerable.


vena cava (n.)

Medical Latin, from Latin vena vein (see vein) + cava, from cavus hollow (see cave (n.)).


venal (adj.)

1650s, capable of being obtained for a price; that can be corrupted; 1660s, offered for sale, from
French v&eacute;nal, Old French venel for sale (of prostitutes, etc.; 12c.), from Latin venalis for
sale, to be sold; capable of being bribed, from venum (nominative *venus) for sale, from PIE root
*wes- (1) to buy, sell (cognates: Sanskrit vasnah purchase money, vasnam reward, vasnayati he
bargains, haggles; Greek onos price paid, purchase, oneisthai to buy). Typically with a bad sense of
ready to sell one's services or influence for money and from sordid motives; to be bought basely or
meanly.


venality (n.)

1610s, from French v&eacute;nalit&eacute; or directly from Late Latin venalitatem (nominative
venalitas) capability of being bought, from Latin venalis capable of being bought (see venal).


venation (n.)

arrangement of veins, 1640s, of plant structures, noun of state from Latin vena vein (see vein).
Related: Venational.


vend (v.)

1620s, from Latin vendere to sell, give for a bribe; praise, cry up, contraction of venumdare offer
for sale, from venum for sale (see venal) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). Related: Vended; vending;
vendible (early 14c.). Vending machine is recorded from 1889.


vendee (n.)

person to whom something is sold, 1540s; see vend (v.) + -ee.


Vendee

department of western France, French Vend&#233;e, named for the river through it, which is perhaps
from Gaulish vindos white. Especially in reference to the insurrection there against the Republic in
1793. Related: Vendean.


vender (n.)

1590s, agent noun in native form from vend (v.).


vendetta (n.)

a private war in which a kinsman wreaks vengeance on the slayer of a relative, 1846, from Italian
vendetta a feud, blood feud, from Latin vindicta vengeance, revenge (see vindictive). Especially
associated with Corsica.


vendor (n.)

1590s, from late Anglo-French vendor, from vendre to vend, from Latin vendere to sell (see vend).
More common in legal use than vender.


vendue (n.)

public sale, auction, 1680s, from Dutch vendu, from obsolete French vendue sale, selling price, from
vendre to sell, from Latin vendere (see vend).


veneer (n.)

1702, from German Furnier, from furnieren to cover with a veneer, inlay, from French fournir to
furnish, accomplish, from Middle French fornir to furnish, from a Germanic source (compare Old High
German frumjan to provide; see furnish). From German to French to German to English. Figurative
sense of mere outward show of some good quality is attested from 1868.


veneer (v.)

1728 (earlier fineer, 1708), from German furnieren (see veneer (n.)). Related: Veneered; veneering.


venerable (adj.)

early 15c., worthy of respect, from Old French venerable and directly from Latin venerabilis worthy
of reverence or respect, from venerari to worship, revere (see veneration). As a title, used in
reference to ecclesiastics (in the Anglican church, specifically of archdeacons) or those who had
obtained the first degree of canonization. Related: Venerably; venerability.


venerate (v.)

1620s, back-formation from veneration, or else from Latin veneratus, past participle of venerari to
reverence, worship. Related: Venerated; venerating.


veneration (n.)

early 15c., from Old French veneracion, from Latin venerationem (nominative veneratio) reverence,
profoundest respect, noun of action from past participle stem of venerari to worship, revere, from
venus (genitive veneris) beauty, love, desire (see Venus).


venereal (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to sexual desire or intercourse, from Latin venereus, venerius of
Venus; of sexual love, from venus (genitive veneris) sexual love, sexual desire (see Venus). Used of
sexually transmitted diseases from 1650s. Related: Venereally.


venery (n.1)

pursuit of sexual pleasure, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin veneria sexual intercourse, from Latin
venus (genitive veneris) sexual love, sexual desire (see Venus). In earlier use it may have been
felt as a play on now obsolete homonym venery (n.2) practice or sport of hunting, the chase.
Related: Venereous.


venery (n.2)

hunting, the sports of the chase, early 14c., from Old French venerie, from Medieval Latin venaria
beasts of the chase, game, from Latin venari to hunt, pursue (see venison).


Venetian (n.)

early 15c., native or resident of Venice, from Medieval Latin Venetianus, from Venetia (see Venice).
Also probably in part from Old French Venicien. As a kind of dress cloth, from 1710. As an adjective
from 1550s. Venetian blinds so called by 1791.


Venezuela

Spanish, diminutive of Venecia Venice (see Venice). Supposedly the name was given by Spanish sailors
in 1499 when they saw a native village built on piles on Lake Maracaibo. Related: Venezuelan.


venge (v.)

avenge, c.1300, from Old French vengier revenge, avenge, punish, from Latin vindicare avenge,
vindicate (see vindication). Related: Venged; venging.


vengeance (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French vengeaunce, Old French vengeance, venjance revenge, retribution (12c.),
from vengier take revenge, from Latin vindicare assert a claim, claim as one's own; avenge, punish
(see vindicate).  Vengeance is mine, ... saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. [Paul to
the Romans, xii:19-20]


vengeful (adj.)

1580s, from obsolete venge (v.) take revenge + -ful. Related: Vengefully; vengefulness.


venial (adj.)

c.1300, pardonable, from Old French venial pardonable, excusable (13c.) and directly from Late Latin
venialis pardonable, from Latin venia forgiveness, indulgence, pardon, related to venus sexual love,
desire (see Venus). Related: Venially.


Venice

(Italian Venezia, German Venedig), from Medieval Latin Venetia, from Veneti (Greek Ouenetoi), name
of an ancient people of Illyrian origin.


venire

1660s, elliptical for venire facias (mid-15c.), Latin, literally that you cause to come, formerly
the first words in a writ to a sheriff to summon a jury. See venue.


venison (n.)

c.1300, from Old French venesoun meat of large game, especially deer or boar, also a hunt, from
Latin venationem (nominative venatio) a hunt, hunting, the chase, also game as the product of the
hunt, from venatus, past participle of venari to hunt, pursue, probably from PIE *wen-a-, from root
*wen- (1) to strive for, desire (see Venus).


Venn diagram (n.)

1918 (Venn's diagram is from 1904), named for English logician John Venn (1834-1923) of Cambridge,
who explained them in the book Symbolic Logic (1881).


venom (n.)

mid-13c., venim, venym, poison secreted by some animals and transferred by biting, from Anglo-French
and Old French venim, venin poison; malice, from Vulgar Latin *venimen (source also of Italian
veleno, Spanish veneno), from Latin venenum poison, earlier (pre-classical) drug, medical potion,
also charm, seduction, probably originally love potion, from PIE *wenes-no-, from root *wen- (1) to
strive after, wish, desire (see Venus). Variously deformed in post-Latin languages, apparently by
dissimilation. Modern spelling in English from late 14c. The meaning bitter, virulent feeling or
language is first recorded c.1300.


venomous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French venimeus, Old French venimos (12c., Modern French venimeux), from venim
(see venom). Earliest recorded use is figurative; literal sense by early 14c. Related: Venomously;
venomousness.


venous (adj.)

1620s, from Latin venosus full of veins, from vena (see vein).


vent (v.)

late 14c., emit from a confined space, probably a shortening of aventer expose oneself to the air
(c.1300), from Old French eventer let out, expose to air, from Vulgar Latin *exventare, from Latin
ex- out + ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Sense of express freely first recorded 1590s. Sense of
divulge, publish (1590s) is behind phrase vent one's spleen (see spleen). Related: Vented; venting.


vent (n.)

c.1400, anus, from Old French vent from verb eventer (see vent (v.)) and in part from Middle English
aventer, from the French verb. Perhaps also merged with or influenced by Middle English fent opening
or slit in a the front of a garment (usually held closed with a brooch), c.1400, from Old French
fente, from Latin findere to split (see fissure). Meaning outlet for water, also air hole, breathing
hole is from mid-15c. Meaning action of venting is recorded from c.1500.


ventilate (v.)

early 15c., to scatter, disperse (as the wind does), from Latin ventilatus, past participle of
ventilare to brandish, toss in the air, winnow, fan, agitate, set in motion, from ventulus a breeze,
diminutive of ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Original notion is of cleaning grain by tossing it in
the air and letting the wind blow away the chaff. Meaning supply a room with fresh air first
recorded 1743 (see ventilation). Formerly with diverse slang senses, including shoot (someone),
recorded from 1875. Related: Ventilated; ventilating.


ventilation (n.)

process of replacing foul air in an enclosed place with fresh, pure air, 1660s, from Latin
ventilationem (nominative ventilatio) an exposing to the air, noun of action from past participle
stem of ventilare (see ventilate).


ventilator (n.)

1743, agent noun from ventilate. Latin ventilator meant a winnower.


ventral (adj.)

1739, from French ventral or directly from Late Latin ventralis of or pertaining to the belly or
stomach, from Latin venter (genitive ventris) belly, paunch; stomach, appetite; womb, unborn child,
from PIE *wend-tri- (cognates: Latin vesica bladder, Sanskrit vastih bladder, Old High German
wanast, German wanst paunch, belly), perhaps from root *udero- abdomen, womb, stomach (see uterus).


ventricle (n.)

late 14c., small chamber or cavity within a bodily organ, especially of the heart, from Latin
ventriculus (in reference to the heart, ventriculus cordis), literally little belly, diminutive of
venter (genitive ventris) belly (see ventral).


ventriloquism (n.)

1773, in the modern sense, from ventriloquy + -ism.


ventriloquist (n.)

1650s in the classical sense, from ventriloquy + -ist. In the modern sense from c.1800.
Ventriloquists in ancient Greece were Pythones, a reference to the Delphic Oracle.


ventriloquy (n.)

1580s, from Late Latin ventriloquus, from Latin venter (genitive ventris) belly (see ventral) +
loqui speak (see locution). Related: Ventriloquial; ventriloquize.    Patterned on Greek
engastrimythos, literally speaking in the belly, which was not originally an entertainer's trick but
rather a rumbling sort of internal speech, regarded as a sign of spiritual inspiration or (more
usually) demonic possession. Reference to the modern activity so called seems to have begun early
18c., and by 1797 it was being noted that this was a curiously inappropriate word to describe
throwing the voice.


venture (v.)

early 15c., to risk the loss (of something), shortened form of aventure, itself a form of adventure.
General sense of to dare, to presume is recorded from 1550s. Related: Ventured; venturing.    Nought
venter nought have [Heywood, Proverbs, 1546]


venture (n.)

c.1400, fortune, chance, shortening of aventure (n.), a variant of adventure (n.); also from Anglo-
French venture. Sense of risky undertaking first recorded 1560s; meaning enterprise of a business
nature is recorded from 1580s. Venture capital is attested from 1943.


venturesome (adj.)

1660s, from venture + -some (1).


Venturi

type of tube, 1887, in reference to Italian physicist G.B. Venturi (1746-1822).


venturous (adj.)

daring, bold, hardy, 1560s, shortened form of adventurous, influenced by venture.


venue (n.)

c.1300, a coming for the purpose of attack, from Old French venue coming (12c.), from fem. past
participle of venir to come, from Latin venire to come, from PIE root *gwa- to go, come (cognates:
Old English cuman to come; see come). The sense of place where a case in law is tried is first
recorded 1530s. Extended to locality in general, especially site of a concert or sporting event
(1857). Change of venue is from Blackstone (1768).


venule (n.)

small vein, 1850, from Latin venula, diminutive of vena vein (see vein).


Venus

late Old English, from Latin Venus (plural veneres), in ancient Roman mythology, the goddess of
beauty and love, especially sensual love, from venus love, sexual desire; loveliness, beauty, charm;
a beloved object, from PIE root *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire (cognates: Sanskrit veti
follows after, vanas- desire, vanati desires, loves, wins; Avestan vanaiti he wishes, is victorious,
vayeiti hunts; Lithuanian veju to hunt, pursue; Old Church Slavonic voji warrior; Old English
wa&thorn; hunting, wynn joy, wunian to dwell, wenian to accustom, train, wean, wyscan to wish; Old
Norse vei&eth;r chase, hunting, fishing). Applied by the Romans to Greek Aphrodite, Egyptian Hathor,
etc.    Applied in English to any beautiful, attractive woman by 1570s. As the name of the most
brilliant planet from late 13c., from this sense in Latin (Old English called it morgensteorra and
&aelig;fensteorra). The venus fly-trap (Dion&aelig;a muscipula) was discovered 1760 by Gov. Arthur
Dobbs in North Carolina and description sent to Collinson in England. The Central Atlantic Coast
Algonquian name for the plant, /titipiwitshik/, yielded regional American English tippity wichity.


Venusian (n.)

(hypothetical) inhabitant of the second planet from the sun, 1866, from Venus + -ian. Middle English
had Venerian one under the influence of the planet Venus; a lover (late 14c.).


ver (n.)

springtime, late 14c., from Old French ver or directly from Latin ver the spring, spring-time (see
vernal).


ver-

German prefix denoting destruction, reversal, or completion [Watkins], from Proto-Germanic *fer-,
*far- (see per).


Vera

fem. proper name, from Latin, literally true (see very).


veracious (adj.)

habitually disposed to speak truth, 1670s, from Latin verac-, stem of verax according to truth,
truthful, from verus true (see very) + -ous.


veracity (n.)

1620s, from French v&eacute;racit&eacute; (17c.), from Medieval Latin veracitatem (nominative
veracitas) truthfulness, from Latin verax (genitive veracis) truthful, from verus true (see very).


veranda (n.)

also verandah, 1711, from Hindi varanda, which probably is from Portuguese varanda, originally long
balcony or terrace, of uncertain origin, possibly related to Spanish baranda railing, and ultimately
from Vulgar Latin *barra barrier, bar. French v&eacute;randa is borrowed from English.    That the
word as used in England and in France was brought by the English from India need not be doubted. But
either in the same sense, or in one closely analogous, it appears to have existed, quite
independently, in Portuguese and Spanish; and the manner in which it occurs without explanation in
the very earliest narrative of the adventure of the Portuguese in India ... seems almost to preclude
the possibility of their having learned it in that country for the first time .... [Col. Henry Yule
and A.C. Burnell, Hobson-Jobson, A Glossary of Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases, 1903]


verb (n.)

late 14c., from Old French verbe word; word of God; saying; part of speech that expresses action or
being (12c.) and directly from Latin verbum verb, originally a word, from PIE root *were- (3) to
speak (cognates: Avestan urvata- command; Sanskrit vrata- command, vow; Greek rhetor public speaker,
rhetra agreement, covenant, eirein to speak, say; Hittite weriga- call, summon; Lithuanian vardas
name; Gothic waurd, Old English word word).


verbage (n.)

variant of verbiage (q.v.).


verbal (adj.)

early 15c., dealing with words (especially in contrast to things or realities), from Old French
verbal (14c.) and directly from Late Latin verbalis consisting of words, relating to verbs, from
Latin verbum word (see verb). Related: Verbally. Verbal conditioning is recorded from 1954.
Colloquial verbal diarrhea is recorded from 1823. A verbal noun is a noun derived from a verb and
sharing in its senses and constructions.


verbalization (n.)

1837, noun of action from verbalize.


verbalize (v.)

c.1600, use too many words, from French verbaliser (16c.); see verbal. Meaning express in words is
attested from 1875. Related: Verbalized; verbalizing.


verbarian (n.)

word-coiner, 1873, from Latin verbum word (see verb) + -arian. Coleridge (or the friend he was
quoting) had used it earlier as an adjective, and with a different sense, in wishing for: a
verbarian Attorney-General, authorised to bring informations ex officio against the writer or editor
of any work in extensive circulation, who, after due notice issued, should persevere in misusing a
word (1830).


verbatim (adv.)

late 15c., from Medieval Latin verbatim word for word, from Latin verbum word (see verb). As an
adjective from 1737.


verbena (n.)

genus of plants, the vervain, 1560s, from Latin verbena leaves or twigs of olive, myrtle, laurel, or
other sacred plants employed in religious ceremonies, from PIE *werbh- (cognates: Lithuanian virbas
twig, branch, scion, rod), from root *werb- to turn, bend (see warp (v.)).


verbiage (n.)

abundance of words, 1721, from French verbiage wordiness (17c.), from Middle French verbier to
chatter, from Old French verbe word, from Latin verbum word (see verb).


verbicide (n.)

the killing of a word by perversion from its original meaning, 1836, from Latin verbum word (see
verb) + -cide.


verbiculture (n.)

the production of words, 1873, from Latin verbum word (see verb) + ending from agriculture, etc.
Coined by Fitzedward Hall, in Modern English. He was scolded for it in the Edinburgh Review.


verbigeration (n.)

the continual utterance of certain words or phrases, repeated at short intervals, without any
reference to their meanings [Century Dictionary], 1877, earlier in German, noun of action from Late
Latin verbigere to talk, chat, dispute, from Latin verbum (see verb).


verbose (adj.)

wordy, 1670s, from Latin verbosus full of words, wordy, from verbum word (see verb). Related:
Verbosely (c.1400); verboseness.


verbosity (n.)

1540s, from French verbosit&eacute; (16c.) or directly from Late Latin verbositas, from Latin
verbosus (see verbose).


verboten (adj.)

1912, German, literally forbidden (see forbid).


verdant (adj.)

1580s, green in color; green with vegetation, from Middle French virdeant becoming green, present
participle of Old French verdeiier become green, from Vulgar Latin *viridiare grow green, make
green, from Latin viridis green (see verdure). Related: Verdantly; verdancy.


verdict (n.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English verdit (c.1300), a jury's decision in a case, from Anglo-French
verdit (Old French voirdit) sworn testimony, affidavit; judgment, written record of a verdict,
literally a true saying or report, from ver, veir true (see very) + dit, past participle of dire to
say (see diction). Spelling influenced by Medieval Latin verdictum a verdict.


verdigris (n.)

c.1300, vertegrez, from Old French verte grez (13c.), verte de Grece (late 12c.), literally green of
Greece, from obsolete French verd, from Latin viridis (see verdure). The reason for it being called
that is not known. In other languages, green of Spain (German gr&#252;nspan, Danish
spanskgr&#246;nt, Dutch spaansch-groen), from Medieval Latin viride Hispanum. Current spelling in
English is from 1789. In chemistry, confined to a basic copper acetate; popularly applied to the
green encrustation on copper or brass exposed to the air.


verdure (n.)

late 14c., fresh green color, from Old French verdure greenness, greenery, green fields, herbs, from
verd, variant of vert green (12c.), from Latin viridis (source of Spanish, Italian verde), related
to virere be green, of unknown origin. Perhaps ultimately from a root meaning growing plant and
cognate with Lithuanian veisti propagate, Old Norse visir bud, sprout, Old English wise sprout,
stalk, etc. Meaning green plants, vegetation is attested from c.1400.


verdurous (adj.)

c.1600, from verdure + -ous.


verge (n.)

edge, rim, mid-15c., from Old French verge twig, branch; measuring rod; penis; rod or wand of office
(12c.), hence, from the last sense, scope, territory dominated (as in estre suz la verge de be under
the authority of), from Latin virga shoot, rod, stick, slender green branch, of unknown origin.
Earliest attested sense in English is now-obsolete meaning male member, penis (c.1400). Modern sense
is from the notion of within the verge (c.1500, also as Anglo-French dedeinz la verge), i.e. subject
to the Lord High Steward's authority (as symbolized by the rod of office), originally a 12-mile
radius round the king's court. Sense shifted to the outermost edge of an expanse or area. Meaning
point at which something happens (as in on the verge of) is first attested c.1600. A very curious
sense development. [Weekley]


verge (v.1)

tend, incline, c.1600, from Latin vergere to bend, turn, tend toward, incline, from PIE *werg- to
turn, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). Influenced by verge (v.2) provide with a
border (c.1600); be adjacent to (1787), from verge (n.). Related: Verged; verging.


vergence (n.)

1902 in ophthalmology, from verge (v.) + -ence. From 1660s as fact or condition of being inclined
(toward something). Related: Vergency.


verger (n.)

one who carries a verge as an officer of the church, c.1400, probably from Anglo-French *verger,
from verge (see verge (n.)).


veridical (adj.)

speaking truth, 1650s, from Latin veridicus truth-telling, truthful, from verum truth, neuter of
verus true (see very) + dic-, stem of dicere to speak (see diction). Related: Veridically.


verifiable (adj.)

1590s, from verify + -able. Related: Verifiably; verifiability.


verification (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin *verificationem (nominative verificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of verificare (see verify). Middle English had verifiaunce confirmation,
corroboration (c.1400).


verify (v.)

early 14c., from Old French verifier substantiate, find out the truth about (14c.), from Medieval
Latin verificare make true, from Latin verus true (see very) + root of facere to make (see
factitious).


verily (adv.)

in truth, early 14c., from Middle English verray true, real (see very) + -ly (2).


verisimilitude (n.)

appearance of truth or reality, likelihood, c.1600, from French verisimilitude (1540s), from Latin
verisimilitudo likeness to truth, from veri, genitive of verum, neuter of verus true (see very) +
similis like, similar (see similar). Related: Verisimilar.


verism (n.)

the theory that art and literature should strictly reproduce truth, 1892, from Italian verismo, from
vero truth, from Latin verus (see very) + -ismo, Italian form of -ism.


veritable (adj.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French and Old French veritable true, real, truthful, valid (in law), from
verit&eacute; (see verity) + -able. Probably lost mid-17c. and reborrowed or revived after 1830.
Related: Veritably.


veritas (n.)

Latin, literally truth, truthfulness, from verus true (see very). Latin phrase in vino veritas is
attributed to Pliny the Elder, though there is a Greek version of it.


verity (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French and Old French verite truth, sincerity, loyalty (12c.), from Latin
veritatem (nominative veritas) truth, truthfulness, from verus true (see very). Modern French
v&eacute;rit&eacute;, literally truth, was borrowed into English 1966 as a term for naturalism or
realism in film, etc.


vermeil (adj.)

bright-red, late 14c., from Anglo-French and Old French vermail, vermeil bright-red, scarlet,
crimson (11c. in Old French), from Late Latin vermiculus a little worm, specifically, the cochineal
insect from which crimson dyes were obtained (compare kermes), in classical Latin, larva of an
insect, grub, maggot, diminutive of vermis worm (see worm (n.)). As a noun in English from 1590s.


vermicelli (n.)

kind of pasta, 1660s, literally little worms, from Italian vermicelli, plural of vermicello,
diminutive of verme, accusative singular of Latin vermis worm (see worm (n.)). So called for
resemblance.


vermicular (adj.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin vermicularis, from Latin vermiculus little worm, from vermis (see worm
(n.)).


vermiculation (n.)

1610s, from Latin vermiculationem (nominative vermiculatio), noun of action from vermiculari, from
vermiculus (see vermicular).


vermiculite (n.)

micaceous mineral, 1814, from Latin vermiculari (from vermiculus, diminutive of vermis; see worm
(n.)) + -ite. So called from its reaction when heated.


vermiform (adj.)

worm-shaped, worm-like in form, 1730, from Modern Latin vermiformis, from Latin vermis worm (see
worm (n.)) + forma form (see form (n.)).


vermilion (n.)

late 13c., cinnabar, red dye, from Anglo-French and Old French vermeillon red lead, cinnabar,
(cosmetic) rouge (12c.), from vermeil (see vermeil). As an adjective, from 1580s.


vermin (n.)

c.1300, noxious animals, from Anglo-French and Old French vermin moth, worm, mite, in plural
troublesome creatures (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *verminum vermin, possibly including bothersome
insects, collective noun formed from Latin vermis worm (see worm (n.)). Extended to low, obnoxious
people by 1560s.


verminous (adj.)

1610s, from vermin + -ous or else from Latin verminosus.


Vermont

U.S. state, 1777, based on French words for Green Mountain, but perhaps was formed by one with
limited knowledge of French, where the correct form would be Mont Vert (as in the village of Pont-
de-Montvert). Related: Vermonter.


vermouth (n.)

white wine flavored with aromatic herbs, 1806, from French vermouth (18c.), from German Wermuth
wormwood, from Middle High German wermuot, from Old High German wermuota (see wormwood), name of the
aromatic herb formerly used in the flavoring of the liqueur.


vernacular (adj.)

c.1600, native to a country, from Latin vernaculus domestic, native, indigenous; pertaining to home-
born slaves, from verna home-born slave, native, a word of Etruscan origin. Used in English in the
sense of Latin vernacula vocabula, in reference to language. As a noun, native speech or language of
a place, from 1706.    For human speech is after all a democratic product, the creation, not of
scholars and grammarians, but of unschooled and unlettered people. Scholars and men of education may
cultivate and enrich it, and make it flower into the beauty of a literary language; but its rarest
blooms are grafted on a wild stock, and its roots are deep-buried in the common soil. [Logan
Pearsall Smith, Words and Idioms, 1925]


vernal (adj.)

pertaining to spring, 1530s, from Late Latin vernalis of the spring, from vernus of spring, from
Latin ver the spring, spring-time, from PIE *wesr- the spring (cognates: Old Norse var spring, Greek
ear, Armenian gar-un, Sanskrit vasantah, Persian bahar, Old Church Slavonic vesna spring, Lithuanian
vasara summer).


vernier (n.)

device for making precise measurements, 1766, from name of inventor, French mathematician Pierre
Vernier (1580-1637), who described it in 1631.


Verona

city in northern Italy, Celtic Vernomago, from verno elder tree + mago field, place. Related:
Veronese.


Veronica

fem. proper name, French Veronique, a variant of Greek Berenike (see Berenice). The popular Saint
Veronica (not in the Roman Martyrology) traditionally was a pious woman who wiped the face of Christ
when he fell carrying the cross to Calvary. The image of his face remained on the cloth, and the
veil of Veronica has been preserved in Rome from the 8c. Her popularity rose with the propagation of
the Stations of the Cross, and this connection led to the folk-etymology derivation of the name from
Latin vera true + Greek eikon image. Some also identified her with the woman with the issue of
blood, cured by Christ, as in the East this woman was identified from an early date by the name
Berenike. Hence vernicle (mid-14c.) picture of the face of Christ, from Old French veronicle,
variant of veronique St. Veronica's cloth.


verruca (n.)

1560s, from Latin verruca a wart, also a fault, failing (see vary). Related: Verrucose.


vers libre (n.)

1902, from French, literally free verse, lines of varying length.  I remarked some years ago, in
speaking of vers libre, that 'no vers is libre for the man who wants to do a good job.' The term,
which fifty years ago had an exact meaning in relation to the French alexandrine, now means too much
to mean anything at all. [T.S. Eliot, introduction to Selected Poems of Ezra Pound, 1928]


Versailles

place outside Paris, of uncertain origin; perhaps from Latin versus slope. Louis XIII built a
hunting lodge there; made into a palace 17c. by Louis XIV.


versant (adj.)

1640s, busy (with something), from Latin versantem (nominative versans), present participle of
versare (see versus). Meaning familiar, acquainted is from 1787.


versatile (adj.)

c.1600, inconstant, from Latin versatilis turning, revolving, moving, capable of turning with ease
to varied subjects or tasks, from past participle stem of versare keep turning, be engaged in
something, turn over in the mind, frequentative of vertere to turn (see versus). Meaning able to do
many things well is from 1762 in English.


versatility (n.)

1755, fickleness, from versatile + -ity. As ability to do many things well from 1798.


verse (n.)

late Old English (replacing Old English fers, an early West Germanic borrowing directly from Latin),
line or section of a psalm or canticle, later line of poetry (late 14c.), from Anglo-French and Old
French vers line of verse; rhyme, song, from Latin versus a line, row, line of verse, line of
writing, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). The metaphor is of plowing, of turning
from one line to another (vertere = to turn) as a plowman does.    Verse was invented as an aid to
memory. Later it was preserved to increase pleasure by the spectacle of difficulty overcome. That it
should still survive in dramatic art is a vestige of barbarism. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    The
English New Testament first was divided fully into verses in the Geneva version (1550s). Meaning
metrical composition is recorded from c.1300; as the non-repeating part of a modern song (between
repetitions of the chorus) by 1918.    The Negroes say that in form their old songs usually consist
in what they call Chorus and Verses. The chorus, a melodic refrain sung by all, opens the song; then
follows a verse sung as a solo, in free recitative; the chorus is repeated; then another verse;
chorus again;--and so on until the chorus, sung for the last time, ends the song. [Natalie Curtis-
Burlin, Negro Folk-Songs, 1918]


versed (adj.)

practiced, conversant, acquainted, c.1600, from past participle of obsolete verse to turn over (a
book, subject, etc.) in study or investigation, from Middle French verser to turn, revolve as in
meditation (12c.), from Latin versare be employed, busy oneself, literally to turn to, turn often;
think over (see versus).


versification (n.)

c.1600, from Latin versificationem (nominative versificatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of versificare (see versify).


versify (v.)

late 14c., compose verse, write poetry, make verses, from Old French versifier turn into verse
(13c.), from Latin versificare compose verse; put into verse, from versus verse (see verse) + root
of facere to make (see factitious). Transitive sense of put into verse in English is from 1735.
Related: Versified; versifying; versifier (mid-14c.).


version (n.)

1580s, a translation, from Middle French version, from Medieval Latin versionem (nominative versio)
a turning, a translation, from past participle stem of Latin vertere to turn, change, alter,
translate (see versus). Also with a Middle English sense of destruction; the meaning particular form
of a description is first attested 1788.


verso (n.)

reverse, back, or other side of some object, especially a printed page or book, 1839, from Latin
verso (folio), ablative singular neuter of versus, past participle of vertere to turn (see versus).


verst (n.)

Russian unit of distance measure equal to about two-thirds of a mile, 1550s, from Russian versta,
related to Old Church Slavonic vrusta stadium, vruteti (Russian vertet) to turn (see versus).


versus (prep.)

mid-15c., in legal case names, denoting action of one party against another, from Latin versus
turned toward or against, from past participle of vertere (frequentative versare) to turn, turn
back, be turned, convert, transform, translate, be changed, from PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root
*wer- (3) to turn, bend (cognates: Old English -weard toward, originally turned toward, weorthan to
befall, wyrd fate, destiny, literally what befalls one; Sanskrit vartate turns round, rolls; Avestan
varet- to turn; Old Church Slavonic vr&#365;teti to turn, roll, Russian vreteno spindle, distaff;
Lithuanian ver &#269;iu to turn; Greek rhatane stirrer, ladle; German werden, Old English
weor&eth;an to become (for sense, compare turn into); Welsh gwerthyd spindle, distaff; Old Irish
frith against).


vert (n.)

mid-15c., the color green (especially in heraldry), also trees and brush bearing green leaves (in
forest law), from Anglo-French and Old French vert foliage, greenery, green cloth, from Latin
viridem, viridis green (see verdure).


vert (v.)

to turn in some direction, 1570s, from Latin vertere (see versus). As a noun meaning one who has
left the Church of England from 1864, short for convert (v.).


vertebra (n.)

bone of the spine, early 15c., from Latin vertebra joint or articulation of the body, joint of the
spine (plural vertebr&aelig;), perhaps from vertere to turn (see versus) + instrumental suffix -bra.
The notion would be the spine as the hinge of the body.


vertebral (adj.)

1680s, from vertebra + -al (1).


vertebrate (n.)

a vertebrate animal, 1826, from Latin vertebratus (Pliny), from vertebra joint or articulation of
the body, joint of the spine (see vertebra). As an adjective also from 1826.


vertex (n.)

1560s, the point opposite the base in geometry, from Latin vertex highest point, literally the
turning point, originally whirling column, whirlpool, from vertere to turn (see versus). Meaning
highest point of anything is first attested 1640s.


vertical (adj.)

1550s, of or at the vertex, directly overhead, from Middle French vertical (1540s), from Late Latin
verticalis overhead, from Latin vertex (genitive verticis) highest point (see vertex). Meaning
straight up and down is first recorded 1704. As a noun meaning the vertical position or line from
1834. Related: Vertically.


vertiginous (adj.)

c.1600, of the nature of vertigo, from French vertigineux, from Latin vertiginosus suffering from
dizziness, from vertigo (see vertigo). From 1620s as dizzy; 1640s as liable to cause dizziness.
Related: Vertiginously.


vertigo (n.)

early 15c., from Latin vertigo dizziness, sensation of whirling, originally a whirling or spinning
movement, from vertere to turn (see versus).


vervain (n.)

herbaceous plant much valued medicinally in Middle Ages, late 14c., from Old French verveine (13c.),
from Latin verbena (see verbena).


verve (n.)

1690s, special talent in writing, enthusiasm in what pertains to art and literature, from French
verve enthusiasm (especially pertaining to the arts), in Old French caprice, odd humor, proverb,
saying; messenger's report (12c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *verva, from Latin verba (whimsical)
words, plural of verbum word (see verb). Meaning mental vigor is first recorded 1803.


vervet (n.)

South African monkey, 1884, from French (Cuvier), of unknown origin, perhaps short for vert grivet,
literally a green grivet, indicating it was greener than the kind of monkey known as a grivet
(itself a name of unknown origin). Vervets are among the monkeys carried about by organ-grinders
[Century Dictionary].


very (adj.)

late 13c., verray true, real, genuine, later actual, sheer (late 14c.), from Anglo-French verrai,
Old French verai true, truthful, sincere; right, just, legal, from Vulgar Latin *veracus, from Latin
verax (genitive veracis) truthful, from verus true (source also of Italian vero), from PIE root
*were-o- true, trustworthy (cognates: Old English w&aelig;r a compact, Old Dutch, Old High German
war, Dutch waar, German wahr true; Welsh gwyr, Old Irish fir true; Old Church Slavonic vera faith,
Russian viera faith, belief). Meaning greatly, extremely is first recorded mid-15c. Used as a pure
intensive since Middle English.


vesicant (n.)

a blistering agent, 1660s, from Medieval Latin vesicantem (nominative vesicans), present participle
of vesicare, from vesica a bladder, a blister (see ventral). From 1826 as an adjective.


vesicle (n.)

small, bladder-like structure, early 15c., from Middle French vesicule, from Latin vesicula little
blister, diminutive of vesica bladder, blister (see ventral).


vesicular (adj.)

1715, from Modern Latin vesicularis, from vesicula little blister, diminutive of vesica bladder (see
ventral).


Vespa (n.)

1950, proprietary name of an Italian make of motor scooter, first produced 1946, from Italian,
literally wasp, from Latin vespa (see wasp). Rival brand was Lambretta.


vesper (n.)

late 14c., the evening star, from Old French vespre evening, nightfall (12c., Modern French
v&#234;pre), from Latin vesper (masc.), vespera (fem.) evening star, evening, west, related to Greek
hesperos, and ultimately from PIE root *wes-pero- evening, night (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
ve&#269;eru, Polish wieczor, Russian vecher&#365;, Lithuanian vakaras, Welsh ucher, Old Irish fescor
evening), perhaps an enlarged form of root *we- down (source of Sanskrit avah down, downward), thus
literally direction in which the sun sets. Meaning evening is attested from c.1600.   Vespers sixth
canonical hour is attested from 1610s, from plural of Latin vespera evening; the native name was
evensong (Old English &aelig;fen-sang).


vespertine (adj.)

c.1500, of the evening, from Latin vespertinus of the evening, from vesper evening (see vesper).


vespiary (n.)

wasp's nest, 1816, from Latin vespa wasp (see wasp) on model of apiary. A proper formation would be
*vespary.


vessel (n.)

c.1300, container, from Old French vessel container, receptacle, barrel; ship (12c., Modern French
vaisseau) from Late Latin vascellum small vase or urn, also a ship, alteration of Latin vasculum,
diminutive of vas vessel. Sense of ship, boat is found in English from early 14c. The association
between hollow utensils and boats appears in all languages [Weekley]. Meaning canal or duct of the
body (especially for carrying blood) is attested from late 14c.


vest (v.)

early 15c., to put in possession of a person, from Old French vestir to clothe; get dressed, from
Medieval Latin vestire to put into possession, to invest, from Latin vestire to clothe, dress,
adorn, related to vestis garment, clothing, from PIE *wes- (4) to clothe (see wear (v.)). Related:
Vested; vesting.


vest (n.)

1610s, loose outer garment (worn by men in Eastern countries or in ancient times), from French veste
a vest, jacket (17c.), from Italian vesta, veste robe, gown, from Latin vestis clothing, from
vestire to clothe (see vest (v.)). The sleeveless garment worn by men beneath the coat was
introduced by Charles II in a bid to rein in men's attire at court, which had grown extravagant and
decadent in the French mode.    The King hath yesterday, in Council, declared his resolution of
setting a fashion for clothes .... It will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the
nobility thrift. [Pepys, Diary, Oct. 8, 1666]    Louis XIV of France is said to have mocked the
effort by putting his footmen in such vests.


Vesta

Roman goddess of hearth and home, late 14c., corresponding to, and perhaps cognate with, Greek
Hestia, from hestia hearth, from PIE root *wes- (3) to dwell, stay (cognates: Sanskrit vasati stays,
dwells, Gothic wisan, Old English, Old High German wesan to be). As the name of a planetoid from
1807 (Olbers).


vestal (adj.)

chaste, pure, virgin, 1590s, originally (early 15c.) belonging to or dedicated to Vesta, Roman
goddess of hearth and home, from Latin vestalis. The noun is recorded from 1570s, short for Vestal
virgin, one of four (later six) priestesses (Latin virgines Vestales) in charge of the sacred fire
in the temple of Vesta in Rome. From 1580s in reference to any virgin or chaste woman.    They
entered the service of the goddess at from six to ten years of age, their term of service lasting
thirty years. They were then permitted to retire and to marry, but few did so, for, as vestals, they
were treated with great honor, and had important public privileges. Their persons were inviolable,
any offense against them being punished with death, and they were treated in all their relations
with the highest distinction and reverence. A vestal who broke her vow of chastity was immured alive
in an underground vault amid public mourning. There were very few such instances; in one of them,
under Domitian, the chief of the vestals was put to death under a false charge trumped up by the
emperor.


vested (adj.)

established, secured, settled, not in a state of contingency, 1766, past participle adjective from
vest (v.).


vestibular (adj.)

1819, in reference to the inner ear part, from vestibule + -ar.


vestibule (n.)

1620s, a porch, later antechamber, lobby (1730), from French vestible, from Latin vestibulum
forecourt, entrance, of unknown origin. In reference to the ear part from 1728.


vestige (n.)

c.1600, from French vestige a mark, trace, sign (16c.), from Latin vestigium footprint, trace, of
unknown origin.


vestigial (adj.)

1850, like a mere trace of what has been, originally in biology, from vestige + -al (1).


vestment (n.)

c.1300, from Old French vestment (12c., Modern French v&ecirc;tement), from Latin vestimentum
clothing, clothes, from vestire to clothe (see wear (v.)). Related: Vestments; vestmental.


vestry (n.)

mid-15c., probably from Anglo-French *vesterie, from Old French vestiaire room for vestments,
dressing room (12c.), from Latin vestarium wardrobe, noun use of neuter of vestiarius (adj.) of
clothes, from vestis garment (see vest (v.)). Often also a meeting room for the transaction of
parish business, and retained in non-liturgical churches as the name of a separate room used for
Sunday school, prayer meetings, etc., hence transferred secular use (as in vestryman, 1610s).


vesture (n.)

late 14c., garments, clothes worn by a person at one time, from Anglo-French and Old French vesture,
vesteure dress, clothes, clothing, from Vulgar Latin *vestitura vestments, clothing, from Latin
vestivus, past participle of vestire to clothe (see wear (v.)).


Vesuvius

volcano near Naples, of unknown origin; perhaps from Celtic root *ves- mountain or Oscan fesf smoke,
steam. Related: Vesuvian.


vet (n.1)

1862, shortened form of veterinarian.


vet (v.)

to submit (an animal) to veterinary care, 1891, from veterinarian. The colloquial sense of subject
(something) to careful examination (as of an animal by a veterinarian, especially of a horse before
a race) is attested by 1901. Related: Vetted; vetting.


vet (n.2)

1848, shortened form of veteran (n.).


vetch (n.)

climbing herb, late 14c., from Old North French veche, variant of Old French vece, from Latin vicia,
which perhaps is related to vincire to bind (compare second element of periwinkle (n.1)). Dutch
wikke, German Wicke are loan-words from Latin vicia.


veteran (n.)

c.1500, old experienced soldier, from French v&eacute;t&eacute;ran, from Latin veteranus old, aged,
that has been long in use, especially of soldiers; as a plural noun, old soldiers, from vetus
(genitive veteris) old, aged, advanced in years; of a former time, as a plural noun, vetores, men of
old, forefathers, from PIE *wet-es-, from root *wet- (2) year (cognates: Sanskrit vatsa- year, Greek
etos year, Hittite witish year, Old Church Slavonic vetuchu old, Old Lithuanian vetu&#353;as old,
aged; and compare wether). Latin vetus also is the ultimate source of Italian vecchio, French vieux,
Spanish viejo. General sense of one who has seen long service in any office or position is attested
from 1590s. The adjective first recorded 1610s.


veterinarian (n.)

animal doctor, 1640s, from Latin veterinarius of or having to do with beasts of burden, also, as a
noun, cattle doctor, from veterinum beast of burden, perhaps from vetus (genitive veteris) old (see
veteran), possibly from the notion of experienced, or of one year old (hence strong enough to draw
burdens). Another theory connects it to Latin vehere to draw, on notion of used as a draft animal.
Replaced native dog-leech (1520s).


veterinary (adj.)

1791, from Latin veterinarius of or pertaining to beasts of burden, from veterinus (see
veterinarian).


veto (n.)

1620s, from Latin veto, literally I forbid, first person singular present indicative of vetare
forbid, prohibit, oppose, hinder, of unknown origin. In ancient Rome, the technical term for protest
interposed by a tribune of the people against any measure of the Senate or of the magistrates
[Lewis].


veto (v.)

1706, from veto (n.). Related: Vetoed; vetoing.


vetting (n.)

1918, verbal noun from vet (v.).


vex (v.)

early 15c., from Old French vexer vex, harass (14c.), from Latin vexare to shake, jolt, toss
violently; figuratively attack, harass, trouble, annoy, from vexus, collateral form of vectus, past
participle of vehere to draw, carry (see vehicle). Related: Vexed; vexing.


vexation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French vexacion abuse, harassment; insult, affront, or directly from Latin
vexationem (nominative vexatio) annoyance, harassing; distress, trouble, noun of action from past
participle stem of vexare to harass, trouble (see vex).


vexatious (adj.)

1530s; see vexation + -ous. Related: Vexatiously; vexatiousness.


vexed (adj.)

mid-15c., past participle adjective from vex. Phrase vexed question attested from 1825 (in Latin
form vexata quaestio from 1813).


vexillology (n.)

study of flags, 1959, from Latin vexillum flag, military ensign, banner (from velum a sail, curtain,
veil; see veil (n.)) + -ology.


VFW (n.)

1916, abbreviation of Veterans of Foreign Wars, U.S. organization with roots to 1899.


VHF

1932, initialism (acronym) of very high frequency.


VHS

1982, initialism (acronym) of Video Home System.


via (adv.)

1779, from Latin via by way of, ablative form of via way, road, path, highway, channel, course, from
PIE *wegh- to go, convey (see weigh).


viability (n.)

1823, from French viabilit&#233;, from viable (see viable).


viable (adj.)

1828, from French viable capable of life (1530s), from vie life (from Latin vita life; see vital) +
-able. Originally of newborn infants; generalized sense is first recorded 1848. Related: Viably.


viaduct (n.)

1816, from Latin via road (see via) + -duct as in  aqueduct. French viaduc is a 19c. English loan-
word.    An extensive bridge consisting, strictly of a series of arches of masonry, erected for the
purpose of conducting a road or a railway a valley or a district of low level, or over existing
channels of communication, where an embankment would be impracticable or inexpedient; more widely,
any elevated roadway which artificial constructions of timber, iron, bricks, or stonework are
established. [Century Dictionary]     But the word apparently was coined by English landscape
gardener Humphry Repton (1752-1818) for an architectural feature, a form of bridge adapted to the
purposes of passing over, which may unite strength with grace, or use with beauty ....


Viagra (n.)

1998, proprietary name of drug manufactured by Pfizer company.


vial (n.)

late 14c., vyol, an irregular variant of fyole (see phial).


viand (n.)

article of food, early 14c., from Anglo-French viaunde, Old French viande food (vegetable as well as
animal), victuals, provisions (11c.), dissimilated from Vulgar Latin *vivanda, from Late Latin
vivenda things for living, things to be lived upon, in classical Latin, be live, neuter plural
gerundive of vivere to live (see vital). The French word later was restricted to fresh meat.


viatic (adj.)

1650s, from Latin viaticus of or pertaining to a journey, from via way (see via) + -al (1). Related:
Viatical (1782).


viaticum (n.)

1560s, from Latin viaticum travelling money; provision for a journey, noun use of neuter of
adjective viaticus, from via way (see via). In Late Latin also money to pay the expenses of one
studying abroad, and in Church Latin, the eucharist given to a dying person.


vibe (n.)

1940, short for vibraphone; attested from 1967 as an abbreviated form of vibration in the 1960s
slang sense of instinctive feeling. Related: Vibes.


vibrant (adj.)

1550s, agitated; 1610s, vibrating (especially vibrating so as to produce sound, of a string, etc.),
from Latin vibrantem (nominative vibrans) swaying, present participle of vibrare move to and fro
(see vibrate). Meaning vigorous, full of life is first recorded 1860. Related: Vibrantly; vibrancy.


vibraphone (n.)

1926, a hybrid from vibrato + -phone.


vibrate (v.)

1610s (intransitive) move to and fro; 1660s, swing to and fro; from Latin vibratus, past participle
of vibrare set in tremulous motion, move quickly to and fro, quiver, tremble, shake, from PIE *wib-
ro-, from root *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically, move quickly to and fro (cognates:
Lithuanian wyburiu to wag (the tail), Danish vippe, Dutch wippen to swing, Old English wipan to
wipe). Transitive sense cause to vibrate is from c.1700. Related: Vibrated; vibrating.


vibration (n.)

1650s, from Latin vibrationem (nominative vibratio) a shaking, a brandishing, noun of action from
past participle stem of vibrare set in tremulous motion (see vibrate). Meaning intuitive signal
about a person or thing was popular late 1960s, but has been recorded as far back as 1899. Related:
Vibrational.


vibrato

1861 (adv.), 1870 (n.), tremulous effect in music, from Italian vibrato, from Latin vibratus, past
participle of vibrare to vibrate (see vibrate).    Strictly, the vibrato is distinct from the
tremolo, in that the latter involves a perceptible variation in pitch; but in common usage the terms
are made synonymous. [Century Dictionary]


vibrator (n.)

1862, that which vibrates, originally a part in a musical instrument, agent noun in Latin form from
vibrate (v.). Attested from 1888 in reference to various appliances; specific sense of small
electrical device for sexual stimulation is recorded from 1953.


vibrissa (n.)

plural vibrissae, 1690s, nose hair, stiff hair in the nostril, from Latin vibrissa, back-formation
from vibrissare, from vibrare to vibrate (see vibrate). In reference to the long whiskers of a cat,
etc., from 1839.


viburnum (n.)

genus of shrubs widespread in Eurasia and North America, the wayfaring-tree, 1731, from Latin
viburnum, which is said to be probably an Etruscan word.


Vic

1858, colloquial abbreviation of Royal Victoria Theater in London.


vicar (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French vicare, Old French vicaire deputy, second in command, also in the
ecclesiastical sense (12c.), from Latin vicarius a substitute, deputy, proxy, noun use of adjective
vicarius substituted, delegated, from vicis change, interchange, succession; a place, position (see
vicarious). The original notion is of earthly representative of God or Christ; but also used in
sense of person acting as parish priest in place of a real parson (early 14c.).    The original
Vicar of Bray (in figurative use from 1660s) seems to have been Simon Allen, who held the benefice
from c.1540 to 1588, thus serving from the time of Henry VIII to Elizabeth I, being twice a Catholic
and twice a Protestant but always vicar of Bray. The village is near Maidenhead in Berkshire.


vicarage (n.)

early 15c., benefice of a vicar, from vicar + -age. Meaning house or residence of a vicar is from
1520s.


vicarious (adj.)

1630s, taking the place of another, from Latin vicarius that supplies a place; substituted,
delegated, from vicis a change, exchange, interchange; succession, alternation, substitution, from
PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (cognates: Sanskrit visti changing, changeable; Old English wician
to give way, yield, wice wych elm; Old Norse vikja to bend, turn; Swedish viker willow twig, wand;
German wechsel change).    From 1690s as done or experienced in place of another (usually in
reference to punishment, often of Christ); from 1929 as experienced imaginatively through another.
Related: Vicariously.


vice (n.1)

moral fault, wickedness, c.1300, from Old French vice fault, failing, defect, irregularity,
misdemeanor (12c.), from Latin vitium defect, offense, blemish, imperfection, in both physical and
moral senses (in Medieval Latin also vicium; source also of Italian vezzo usage, entertainment),
from PIE *wi-tio-, from root *wei- (3) vice, fault, guilt.  Horace and Aristotle have already spoken
to us about the virtues of their forefathers and the vices of their own times, and through the
centuries, authors have talked the same way.  If all this were true, we would be bears today.
[Montesquieu]   Vice squad special police unit targeting prostitution, narcotics, gambling, etc., is
attested from 1905, American English. Vice anglais fetish for corporal punishment, literally the
English vice, is attested from 1942, from French. In Old French, the seven deadly sins were les set
vices.


vice (n.2)

tool for holding, see vise.


vice versa

the order being changed, c.1600, Latin, from vice, ablative of vicis a change, alternation,
alternate order (see vicarious) + versa, feminine ablative singular of versus, past participle of
vertere to turn, turn about (see versus). The phrase has the complete force of a proposition, being
as much as to say that upon a transposition of antecedents the consequents are also transposed
[Century Dictionary].


vice-

word-forming element meaning deputy, assistant, substitute, also instead of, in place of, 15c., from
Latin vice in place of, ablative of vicis a change, a turn, interchange alternation (see vicarious).
In Middle English sometimes borrowed in Old French form vis-, vi-.


vice-president (n.)

also vice president, 1570s, one who acts as a deputy for a president, from vice- + president. Made
into an official rank and given a different meaning (vice = next in rank to) in the U.S.
Constitution (1787).    There seems to be no doubt of my election as V[ice] Pres[iden]t. It will
have at least one advantage, that of permitting me to devote more of my time to my private affairs.
[John C. Calhoun, letter to wife, Nov. 12, 1824]    Related: vice presidential; vice presidency.


vice-regent (n.)

also viceregent, 1580s, from vice- + regent (n.). Difficult to distinguish from vicegerent.


vicegerent (n.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin vicegerentem (nominative vicegerens), from Latin vicem, accusative of
vicus stead, place, office, (see vicarious) + gerens, present participle of gerere to carry (see
gest). From 1570s as an adjective.


viceroy (n.)

person ruling as representative of a sovereign, 1520s, from Middle French vice-roy, from Old French
vice- deputy (see vice-) + roi king, from Latin regem (nominative rex); see rex. The species of
American butterfly so called from 1881.


Vichy (adj.)

in reference to collaborationist government of France, 1940, from the name of the city in department
of Allier in central France, famous for mineral springs, seat 1940-44 of the French government
formed under Nazi occupation and headed by P&eacute;tain. The place name is of uncertain origin.


vichyssoise (n.)

1939, French, in full cr&ecirc;me vichyssoise glac&eacute;e, literally iced cream (soup) of Vichy
(see Vichy).


vicinage (n.)

a neighborhood, early 14c., from Old French visenage, from Latin vicinus (see vicinity).


vicinity (n.)

1550s, nearness in place, from Middle French vicinit&#233; and directly from Latin vicinitas of or
pertaining to neighbors or a neighborhood, as a noun, neighborhood, nearness, proximity, from
vicinus (adj.) of the neighborhood, near, neighboring, as a noun the neighborhood, a neighbor, from
vicus group of houses, village, related to the -wick, -wich in English place names, from PIE *weik-
(1) clan, social unit above the household (see villa). Meaning neighborhood, surrounding district in
English is attested by 1796.


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


vicissitude (n.)

a passing from one state to another, whether regular or not, 1560s, from Middle French vicissitude
(14c.), from Latin vicissitudinem (nominative vicissitudo) change, interchange, alternation, from
vicissim (adv.) changeably, on the other hand, by turns, in turn, from vicis a turn, change (see
vicarious). Related: Vicissitudes.


Vicksburg

city in Mississippi, U.S., incorporated 1825, named for an early settler the Rev. Newitt Vick, who
was said to have come to the region c.1812 from Virginia with his family and chosen the town site in
1819.


victim (n.)

late 15c., living creature killed and offered as a sacrifice to a deity or supernatural power, from
Latin victima person or animal killed as a sacrifice. Perhaps distantly connected to Old English wig
idol, Gothic weihs holy, German weihen consecrate (compare Weihnachten Christmas) on notion of a
consecrated animal. Sense of person who is hurt, tortured, or killed by another is recorded from
1650s; meaning person oppressed by some power or situation is from 1718. Weaker sense of person
taken advantage of is recorded from 1781.


victimization (n.)

1832, noun of action from victimize.


victimize (v.)

1830, from victim + -ize. Related: Victimized; victimizing.


victimless (adj.)

1965, from victim + -less.


victimology (n.)

1958, from French victimologie (1956), from victime (see victim) + -logy.


victor (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French, Old French victor conqueror, and directly from Latin victorem
(nominative victor) a conqueror, agent noun from past participle stem of vincere to conquer,
overcome, defeat, from PIE root *weik- (5) to fight, conquer (cognates: Lithuanian apveikiu to
subdue, overcome, Old Church Slavonic veku strength, power, age, Old Norse vigr able in battle, Old
English wigan fight, Welsh gwych brave, energetic, Old Irish fichim I fight, second element in
Celtic Ordovices those who fight with hammers). Fem. formations include victrice (late 14c.),
victress (c.1600), victrix (1650s).


Victoria

fem. proper name, Latin, literally victory in war, also the name of the Roman goddess of victory
(see victory). The Victoria cross is a decoration founded 1856 by Queen Victoria of Great Britain
and awarded for acts of conspicuous bravery in battle.


Victorian (adj.)

1839, belonging to or typical of the reign of Queen Victoria of Great Britain (ruled 1837-1901).
Figurative sense of typified by prudish or outdated attitudes is attested by 1934. The noun meaning
a person from or typical of Victorian times is from 1876.


Victorianism (n.)

1905, from Victorian + -ism.


victorious (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French victorious and directly from Late Latin victoriosus having many
victories, from victoria victory (see victory). Related: Victoriously; victoriousness.


victory (n.)

c.1300, military supremacy, victory in battle or a physical contest, from Anglo-French and Old
French victorie (12c.) and directly from Latin victoria victory, from past participle stem of
vincere (see victor). V.E. (victory in Europe) and V.J. (victory in Japan) days in World War II were
first used Sept. 2, 1944, by James F. Byrne, U.S. director of War Mobilization [Washington Post,
Sept. 10, 1944].


Victrola (n.)

1905, trademark of a phonograph, from Victor Talking Machine Co. According to a contemporary letter
from company head Eldridge R. Johnson, coined because it had a sound suggestive of music, with
ending from pianola.


victual (n.)

c.1300; see victuals.


victual (v.)

mid-14c., to stock or supply (a ship, garrison, etc.) with provisions to last for some time, from
Anglo-French or Old French vitaillier (12c.), from vitaille (see victuals). Related: Victualed;
victualing; Victualer; victualler.


victuals (n.)

c.1300, vitaylle (singular), from Anglo-French and Old French vitaille food, nourishment,
provisions, from Late Latin victualia provisions, noun use of plural of victualis of nourishment,
from victus livelihood, food, sustenance, that which sustains life, from past participle stem of
vivere to live (see vital). Spelling altered early 16c. to conform with Latin, but pronunciation
remains vittles.


vicuna (n.)

Peruvian ruminant, c.1600, from Spanish vicu&ntilde;a, from Quechua (Peru) wikuna, the native name
of the animal.


vid.

abbreviation of vide, Latin imperative singular of videre to see (see vision).


vide

see, Latin imperative singular of videre to see (see vision).


videlicet

namely, to wit, mid-15c., see viz.


video (adj.)

1935, as visual equivalent of audio, from Latin video I see, first person singular present
indicative of videre to see (see vision). As a noun, that which is displayed on a (television)
screen, 1937.    Engineers, however, remember the sad fate of television's first debut and are not
willing to allow video transmission (as television is now called by moderns) to leave the laboratory
until they are sure it will be accepted. [The Michigan Technic, November 1937]   video game is from
1973.


video-

word-forming element; see video (adj.).


videocassette (n.)

1970, from video + cassette. Videocassette recorder is from 1971, usually VCR (also 1971), now a
period piece.


videographer (n.)

1980, from video + second element from photographer.


videotape (n.)

1953, from video + tape (n.). The verb is 1958, from the noun. Related: Videotaped; videotaping.


vidette (n.)

alternative form of vedette.


vie (v.)

1560s, to bet, make a bet, (literally make a vie, the noun attested from 1530s in cards), especially
in card-playing, to wager the value of one's hand against an opponent's, shortened form of Middle
English envie make a challenge, from Old French envier compete (against), provoke; invite, summon,
subpoena; in gambling, put down a stake, up the bet; from Latin invitare to invite, also to summon,
challenge (see invitation). Sense of to contend (with) in rivalry in English is from 1560s; that of
to contend, compete, strive for superiority is from c.1600.


Vienna

capital of Austria, Latin Vindobona, from Gaulish vindo- white, from Celtic *vindo- (cognates: Old
Irish find, Welsh gwyn white; see Gwendolyn) + bona foundation, fort. The white might be a reference
to the river flowing through it. Related: Viennese.


Viet Cong (n.)

the communist guerilla force in Vietnam 1954-1976, also Vietcong, 1957, from Vietnamese, in full
Vi&#234;t Nam Cong San, literally Vietnamese communist.


Viet Minh (n.)

also Vietminh, 1945, name of the independence movement in French Indo-China 1941-50, in full
Vi&#234;t Nam D&#244;c-L&#226;p D&#244;ng-Minh Vietnamese Independence League.


Vietnam

country in Southeast Asia, from Vietnamese Viet, the people's name + nam south. Division into North
and South lasted from 1954 to 1976. Vietnam War attested by 1963.


Vietnamese

1947 (adjective and noun), from Vietnam + -ese.


Vietnamization (n.)

1957, from Vietnam + -ization.


view (n.)

early 15c., formal inspection or survey (of land); mid-15c., visual perception, from Anglo-French
vewe view, Old French veue light, brightness; look, appearance; eyesight, vision, noun use of fem.
past participle of veoir to see, from Latin videre to see (see vision). Sense of manner of regarding
something attested from early 15c. Meaning sight or prospect of a landscape, etc. is recorded from
c.1600.


view (v.)

1520s, inspect, examine, from view (n.). From 1765 as to regard in a certain way; from 1935 as to
watch television. Related: Viewed; viewing.


viewer (n.)

early 15c., civic official responsible for surveying property, agent noun from view (v.). Meaning
watcher of television first recorded 1935, in place of earlier suggestion looker-in (1927).


viewing (n.)

1540s, inspection, verbal noun from view (v.). From 1944 as last presentation of a dead body before
the funeral (earlier viewing (of) the remains, 1920); from 1959 as the watching of television.


viewpoint (n.)

1856, of mental positions; 1858 in a physical sense, from view + point (n.).


vigil (n.)

c.1200, eve of a religious festival (an occasion for devotional watching or observance), from Anglo-
French and Old French vigile watch, guard; eve of a holy day (12c.), from Latin vigilia a watch,
watchfulness, from vigil watchful, awake, on the watch, alert, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or
active, be strong (cognates: Old English wacan to wake up, arise, wacian to be awake; Old High
German wahta watch, vigil; see wake (v.)). Meaning watch kept on a festival eve in English is from
late 14c.; general sense of occasion of keeping awake for some purpose is recorded from 1711.


vigilance (n.)

1560s, from Middle French vigilance (16c.), from Latin vigilantia wakefulness, watchfulness,
attention, from vigil watchful, awake (see vigil). Related: Vigilancy (1530s).


vigilant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French vigilant or directly from Latin vigilantem (nominative vigilans)
watchful, anxious, careful, present participle of vigilare to watch, keep awake, not to sleep, be
watchful, from vigil watchful, awake (see vigil). Related: Vigilantly.


vigilante (n.)

member of a vigilance committee, 1856, American English, from Spanish vigilante, literally watchman,
from Latin vigilantem (nominative vigilans) watchful, anxious, careful, from vigil (see vigil).
Vigilant man in same sense is attested from 1824 in a Missouri context. Vigilance committees kept
informal rough order on the U.S. frontier or in other places where official authority was imperfect.


vignette (n.)

1751, decorative design, originally a design in the form of vine tendrils around the borders of a
book page, especially a picture page, from French vignette, from Old French diminutive of vigne
vineyard (see vine). Sense transferred from the border to the picture itself, then (1853) to a type
of small photographic portrait with blurred edges very popular mid-19c. Meaning literary sketch is
first recorded 1880, probably from the photographic sense.


vigor (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, energy in an activity, from Anglo-French vigour, Old French vigor force,
strength (Modern French vigueur), from Latin vigorem (nominative vigor) liveliness, activity, force,
from vigere be lively, flourish, thrive, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or active (see wake
(v.)).


vigorous (adj.)

c.1300 (early 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French vigrus, Old French vigoros strong, robust,
powerful (12c., Modern French vigoreux), from Medieval Latin vigorosus, from Latin vigere be lively,
flourish, thrive (see vigor). Related: Vigorously.


vigour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of vigor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


vilayet (n.)

province of the Turkish empire, 1869, from Turkish, from Arabic wilayah province, from wali
governor, from waliya he reigned, governed.


vile (adj.)

late 13c., morally repugnant; morally flawed, corrupt, wicked; of no value; of inferior quality;
disgusting, foul, ugly; degrading, humiliating; of low estate, without worldly honor or esteem, from
Anglo-French ville, Old French vil shameful, dishonorable; low-born; cheap; ugly, hideous, from
Latin vilis cheap, worthless, base, common, of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *wes- (1) to
buy, sell (see venal). Related: Vilely; vileness; vilety (early 13c.).


vilification (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin vilificationem (nominative vilificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Late Latin vilificare (see vilify).


vilify (v.)

mid-15c., to lower in worth or value, from Late Latin vilificare to make cheap or base; to esteem of
little value, from Latin vilis cheap, base (see vile) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning to slander, speak evil of is first recorded 1590s. Related: Vilified, vilifying.


villa (n.)

1610s, country mansion of the ancient Romans, from Italian villa country house, villa, farm, from
Latin villa country house, farm, related to vicus village, group of houses, from PIE *weik-sla-,
suffixed form of root *weik- (1) clan (cognates: Sanskrit vesah house, vit dwelling, house,
settlement; Avestan vis house, village, clan; Old Persian vitham house, royal house; Greek oikos
house; Old Church Slavonic visi village; Gothic weihs village; Lithuanian vie&#353;pats master of
the house). Of modern structures from 1711.


village (n.)

late 14c., inhabited place larger than a hamlet but smaller than a town, from Old French vilage
houses and other buildings in a group (usually smaller than a town), from Latin villaticum farmstead
(with outbuildings), noun use of neuter singular of villaticus having to do with a farmstead or
villa, from villa country house (see villa). As an adjective from 1580s. Village idiot is recorded
from 1825. Related: Villager (1560s).


villain (n.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), base or low-born rustic, from Anglo-French and Old French vilain
peasant, farmer, commoner, churl, yokel (12c.), from Medieval Latin villanus farmhand, from Latin
villa country house, farm (see villa).  The most important phases of the sense development of this
word may be summed up as follows: 'inhabitant of a farm; peasant; churl, boor; clown; miser; knave,
scoundrel.' Today both Fr. vilain and Eng. villain are used only in a pejorative sense. [Klein]
Meaning character in a novel, play, etc. whose evil motives or actions help drive the plot is from
1822.


villainous (adj.)

c.1300, offensive, abusive, from Old French vileneus worthless, base, from vilain (see villain).
Sense of despicable, shameful, morally corrupt is from c.1400 in English. Related: Villainously;
villainousness.


villainy (n.)

c.1200, from Anglo-French vilanie, Old French vilenie low character, unworthy act, disgrace,
degradation, from vilain (see villain).


villanelle (n.)

poetic form (or a poem in this form) of five 3-lined stanzas and a final quatrain, with only two
rhymes throughout, usually of pastoral or lyric nature, 1580s, from French villanelle, from Italian
villanella ballad, rural song, from fem. of villanello rustic, from Medieval Latin villanus (see
villain).


Villanova

European culture of the early Iron Age, 1901, named for a hamlet near Bologna where archaeological
remains of it were found.


villein (n.)

early 14c., vileyn, spelling variant of villain in its reference to a feudal class of half-free
peasants. It tends to keep the literal, historical sense of the word and let the pejorative meanings
go with villain; Century Dictionary writes that the forms villain, villein, etc., are historically
one, and the attempt to differentiate them in meaning is idle, but Fowler finds this a useful piece
of differentiation. Related: Villeinage.


villus (n.)

long, slender hair, 1704, plural villi, from modern use of Latin villus tuft of hair, shaggy hair,
wool, fleece (see velvet).


vim (n.)

1843, usually said to be from Latin vim, accusative of vis strength, force, power, vigor, energy,
from PIE root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force,
desire (see venison). But based on the early uses OED suggests the possibility that the word is of a
purely inventive or interjectional origin.


vinaigrette (n.)

1690s, a type of condiment, from French vinaigrette (14c.), diminutive of vinaigre (aromatic)
vinegar (see vinegar). Use in reference to a type of dressing for salads or cold vegetables is
attested from 1877. From 1811 as small box or bottle for carrying aromatic vinegar.


Vincent

masc. proper name, from French, shortened from Latin Vincentius, from vincentem (nominative vincens)
conquering, from vincere to overcome (see victor). The name of a 3c. martyr, it was introduced in
England c.1200.


vincible (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French vincible and directly from Latin vincibilis that which can be gained;
easily maintained, from vincere (see victor). A vincible ignorance in theology is an ignorance in
one who possesses the means of overcoming it.


vinculum (n.)

plural vincula, a bond, tie, 1670s, from Latin vinculum that with which anything is bound, from stem
of vincire to bind (see wind (v.1)).


vindicate (v.)

1620s, to avenge or revenge, from Latin vindicatus, past participle of vindicare to stake a claim;
to liberate; to act as avenger (see vindication). Meaning to clear from censure or doubt, by means
of demonstration is recorded from 1630s. Related: Vindicated, vindicating.


vindication (n.)

late 15c., act of avenging, revenge, from Old French vindicacion vengeance, revenge and directly
from Latin vindicationem (nominative vindicatio) act of claiming or avenging, noun of action from
past participle stem of vindicare lay claim to, assert; claim for freedom, set free; protect,
defend; avenge (related to vindicta revenge), probably from vim dicare to show authority, from vim,
accusative of vis force + root of dicere to say (see diction). Meaning justification by proof,
defense against censure is attested from 1640s.


vindicative (adj.)

mid-15c., vindictive, having vengeful intent, from Old French vindicatif (14c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin vindicativus, from vindicat-, past participle stem of vindicare (see vindicate). From
c.1600 as involving retribution or punishment, a sense common in 17th cent. [OED].


vindicatory (adj.)

1640s, serving to justify, tending to vindicate; 1650s, avenging, from vindicate + -ory.


vindictive (adj.)

1610s, vengeful, from Latin vindicta revenge (see vindication) + -ive; or perhaps a shortening of
vindicative based on the Latin word. From 1620s as punitive, retributive, rather than personally
vengeful or deliberately cruel. Related: Vindictively.


vindictiveness (n.)

1670s, from vindictive + -ness.


vine (n.)

c.1300, plant which bears the grapes from which wine is made, from Old French vigne vine, vinyard
(12c.), from Latin vinea vine, vineyard, from vinum wine, from PIE *win-o- wine, an Italic noun
related to words for wine in Greek, Armenian, Hittite, and non-Indo-European Georgian and West
Semitic (Hebrew yayin, Ethiopian wayn); probably ultimately from a lost Mediterranean language word
*w(o)in- wine. From late 14c. in reference to any plant with a long slender stem that trails or
winds around. The European grape vine was imported to California via Mexico by priests in 1564.


vinegar (n.)

early 14c., from Old French vinaigre vinegar, from vin wine (from Latin vinum; see wine (n.)) +
aigre sour (see eager). In Latin, it was vinum acetum wine turned sour; compare Greek oxos wine
vinegar, which is related to oxys sharp (see acrid). Related: Vinegary; vinegarish.


vineyard (n.)

c.1300, replacing Old English wingeard, from vine + yard (n.1). Compare German weingarten.


Vinland

name supposedly given by Leif Erikssson to lands he explored in northeastern North America c.1000;
it could mean either vine-land or meadow-land, and either way was perhaps coined to encourage
settlement (compare Greenland).    After Columbus' journeys and the European exploration of the New
World, evidence in the old sagas of the earlier Norse discovery of America had been noticed from
time to time by those who could read them. In early 19c. the notion was seriously debated by
Humboldt and other European scholars before winning their general acceptance by the 1830s. The case
for the identification of Vinland with North America began to be laid out in English-language
publications in 1840. Physical evidence of the Norse discovery was uncovered by the excavations at
L'Anse aux Meadows in 1960.


vino (n.)

inferior wine, 1919, colloquial, from the Italian and Spanish word for wine, from Latin vinum (see
vine (n.)).


vinous (adj.)

1660s, from Latin vinosus full of wine; fond of wine, from vinum wine (see wine (n.)).


vintage (n.)

early 15c., harvest of grapes, yield of wine from a vineyard, from Anglo-French vintage (mid-14c.),
from Old French vendage, vendenge vine-harvest, yield from a vineyard, from Latin vindemia a
gathering of grapes, yield of grapes, from comb. form of vinum wine (see wine (n.)) + stem of demere
take off (from de- from, away from + emere to take; see exempt). Sense shifted to age or year of a
particular wine (1746), then to a general adjectival sense of being of an earlier time (1883). Used
of cars since 1928.


vintner (n.)

wine merchant, c.1400 (late 12c. as a surname), alteration of Anglo-French vineter, Old French
vinetier wine-merchant; grape-harvester, from Medieval Latin vinetarius a wine dealer, from Latin
vinetum vineyard, from vinum wine (see vine).


vinyl (n.)

in modern use, in reference to a plastic or synthetic resin, 1939, short for polyvinyl; not in
widespread use until late 1950s. Slang meaning phonograph record (1976) replaced wax (n.) in that
sense. In chemistry, vinyl was used from 1863 as the name of a univalent radical derived from
ethylene, from Latin vinum wine (see wine (n.)), because ethyl alcohol is the ordinary alcohol
present in wine.


viol (n.)

stringed musical instrument played with a bow, late 15c., viel, from Middle French viole, from Old
French viol stringed instrument like a fiddle, from Old Proven&ccedil;al viola (see viola).


viola (n.)

tenor violin, 1797, from Italian viola, from Old Proven&ccedil;al viola, from Medieval Latin vitula
stringed instrument, perhaps from Vitula, Roman goddess of joy (see fiddle), or from related Latin
verb vitulari to exult, be joyful. Viola da gamba bass viol (1724) is from Italian, literally a
viola for the leg (i.e. to hold between the legs).


Viola

fem. proper name, from Latin viola the violet (see violet).


violate (v.)

early 15c., to break (an oath, etc.), from Latin violatus, past participle of violare treat with
violence, dishonor, outrage (see violation). Sense of ravish is first recorded mid-15c. Related:
Violated; violating.


violation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French violacion and directly from Latin violationem (nominative violatio) an
injury, irreverence, profanation, from past participle stem of violare to treat with violence,
outrage, dishonor, perhaps an irregular derivative of vis strength, force, power, energy, from PIE
root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force, desire
(see venison).


violative (adj.)

tending to or causing violation, 1765, from violate + -ive.


violence (n.)

late 13c., physical force used to inflict injury or damage, from Anglo-French and Old French
violence (13c.), from Latin violentia vehemence, impetuosity, from violentus vehement, forcible,
probably related to violare (see violation). Weakened sense of improper treatment is attested from
1590s.


violent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French violent or directly from Latin violentus, related to violare (see
violation). In Middle English the word also was applied in reference to heat, sunlight, smoke, etc.,
with the sense having some quality so strongly as to produce a powerful effect. Related: Violently.


violet (n.)

small wild plant with purplish-blue flowers, c.1300, from Old French violete (12c.), diminutive of
viole violet, from Latin viola the violet, a violet color, cognate with Greek ion (see iodine),
probably from a pre-Indo-European Mediterranean language. The color sense (late 14c.) developed from
the flower.


violin (n.)

1570s, from Italian violino, diminutive of viola (see viola). The modern form of the smaller,
medieval viola da braccio.


violinist (n.)

1660s, from Italian violinista, from violino (see violin).


violon d&#039;Ingres (n.)

an occasional pastime, an activity other than that for which one is well-known, or at which one
excells, 1963, from French, literally Ingres' violin, from the story that the great painter prefered
to play his violin (badly) for visitors instead of showing them his pictures.   Une l&eacute;gende,
assez suspecte, pr&eacute;tend que le peintre Ingres &eacute;tat plus fier de son jeu sur le violon,
jeu qui &eacute;tait fort ordinaire, que de sa peinture, qui l'avait rendu illustre. [Larousse du
XXe Siecle, 1931]


violoncello (n.)

1724, from Italian violoncello, diminutive of violone bass viol, from viola (see viola) +
augmentative suffix -one (see -oon). Related: Violoncellist.


VIP (n.)

also V.I.P., 1933, initialism (acronym) for very important person or personage; not common until
after World War II.    At most, the greatest persons, are but great wens, and excrescences; men of
wit and delightfull conversation, but as moales for ornament, except they be so incorporated into
the body of the world, that they contribute something to the sustentation of the whole. [John Donne,
letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]


viper (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French vipere, earlier in English as vipera (c.1200), directly from Latin
vipera viper, snake, serpent, contraction of *vivipera, from vivus alive, living (see vital) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). In common with many snake species in cooler climates, in most
cases the viper's eggs are kept inside the mother until hatching.    Applied to persons of spiteful
character since at least 1590s. The only venomous snake found in Great Britain, but not especially
dangerous. The word replaced native adder. The flesh of the viper was formerly regarded as
possessing great nutritive or restorative properties, and was frequently used medicinally [OED];
hence viper-wine, wine medicated with some kind of extract from vipers, used 17c. by gray-bearded
gallants in a bid to feele new lust, and youthfull flames agin. [Massinger]


viperine (adj.)

1540s, from Latin viperinus pertaining to a viper or vipers, from vipera (see viper).


virago (n.)

late 14c., man-like or heroic woman, woman of extraordinary stature, strength and courage, from
Latin virago female warrior, heroine, amazon, from vir man (see virile). &AElig;lfric (c.1000),
following Vulgate, used it in Gen. ii:23 as the name Adam gave to Eve (KJV = woman):   Beo hire nama
Uirago, &thorn;&aelig;t is, f&aelig;mne, for&eth;an &eth;e heo is of hire were genumen.   Related:
Viraginous.


viral (adj.)

of the nature of, or caused by, a virus, 1948, see virus + -al. Sense of become suddenly widely
popular through Internet sharing is attested by 1999, originally in reference to marketing and based
on the similarity of the effect to the spread of a computer virus. Related: Virally.


vireo (n.)

small American bird, 1834, a modern use of Latin vireo, a word Pliny applied to some kind of bird,
believed to be the European greenfinch, from virere be green (see verdure).


Virgilian (adj.)

1510s, from Latin Virgilianus of or characteristic of the Roman poet Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro,
70-19 B.C.E.). Also in Virgilian lots (Latin sortes Virgilianae), opening Virgil at random as an
oracle.


virgin (n.)

c.1200, unmarried or chaste woman noted for religious piety and having a position of reverence in
the Church, from Anglo-French and Old French virgine virgin; Virgin Mary, from Latin virginem
(nominative virgo) maiden, unwedded girl or woman, also an adj., fresh, unused, probably related to
virga young shoot. For sense evolution, compare Greek talis a marriageable girl, cognate with Latin
talea rod, stick, bar.    Meaning young woman in a state of inviolate chastity is recorded from
c.1300. Also applied since early 14c. to a chaste man. Meaning naive or inexperienced person is
attested from 1953. The adjective is recorded from 1550s in the literal sense; figurative sense of
pure, untainted is attested from c.1300. The Virgin Islands were named (in Spanish) by Columbus for
St. Ursula and her 11,000 martyred virgin companions.


virginal (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French virginal virginal, pure, chaste, or directly from Latin virginalis of a
maiden, of a virgin, from virgin (see virgin). The keyed musical instrument so called from 1520s
(see virginals).


virginals (n.)

small harpsichord, 1520s, evidently from virgin, but the connection is unclear, unless it means an
instrument played by girls.


Virginia

British colony in North America, name appears on a map in 1587, named for Elizabeth I, the Virgin
Queen. The fem. proper name is from Latin Virginia, fem. of Virginius, earlier Verginius, probably
related to Vergilius (see Virgilian). Related: Virginian.


virginity (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French and Old French virginite (state of) virginity; innocence (10c. in Old
French), from Latin virginitatem (nominative virginitas) maidenhood, virginity, from virgo (see
virgin).   Distraught pretty girl: I've lost my virginity!  Benny Hill: Do you still have the box it
came in?


Virgo

zodiacal constellation, c.1000, from Latin constellation name Virgo the virgin (see virgin). Meaning
person born under the sign of Virgo is attested from 1917.


virgule (n.)

thin sloping line similar to a modern backslash, used as a comma in medieval MSS and still in modern
text to indicate line breaks in poetry, 1837, from French virgule (16c.), from Latin virgula
punctuation mark, literally little twig, diminutive of virga shoot, rod, stick. The word had been
borrowed in its Latin form in 1728.


viridian (adj.)

1882, from the paint color name (1862), from Latin virid-, stem of viridis green, blooming, vigorous
(see verdure) + -ian.


virile (adj.)

late 15c., characteristic of a man; marked by manly force, from Middle French viril (14c.) and
directly from Latin virilis of a man, manly, worthy of a man, from vir a man, a hero, from PIE *wi-
ro- man, freeman (cognates: Sanskrit virah, Avestan vira-, Lithuanian vyras, Old Irish fer, Welsh
gwr, Gothic wair, Old English wer man). Virile member for penis is recorded from 1540s.


virility (n.)

period of manhood, 1580s, from Middle French virilit&#233;, from Latin virilitatem (nominative
virilitas) manhood, from virilis (see virile). Meaning power of procreation, capacity for sexua
intercourse is from 1590s; sense of manly strength is recorded from c.1600.


virion (n.)

coined in French, 1959, from virus (see virus) + -on.


virologist (n.)

1946; see virology + -ist.


virology (n.)

1935, from comb. form of virus + -ology. Related: Virological.


virtu (n.)

excellence in an object of art, passion for works of art, 1722, from Italian virtu excellence, from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) virtue, goodness, manliness (see virtue). The same word as
virtue, borrowed during a period when everything Italian was in vogue. Sometimes spelled vertu, as
though from French, but this sense of the word is not in French.


virtual (adj.)

late 14c., influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent
natural qualities, from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus excellence, potency, efficacy,
literally manliness, manhood (see virtue). The meaning being something in essence or effect, though
not actually or in fact is from mid-15c., probably via sense of capable of producing a certain
effect (early 15c.). Computer sense of not physically existing but made to appear by software is
attested from 1959.


virtually (adv.)

early 15c., as far as essential qualities or facts are concerned; from virtual + -ly (2). Sense of
in effect, as good as is recorded from c.1600.


virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


virtuosity (n.)

late 15c., manly qualities, from Medieval Latin virtuositas, from Late Latin virtuosus (see
virtuous). As skill or abilities of a virtuoso, 1670s, from virtuoso + -ity.


virtuoso (n.)

1610s, scholar, connoisseur, from Italian virtuoso (plural virtuosi), noun use of adjective meaning
skilled, learned, of exceptional worth, from Late Latin virtuosus (see virtuous). Meaning person
with great skill, one who is a master of the mechanical part of a fine art (as in music) is first
attested 1743.


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


virulence (n.)

1660s, from Late Latin virulentia, from Latin virulentus full of poison (see virulent). Related:
Virulency (1610s).


virulent (adj.)

c.1400, in reference to wounds, ulcers, etc., full of corrupt or poisonous matter, from Latin
virulentus poisonous, from virus poison (see virus). Figurative sense of violent, spiteful is
attested from c.1600. Related: Virulently.


virus (n.)

late 14c., venomous substance, from Latin virus poison, sap of plants, slimy liquid, a potent juice,
probably from PIE root *weis- to melt away, to flow, used of foul or malodorous fluids, with
specialization in some languages to poisonous fluid (cognates: Sanskrit visam poison, visah
poisonous; Avestan vish- poison; Latin viscum sticky substance, birdlime; Greek ios poison, ixos
mistletoe, birdlime; Old Church Slavonic vi&#353;nja cherry; Old Irish fi poison; Welsh gwy fluid,
water, gwyar blood). Main modern meaning agent that causes infectious disease first recorded 1728
(in reference to venereal disease). The computer sense is from 1972.


vis-a-vis (prep.)

1755, from French prepositional use of the adj. vis-&agrave;-vis face to face, from Old French vis
face (see visage).


visa (n.)

1831, official signature or endorsement on a passport, from French visa, from Modern Latin charta
visa verified paper, literally paper that has been seen, from fem. past participle of Latin videre
to see (see vision). Earlier vis&eacute; (1810), from French past participle of viser to examine,
view. The credit card of this name was introduced 1976, replacing BankAmericard.


visage (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French and Old French visage face, coutenance; portrait, from vis face,
appearance, from Latin visus a look, vision, from past participle stem of videre to see (see
vision). Visagiste make-up artist is recorded from 1958, from French.


viscera (n.)

inner organs of the body, 1650s, from Latin viscera, plural of viscus internal organ, of unknown
origin.


visceral (adj.)

1570s, affecting inward feelings, from Middle French visc&eacute;ral and directly from Medieval
Latin visceralis internal, from Latin viscera, plural of viscus internal organ, inner parts of the
body, of unknown origin. The bowels were regarded as the seat of emotion. The figurative sense
vanished after 1640 and the literal sense is first recorded in 1794. The figurative sense was
revived 1940s in arts criticism.


viscid (adj.)

sticky, 1630s, from French viscide or directly from Late Latin viscidus sticky, clammy, from Latin
viscum mistletoe, birdlime (see viscous). Related: Viscidity (1610s); viscidly.


viscosity (n.)

early 15c., from Old French viscosite (13c.) or directly from Medieval Latin viscositatem
(nominative viscositas), from Late Latin viscosus (see viscous).


viscount (n.)

late 14c., deputy of a count or earl, from Anglo-French and Old French visconte (Modern French
vicomte), from Medieval Latin vicecomes (genitive vicecomitis), from Late Latin vice- deputy (see
vice-) + Latin comes member of an imperial court, nobleman (see count (n.)). As a rank in British
peerage, first recorded 1440. Related: Viscountess.


viscous (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French viscous and directly from Late Latin viscosus sticky, from Latin viscum
anything sticky, birdlime made from mistletoe, mistletoe, probably from PIE root *weis- to melt
away, flow (used of foul or malodorous fluids); see virus.


vise (n.)

early 14c., a winch, crane, from Anglo-French vice, Old French vis, viz screw, from Latin vitis
vine, tendril of a vine, literally that which winds, from root of viere to bind, twist (see withy).
Also in Middle English, device like a screw or winch for bending a crossbow or catapult; spiral
staircase; the screw of a press; twisted tie for fastening a hood under the chin. The modern meaning
clamping tool with two jaws closed by a screw is first recorded c.1500.


Vishnu

name of a principal Hindu deity, 1630s, from Sanskrit Vishnu, probably from root vish- and meaning
all-pervader or worker.


visibility (n.)

c.1400, condition of being visible, from Late Latin visibilitatem (nominative visibilitas) condition
of being seen; conspicuousness, from visibilis (see visible). Meaning range of vision under given
conditions is from 1914. Sense of prominence, fame, public attention is recorded from 1958.


visible (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French visable, visible perceptible (12c.) and directly from Latin visibilis that
may be seen, from visus, past participle of videre to see (see vision). An Old English word for this
was eagsyne. Related: Visibly.


Visigoth

1640s, from Late Latin Visigothus (plural Visigothi), perhaps West Goths (which could be Latinized
from a Germanic source such as Old High German westan from the west), as opposed to Ostrogothi; but
according to some authorities, Visi/Vesi appears to be a Latinized form of a tribal name. Their
kingdom endured to 507 in southern France, till 711 in Spain. In common with Vandal their name later
was used for uncivilized person (1749). Related: Visigothic.


vision (n.)

c.1300, something seen in the imagination or in the supernatural, from Anglo-French visioun, Old
French vision presence, sight; view, look, appearance; dream, supernatural sight (12c.), from Latin
visionem (nominative visio) act of seeing, sight, thing seen, noun of action from past participle
stem of videre to see.    This is from the productive PIE root *weid- to know, to see (cognates:
Sanskrit veda I know; Avestan vaeda I know; Greek oida, Doric woida I know, idein to see; Old Irish
fis vision, find white, i.e. clearly seen, fiuss knowledge; Welsh gwyn, Gaulish vindos, Breton gwenn
white; Gothic, Old Swedish, Old English witan to know; Gothic weitan to see; English wise, German
wissen to know; Lithuanian vysti to see; Bulgarian vidya I see; Polish widzie&#263; to see,
wiedzie&#263; to know; Russian videt' to see, vest' news, Old Russian vedat' to know).    The
meaning sense of sight is first recorded late 15c. Meaning statesman-like foresight, political
sagacity is attested from 1926.


visionary (adj.)

able to see visions, 1650s (earlier perceived in a vision, 1640s), from vision + -ary. Meaning
impractical is attested from 1727. The noun is attested from 1702, from the adjective; originally
one who indulges in impractical fantasies.


visit (v.)

c.1200, come to (a person) to comfort or benefit, from Old French visiter to visit; inspect,
examine; afflict (12c.) and directly from Latin visitare to go to see, come to inspect,
frequentative of visere behold, visit (a person or place), from past participle stem of videre to
see, notice, observe (see vision). Originally of the deity, later of pastors and doctors (c.1300),
general sense of pay a call is from mid-13c. Meaning come upon, afflict (in reference to sickness,
punishment, etc.) is recorded in English from mid-14c. Related: Visited; visiting.


visit (n.)

1620s, friendly or formal call upon someone, from visit (v.) and from French visite (n.). From 1800
as short or temporary trip to some place. With pay (v.) since 1650s.


visitation (n.)

c.1300, a visit by an ecclesiastical representative to examine the condition of a parish, abbey,
etc., from Anglo-French visitacioun, Old French visitacion and directly from Latin visitationem
(nominative visitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of visitare (see visit (v.)). The
supernatural sense of a sight, apparition, a coming of God to a mortal is attested from mid-14c.


visitor (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French visitour, Old French visiteor visitor, inspector, from visiter (see
visit (v.)). Sports sense is from 1900.


visor (n.)

c.1300, viser, front part of a helmet, from Anglo-French viser, Old French visiere visor (13c.),
from vis face (see visage). Spelling shifted 15c. Meaning eyeshade is recorded from 1925.


vista (n.)

1650s, a view or prospect, from Italian vista sight, view, noun use of fem. past participle of
vedere see, from Latin videre to see (see vision).


Vistavision (n.)

form of wide-screen cinematography, 1954; see vista + vision.


visual (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the faculty of sight; also coming from the eye or sight (as a beam of
light was thought to do), from Late Latin visualis of sight, from Latin visus a sight, a looking;
power of sight; things seen, appearance, from visus, past participle of videre to see (see vision).
Meaning perceptible by sight is from late 15c; sense of relating to vision is first attested c.1600.
The noun meaning photographic film or other visual display is first recorded 1944.


visualise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of visualize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Visualised;
visualising; visualisation.


visualization (n.)

1881, noun of action from visualize.


visualize (v.)

1817, first attested in, and perhaps coined by, Coleridge (Biographia Literaria); see visual + -ize.
Related: Visualized; visualizing.


visually (adv.)

mid-15c., from visual + -ly (2).


vita (n.)

plural vitae, Latin, literally life (see vital).


vital (adj.)

late 14c., of or manifesting life, from Latin vitalis of or belonging to life, from vita life,
related to vivere to live, from PIE root *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). The sense of necessary or
important is from 1610s, via the notion of essential to life (late 15c.). Vital capacity recorded
from 1852. Related: Vitally.


vital statistics (n.)

1837, with reference to birth, marriage, death, etc.; meaning a woman's bust, waist, and hip
measurements is from 1952. See vital.


vitality (n.)

1590s, from Latin vitalitatem (nominative vitalitas) vital force, life, from vitalis pertaining to
life (see vital).


vitalize (v.)

1670s, to give life to, from vital + -ize. Figurative sense by 1805. Related: Vitalized; vitalizing.


vitals (n.)

organs of the body essential to life, c.1600, from noun use of adjective vital, perhaps on model of
Latin vitalia vital force, neuter plural of vitalis.


vitamin (n.)

1920, originally vitamine (1912) coined by Polish biochemist Casimir Funk (1884-1967), from Latin
vita life (see vital) + amine, because they were thought to contain amino acids. The terminal -e
formally was stripped off when scientists learned the true nature of the substance; -in was
acceptable because it was used for neutral substances of undefined composition. The lettering system
of nomenclature (Vitamin A, B, C, etc.) was introduced at the same time (1920).


vitiate (v.)

1530s, from Latin vitiatus, past participle of vitiare to make faulty, injure, spoil, corrupt, from
vitium fault, defect, blemish, crime, vice (see vice (n.1)). Related: Vitiated; vitiating.


vitiation (n.)

1630s, from Latin vitiationem (nominative vitiatio) violation, corruption, noun of action from past
participle stem of vitiare (see vitiate).


viticulture (n.)

cultivation of grapes, 1867, from French viticulture, from Latin vitis vine (see vise) + culture
(see culture (n.)). Related: Viticultural (1855).


vitiligo (n.)

1650s, from Latin vitiglio a kind of cutaneous eruption, tetter (Celsus), perhaps with an original
sense of blemish, from PIE *wi-tu-, from root *wei- (3) vice, fault, guilt (see vice (n.1)).


vitreous (adj.)

early 15c., glasslike, from Latin vitreus of glass, glassy, from vitrum glass, which perhaps was so
called for its color (compare vitrium woad). Vitreous humor attested from 1660s.


vitrify (v.)

1590s, from Middle French vitrifier (16c.), from Latin vitrum glass (see vitreous) + -ficare, from
facere to make, do (see factitious). Related: Vitrified; vitrification.


vitrine (n.)

glass show-case, 1880, from French vitrine, from vitre glass, window-glass, from Latin vitrum glass
(see vitreous).


vitriol (n.)

late 14c., sulphate of iron, from Old French vitriol (13c.), from Medieval Latin vitriolum vitriol,
noun use of neuter of vitriolus, variant of Late Latin vitreolus of glass, from Latin vitreus of
glass, glassy, from vitrum glass (see vitreous). So called from its glassy appearance in certain
states. Meaning bitter or caustic feelings first attested 1769, in reference to the corrosive
properties of vitriol (when heated it produces sulfuric acid, formerly called oil of vitriol).


vitriolic (adj.)

1660s, from French vitriolique (16c.) or from vitriol + -ic. Figurative sense biting, caustic, very
severe is by 1841.


vitro-

word-forming element meaning glass, from comb. form of Latin vitrum glass (see vitreous).


vituperate (v.)

1540s, back-formation from  vituperation, or else from Latin vituperatus, past participle of
vituperare. Not in common use until the beginning of the 19th c. [OED]. Related: Vituperated;
vituperating.


vituperation (n.)

mid-15c., but rare before early 19c., from Latin vituperationem (nominative vituperatio) blame, a
blaming, censuring, from  past participle stem of vituperare disparage, find fault with, from
vitiperos having faults, from vitium fault, defect (see vice (n.1)) + parare prepare, provide,
procure (see pare). Vituperatio was stronger than either Latin reprehensio or Modern English
vituperation.


vituperative (adj.)

1727, from vituperate + -ive. Related: Vituperatively.


Vitus

from Latinized form of Svanto-vit, name of a Slavic god worshiped with ecstatic dances on the Baltic
island of R&uuml;gen, transferred by Christian missionaries to Saint Vitus. The Italian form of the
name is Guido.


viva (interj.)

1640s, from Italian viva (long) live, may he (or she) live, third person singular present
subjunctive of vivere to live, from Latin vivere to live (see vital). Probably reborrowed (1836)
from Spanish viva, from vivir to live, from Latin vivere. Sometimes also in Latin form vivat
(1660s).


viva voce

also viva-voce, by word of mouth, 1580s, Latin, literally living-voice, ablative of viva vox.


vivace (adv.)

1680s, from Italian vivace brisk, lively, from Latin vivac-, stem of vivax lively, vigorous; long-
lived, enduring (see vivacity).


vivacious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin vivax (genitive vivacis) lively, vigorous (see vivacity) + -ous. Related:
Vivaciously.


vivacity (n.)

early 15c., liveliness, vigor, from Old French vivacite or directly from Latin vivacitatem
(nominative vivacitas) vital force, liveliness, from vivax (genitive vivacis) lively, also long-
lived, from vivere to live (see vital).


vivarium (n.)

c.1600, game park, from Latin vivarium enclosure for live game, park, warren, preserve, fish pond,
noun use of neuter singular of vivarius pertaining to living creatures, from vivus alive, living
(see vivid). Meaning glass bowl for studying living creatures is from 1853.


vive (interj.)

1590s (in vive le roi), from French, literally long live ______; French equivalent of viva (q.v.).
Jocular phrase vive la diff&eacute;rence in reference to the difference between men and women is
recorded from 1963. Also in vive la bagatelle, literally long live nonsense, denoting a carefree
attitude to life.


Vivian

masc. proper name, from Latin Vivianus (source also of French Vivien), literally living, alive, (see
vivid). But Klein says it is prob. a misreading of the Celtic name Ninian.


vivid (adj.)

1630s, from French vivide and perhaps also directly from Latin vividus spirited, animated, lively,
full of life, from vivus alive, from PIE *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Extension to colors is from
1660s. Sense of strong, distinct (as of memories, etc.) is from 1680s; that of very active or
intense (as of imagination, interest, etc.) is from 1853. Related: Vividly; vividness.


vivify (v.)

late 14c., from Old French vivifier come alive; give life to (12c.), from Late Latin vivificare make
alive, restore to life, from vivificus enlivening, from Latin vivus alive (see vivid) + root of
facere to make (see factitious). Vivificate in same sense is recorded from early 15c.


viviparous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin viviparus bringing forth alive, from Latin vivus alive, living (see vivid) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). See viper.


vivisect (v.)

1852, back-formation from vivisection. Related: Vivisected; vivisecting.


vivisection (n.)

dissection of a living animal, 1694, from Latin vivus alive (see vivid) + ending from dissection).
Related: Vivisectionist.


vixen (n.)

Old English *fyxen (implied in adjective fyxan), fem. of fox (see fox (n.) and cognate with Middle
High German v&uuml;hsinne, German f&uuml;chsin). Solitary English survival of the Germanic feminine
suffix -en, -in (also in Old English gyden goddess; mynecen nun, from munuc monk; wlyfen she-wolf,
etc.). The figurative sense ill-tempered woman is attested from 1570s. The spelling shift from -f-
to -v- began late 1500s (see V).


viz.

1530s, abbreviation of videlicet that is to say, to wit, namely (mid-15c.), from Latin videlicet,
contraction of videre licet it is permissible to see, from videre to see (see vision) + licet it is
allowed, third person singular present indicative of licere be allowed (see licence). The -z- is not
a letter, but originally a twirl, representing the usual Medieval Latin shorthand symbol for the
ending -et. In reading aloud usually rendered by 'namely.'  [OED]


vizard (n.)

mask, 1550s, altered form of vysar, viser (see visor), by influence of words in -ard. Figurative use
from 1570s; common 17c. Also applied to the person with the masks, and used as a verb meaning to
conceal. Related: Vizarded; vizarding.


vizier (n.)

also vizir, 1560s, from Turkish vezir counsellor, from Arabic wazir viceroy, literally one who bears
(the burden of office), literally porter, carrier, from wazara he carried. But Klein says Arabic
wazir is from Avestan vi&ccedil;ira arbitrator, judge. He also says it replaced Arabic katib,
literally writer, in the sense secretary of state.


VJ day (n.)

also V-J Day, Victory in Japan Day, 1944; it shares an origin with VE Day.


Vlach (n.)

member of a Latin-speaking race of the Balkans, a Walachian or Rumanian, 1841, from Bulgarian vlakh
or Serbian vlah, from Old Church Slavonic vlakhu, a Slavic adoptation of Germanic *walh (source of
Old English wealh) foreigner, especially applied to Celts and Latins (see Welsh).


Vladimir

masc. proper name, from Old Church Slavonic Vladimiru Ruling Peace, from vlasti to rule over (from
PIE *wal- to be strong) + miru peace (see Mir).


vocabulary (n.)

1530s, list of words with explanations, from Medieval Latin vocabularium a list of words, from Latin
vocabulum word, name, noun, from vocare to name, call (see voice (n.)). Meaning range of words in
the language of a person or group is first attested 1753.


vocal (adj.)

late 14c., spoken, oral, from Old French vocal (13c.), from Latin vocalis sounding, sonorous,
speaking, as a noun, a vowel, from vox (genitive vocis) voice (see voice (n.)). In reference to
music (as opposed to instrumental), first recorded 1580s; meaning outspoken first attested 1871.
Vocal cords is from 1872; see cord.


vocalist (n.)

1610s, speaker (obsolete); 1817, singer, as opposed to instrumental performer; from vocal + -ist.


vocalization (n.)

1842, action of vocalizing; 1855, mode or manner of vocalizing; from French vocalisation (1835) or
else formed in English from vocalize + -ation.


vocalize (v.)

1660s, from vocal + -ize. Related: Vocalized; vocalizing.


vocation (n.)

early 15c., spiritual calling, from Old French vocacion call, consecration; calling, profession
(13c.) or directly from Latin vocationem (nominative vocatio), literally a calling, a being called
from vocatus called, past participle of vocare to call (see voice (n.)). Sense of one's occupation
or profession is first attested 1550s.


vocational (adj.)

1650s, from vocation + -al (1). Related: Vocationally.


vocative (adj.)

early 15c., showing the person or thing spoken to, from Middle French vocatif, from Latin vocativus
(casus) (case of) calling, from vocatus, past participle of vocare to call (see voice (n.)). The
Latin is a translation of Greek kletike ptosis, from kletikos related to calling, from kletos
called. As a noun from 1520s.


vociferate (v.)

1590s, a back-formation from vociferation and in part from Latin vociferatus, past participle of
vociferari to cry out, shout, exclaim, from voci-, stem of vox voice (see voice (n.)) + ferre to
carry (see infer). Related: Vociferated; vociferating.


vociferation (n.)

c.1400, from Latin vociferationem (nominative vociferatio), a loud calling, clamor, outcry, noun of
action from past participle stem of vociferari (see vociferous).


vociferous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin vociferari to shout, yell, cry out, from vox (genitive vocis) voice  (see voice
(n.)) + stem of ferre to carry (see infer). Related: Vociferously; vociferousness.


vodka (n.)

1802, from Russian vodka, literally little water, diminutive of voda water (from PIE *wod-a-, from
root *wed- (1) water, wet; see water (n.1)) + diminutive suffix -ka.


vogue (n.)

1570s, the vogue, height of popularity or accepted fashion, from Middle French vogue fashion,
success; also drift, swaying motion (of a boat) literally a rowing, from Old French voguer to row,
sway, set sail (15c.), probably from a Germanic source. Compare Old High German wagon to float,
fluctuate, literally to balance oneself; German Wege wave, billow, wogen fluctuate, float (see
weigh).    Perhaps the notion is of being borne along on the waves of fashion. Italian voga a
rowing, Spanish boga rowing, but colloquially fashion, reputation also probably are from the same
Germanic source. Phrase in vogue having a prominent place in popular fashion first recorded 1643.
The fashion magazine began publication in 1892.


voice (n.)

late 13c., sound made by the human mouth, from Old French voiz voice, speech; word, saying, rumor,
report (Modern French voix), from Latin vocem (nominative vox) voice, sound, utterance, cry, call,
speech, sentence, language, word (source also of Italian voce, Spanish voz), related to vocare to
call, from PIE root *wekw- give vocal utterance, speak (cognates: Sanskrit vakti speaks, says,
vacas- word; Avestan vac- speak, say; Greek eipon (aorist) spoke, said, epos word; Old Prussian
wackis cry; German er-w&auml;hnen to mention).    Replaced Old English stefn. Meaning ability in a
singer is first attested c.1600. Meaning expression of feeling, etc. (in reference to groups of
people, etc., such as Voice of America) is recorded from late 14c. Meaning invisible spirit or force
that directs or suggests (especially in the context of insanity, as in hear voices in (one's) head)
is from 1911.


voice (v.)

mid-15c., to be commonly said, from voice (n.). From c.1600 as to express, give utterance to (a
feeling, opinion, etc.); from 1867 as utter (a letter-sound) with the vocal cords. Related: Voiced;
voicing.


voiceless (adj.)

1530s, unable to speak, from voice (n.) + -less. Meaning having no say in affairs is from 1630s;
that of unspoken, unuttered is from 1816. In phonology, unvoiced, from 1867. Related: Voicelessly;
voicelessness.


voicemail (n.)

also (and originally) voice mail, by 1982; see voice (n.), mail (n.1).


void (adj.)

c.1300, unoccupied, vacant, from Anglo-French and Old French voide, viude empty, vast, wide, hollow,
waste, uncultivated, fallow, as a noun, opening, hole; loss, from Latin vocivos unoccupied, vacant,
related to vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)). Meaning lacking or wanting (something) is recorded from
early 15c. Meaning legally invalid, without legal efficacy is attested from mid-15c.


void (n.)

1610s, unfilled space, gap, from void (adj.). Meaning absolute empty space, vacuum is from 1727.


void (v.)

to clear (some place, of something), c.1300, from Anglo-French voider, Old French vuider to empty,
drain; to abandon, evacuate, from voide (see void (adj.)); meaning to deprive (something) of legal
validity is attested from early 14c. Related: Voided; voiding.


voidable (adj.)

late 15c., from void (v.) + -able.


voila (interj.)

1739, French voil&#224;, imperative of voir to see, to view (from Latin videre to see; see vision) +
la there (from Latin ille yonder).


voile (n.)

thin material used for women's dresses, 1889, from French voile veil (see veil (n.)).


voir dire

1670s, from Old French voir true (from Latin verus true; see very) + dire to say (see diction).


voivode (n.)

local or provincial ruler in Transylvania, Moldavia, etc., 1560s, from Russian voevoda, originally
leader of the army, from Old Church Slavonic voji warriors + -voda leader. Compare Hungarian vajvoda
(later vajda), Serbian vojvoda, Polish wojewoda.


volant (adj.)

flying, c.1500, from Middle French volant able to fly, from Latin volantem (nominative volans),
present participle of volare to fly, of unknown origin. French voler, literally to fly, in 16c.
acquired a sense of to steal, via the transitive meaning to make fly.


Volapuk (n.)

artificial language invented 1879 by Johann Martin Schleyer (1831-1912) based on English, Latin, and
German, Volap&#252;k volap&#252;k, literally world-speech.


volar (adj.)

1809, from Latin vola the hollow of a hand or foot + -ar.


volatile (adj.)

1590s fine or light, also evaporating rapidly (c.1600), from Middle French volatile, from Latin
volatilis fleeting, transitory; swift, rapid; flying, winged, from past participle stem of volare to
fly (see volant). Sense of readily changing, flighty, fickle is first recorded 1640s. Volatiles in
Middle English meant birds, butterflies, and other winged creatures (c.1300).


volatility (n.)

1620s, noun from volatile (adj.).


volcanic (adj.)

1774, from French volcanique, from Italian vulcanico, from vulcano (see volcano). Figurative sense
of prone to explosive activity is attested from 1854.


volcanism (n.)

1819, from French volcanisme, from volcan (see volcano).


volcano (n.)

1610s, from Italian vulcano burning mountain, from Latin Vulcanus Vulcan, Roman god of fire, also
fire, flames, volcano (see Vulcan). The name was first applied to Mt. Etna by the Romans, who
believed it was the forge of Vulcan. Earlier form in English was volcan (1570s), from French.


vole (n.)

1828, short for vole-mouse (1805, in an Orkneys book), literally field-mouse, with first element
probably from Old Norse v&ouml;llr field, from Proto-Germanic *walthuz (cognates: Icelandic
v&ouml;llr, Swedish vall field, Old English weald; see wold).


volition (n.)

1610s, from French volition (16c.), from Medieval Latin volitionem (nominative volitio) will,
volition, noun of action from Latin stem (as in volo I wish) of velle to wish, from PIE root *wel-
(2) to wish, will (see will (v.)). Related: Volitional.


volkslied (n.)

folk-song, 1858, from German Volkslied, from Volk people (see folk (n.)) + Lied song (see laud
(v.)).


volley (n.)

1570s, discharge of a number of guns at once, from Middle French volee flight (12c.), from Vulgar
Latin *volta, fem. noun from Latin volatum, past participle of volare to fly (see volant). Sporting
sense of a return of the ball before it hits the ground (originally in tennis) is from 1851, from
notion of hitting the ball in flight.


volley (v.)

1590s, discharge in a volley, from volley (n.). Sporting sense (originally in tennis) of to return
the ball before it has hit the ground is from 1819. Related: Volleyed; volleying.


volleyball (n.)

1896, from volley (n.) in the sporting sense + ball (n.1). So called because the ball must be
returned before it hits the ground.


Volstead

in reference to Prohibition legislation in U.S., 1920, from U.S. Rep. Andrew J. Volstead
(1860-1947), Republican of Minnesota, who introduced the bill in 1919 that prohibited the
manufacture, transportation, and sale of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol.


volt (n.)

unit of electromotive force, 1873, back-formation from voltaic.


Volta

West African river, from 15c. Portuguese Rio da Volta, literally river of return (perhaps because it
was where ships turned around and headed for home) or river of bend, in reference to its course.


voltage (n.)

electromotive force reckoned in volts, 1882, from volt + -age.


voltaic (adj.)

1813, designating electricity produced by chemical action, formed in recognition of Italian
physicist Alessandro Volta (1745-1827), who perfected a chemical process used in electrical
batteries, + -ic.


Voltaire

name taken from 1718 by French author Fran&ccedil;ois Marie Arouet (1694-1778) after his
imprisonment in the Bastille on suspicion of having written some satirical verses; originally de
Voltaire. The signification is uncertain.


volte-face

a reversal of opinion, 1819, French (17c.), from Italian volta faccia, literally turn face, from
volta, imper. of voltare to turn (from Vulgar Latin *volvita, from Latin volvere to roll; see
volvox) + faccia (see face).


voltmeter (n.)

instrument for measuring the difference of potentials in volts, 1882, from volt + meter (n.3).


volubility (n.)

1570s, from Middle French volubilit&#233; (16c.) or directly from Latin volubilitatem (nominative
volubilitas) a rapid turning, figuratively fluency (of speech), from volubilis (see voluble).


voluble (adj.)

early 15c., liable to constant change, from Middle French voluble, from Latin volubilis that turns
around, rolling, flowing, figuratively (of speech) fluent, rapid, from volvere to turn around, roll
(see volvox). Meaning fluent, talkative first recorded 1580s. Related: Volubly.


volume (n.)

late 14c., roll of parchment containing writing; a bound book, from Old French volume scroll, book;
work, volume; girth, size (13c.) and directly from Latin volumen (genitive voluminis) roll (of a
manuscript); coil, wreath, literally that which is rolled, from volvere to turn around, roll (see
volvox). Meaning book forming part of a set is 1520s in English, from that sense in French.
Generalized sense of bulk, mass, quantity (1620s) developed from that of bulk or size of a book
(1520s), again following the sense evolution in the French word.


volumetric (adj.)

1854, from volumeter instrument for measuring the volume of liquids and gases (1827) + -ic. Related:
Volumetrical (1853).


voluminous (adj.)

1610s, forming a large mass, also full of turnings and windings, from Late Latin voluminosus, from
Latin volumen (genitive voluminis) volume (see volume). Related: Voluminously; voluminousness.


voluntarism (n.)

1838, theory or principal of using voluntary action rather than coercion (in politics, religion,
etc.), from voluntary + -ism. (Voluntaryism in the religious sense, as opposed to
establishmentarianism, is recorded from 1835.) In philosophy, theory that the will is the basic
principle, 1896, from German Voluntarismus (T&#246;nnies, 1883).


voluntary (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin voluntarius willing, of one's free will, from voluntas will, from the ancient
accusative singular present participle of velle to wish (see will (v.)). Originally of feelings,
later also of actions (mid-15c.). Related: Voluntarily.


volunteer (n.)

c.1600, one who offers himself for military service, from Middle French voluntaire, one who
volunteers, also as an adjective, voluntary, from Latin voluntarius voluntary, of one's free will,
as a plural noun volunteers (see voluntary). Non-military sense is first recorded 1630s. As an
adjective from 1640s. Tennessee has been the Volunteer State since the Mexican War, when a call for
2,800 volunteers brought out 30,000 men.


volunteer (v.)

1755, from volunteer (n.). Related: Volunteered; volunteering (1690s as a verbal noun).


volunteerism (n.)

1844, with reference to armed forces; from volunteer + -ism. In reference to volunteer labor in
community activities, by 1977.


voluptuary

c.1600 (noun and adjective), from French voluptuaire and directly from Latin voluptuarius, earlier
voluptarius of pleasure, giving enjoyment; devoted to pleasure, luxurious, from voluptas pleasure
(see voluptuous).


voluptuous (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to desires or appetites, from Old French voluptueux, volumptueuse and
directly from Latin voluptuosus full of pleasure, delightful, from voluptas pleasure, delight,
enjoyment, satisfaction, from volup pleasurably, perhaps ultimately related to velle to wish, from
PIE *wel- (2) to wish, will (see will (v.)). Meaning addicted to sensual pleasure is recorded from
mid-15c. Sense of suggestive of sensual pleasure is attested from 1816 (Byron); especially in
reference to feminine beauty from 1839. Related: Voluptuously; voluptuousness.


volute (n.)

1690s, spiral ornament on an Ionic capital, from French volute (16c.), from Italian voluta, from
Latin voluta a spiral scroll, noun use of fem. past participle of volvere to turn around, roll (see
volvox). Extended 1756 to any spiral thing or part. As a type of spiral seashell, it is attested
from 1753.


volvox (n.)

genus of fresh-water algae, 1798, from Latin volvere to roll, from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn,
revolve, with derivatives referring to curved, enclosing objects (cognates: Sanskrit valate turns
round, ulvam womb, vulva; Lithuanian valtis twine, net, vilnis wave, apvalus round; Old Church
Slavonic valiti roll, welter, vl&#365;na wave; Greek eluo wind, wrap, helix spiral object, eilein to
turn, squeeze; Gothic walwjan to roll; Old English wealwian roll, weoloc whelk, spiral-shelled
mollusk; Old High German walzan to roll, waltz; Old Irish fulumain rolling; Welsh olwyn wheel). So
called from their motion.


volvulus (n.)

knotting of the bowels, 1670s, medical Latin, from Latin volvere to turn, twist (see volvox).


vomit (n.)

late 14c., act of expelling contents of the stomach through the mouth, from Anglo-French vomit, Old
French vomite, from Latin vomitus, from vomitare to vomit often, frequentative of vomere to puke,
spew forth, discharge, from PIE root *weme- to spit, vomit (cognates: Greek emein to vomit, emetikos
provoking sickness; Sanskrit vamati he vomits; Avestan vam- to spit; Lithuanian vemi&#249; to vomit,
Old Norse v&aelig;ma seasickness). In reference to the matter so ejected, it is attested from late
14c.


vomit (v.)

early 15c., from Latin vomitus, past participle of vomitare (see vomit (n.)). Related: Vomited;
vomiting.


vomitorium (n.)

1754, passage or opening in an ancient amphitheater, leading to or from the seats, from Latin
(Macrobius, Sat., VI.iv), from vomitare (see vomit (n.)) + -orium (see -ory). Meaning place where
ancient Romans (allegedly) deliberately vomited during feasts is attested by 1876.


von

German, of, from.


voodoo (n.)

religious witchcraft of Haiti and Southern U.S., ultimately of African origin, 1850, from Louisiana
French voudou, from a West African language (such as Ewe and Fon vodu spirit, demon, deity, also
Vandoo, supposedly the name of an African deity, from a language of Dahomey). Compare vodun fetish
connected with snake worship in Dahomey, said to be from vo to be afraid, or vo harmful. The verb is
attested from 1880.


vor

German, before, in front of (see fore).


voracious (adj.)

1630s, formed as an adjectival form of voracity. Related: Voraciously; voraciousness.


voracity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French voracit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin voracitatem (nominative
voracitas) greediness, ravenousness, from vorax (genitive voracis) greedy, ravenous, consuming, from
vorare to devour, from PIE *gwor-a-, from root *gwere- (4) to swallow, devour (cognates: Sanskrit
girati he swallows, garah drink; Greek bibroskein to eat, brosis eating; Lithuanian geriu to drink,
g&#236;rtas drunk; Old Church Slavonic &#382;iro to swallow, gr&#365;lo gullet).


vorlage (n.)

skiing, 1939, from German vorlage, from vorlegen to lean forward, from vor (see fore) + legen (see
lay (v.)).


vorpal (adj.)

1871, invented by Lewis Carroll in Through the Looking-Glass.


vortex (n.)

1650s, whirlpool, eddying mass, from Latin vortex, variant of vertex an eddy of water, wind, or
flame; whirlpool; whirlwind, from stem of vertere to turn (see versus). Plural form is vortices.
Became prominent in 17c. theories of astrophysics (by Descartes, etc.). In reference to human
affairs, it is attested from 1761. Vorticism as a movement in British arts and literature is
attested from 1914, coined by Ezra Pound. Related: Vortical; vorticist.


votary (n.)

1540s, one consecrated by a vow, from Latin votum a promise to a god; that which is promised (see
vow (n.)) + -ary. Originally a monk or nun, general sense of ardent devotee of some aim or pursuit
is from 1591 (in Shakespeare, originally in reference to love). Related: Votaress.


vote (v.)

1550s, give a vote to; 1560s, enact or establish by vote,; see vote (n.). Earlier it meant to vow to
do something (mid-15c.). Related: Voted; voting.


vote (n.)

mid-15c., formal expression of one's wish or choice with regard to a proposal, candidate, etc., from
Latin votum a vow, wish, promise to a god, solemn pledge, dedication, noun use of neuter of votus,
past participle of vovere to promise, dedicate (see vow (n.)). Meaning totality of voters of a
certain class or type is from 1888.


voter (n.)

1570s, agent noun from vote (v.).


votive (adj.)

1590s, dedicated or given in fulfillment of a vow, from Middle French votif, from Latin votivus of
or pertaining to a vow, promised by a vow, conforming to one's wishes, from votum (see vow (n.)).


vouch (v.)

early 14c., summon into court to prove a title, from Anglo-French voucher, Old French vocher to
call, summon, invoke, claim, probably from Gallo-Roman *voticare, metathesis of Latin vocitare to
call to, summon insistently, frequentative of Latin vocare to call, call upon, summon (see voice
(n.)). Meaning guarantee to be true or accurate is first attested 1590s. Related: Vouched; vouching.


voucher (n.)

1520s, originally summoning of a person into court to warrant the title to a property, a calling to
vouch; see vouch. Meaning receipt from a business transaction is first attested 1690s; sense of
document which can be exchanged for goods or services is attested from 1947.


vouchsafe (v.)

c.1300, vouchen safe to vouch as safe, guarantee (see vouch and safe (adj.)).


vow (n.)

solemn promise, c.1300, from Anglo-French and Old French voe (Modern French v&#339;u), from Latin
votum a promise to a god, solemn pledge, dedication; that which is promised; a wish, desire,
longing, prayer, noun use of neuter of votus, past participle of vovere to promise solemnly, pledge,
dedicate, vow, from PIE root *wegwh- to speak solemnly, vow, preach (cognates: Sanskrit vaghat- one
who offers a sacrifice; Greek eukhe vow, wish, eukhomai I pray). Meaning solemn engagement to devote
oneself to a religious order or life is from c.1400; earlier to bind oneself to chastity (early
14c.).


vow (v.)

promise solemnly, c.1300, from Old French voer, from voe (see vow (n.)). Related: Vowed; vowing.


vowel (n.)

c.1300, from Old French voieul (Modern French voyelle), from Latin vocalis, in littera vocalis,
literally vocal letter, from vox (genitive vocis) voice (see voice (n.)). Vowel shift in reference
to the pronunciation change between Middle and Modern English is attested from 1909. The Hawaiian
word hooiaioia, meaning certified, has the most consecutive vowels of any word in current human
speech; the English record-holder is queueing.


vox

Latin, literally voice (see voice (n.)).


vox populi (n.)

1540s, Latin, literally voice of the people. The full maxim (first attested in Medieval Latin) is
vox populi, vox Dei the voice of the people is the voice of God. Short form vox pop attested by
1964.


voyage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French voiage travel, journey, movement, course, errand, mission, crusade (12c.,
Modern French voyage), from Late Latin viaticum a journey (in classical Latin provisions for a
journey), noun use of neuter of viaticus of or for a journey, from via road, journey, travel (see
via).


voyage (v.)

late 15c., from Old French voyager, from voiage (see voyage (n.)). Related: Voyaged; voyaging.


voyager (n.)

late 15c., from Old French voyagier, from voiage (see voyage (n.)).


voyeur (n.)

a scopophiliac, 1889 as a French word in English, from French voyeur, literally one who views or
inspects, from voir to view, from Latin videre to see (see vision).   Je ne puis pourtant omettre
une cat&#233;gorie de sadistes assez &#233;tonnants; ce sont ceux qu'on d&#233;signe sous le nom de
voyeurs. Ceux-ci cherchent une excitation dans les spectacles impudiques. [L&#233;o Taxil]


voyeurism (n.)

scopophilia, 1913, from voyeur + -ism.


voyeuristic (adj.)

1919, from voyeur + -istic. Related: Voyeuristically.


vroom

1967, echoic of the sound of a motor engine revving.


vs

abbreviation in law of Latin versus against (see versus). Also sometimes vs.; ver.


vue

French, literally view, sight; aspect, appearance; vision (see view (n.)).


vug (n.)

1818, from Cornish vooga a cavity in rock; cave, hollow.


Vulcan (n.)

god of fire and metal-work in Roman mythology, 1510s, from Latin Vulcanus, Volcanus, according to
Klein a word of Etruscan origin. Often with allusions to his lameness and the unfaithfulness of his
wife, Venus. As the name of a hypothetical planet between Mercury and the Sun, it is attested from
1860. French physician Edmond Modeste Lescarbault claimed to have discovered it crossing the Sun's
disk in 1859. The Roman feast of Vulcanalia was on Aug. 23.


vulcanize (v.)

1827, to put into flames, from Vulcan (q.v.), name of the Roman god of fire, + -ize. As a treatment
for rubber, first recorded 1846. Related: Vulcanized; vulcanizing.


vulgar (adj.)

late 14c., common, ordinary, from Latin vulgaris, volgaris of or pertaining to the common people,
common, vulgar, low, mean, from vulgus the common people, multitude, crowd, throng, perhaps from a
PIE root *wel- to crowd, throng (cognates: Sanskrit vargah division, group, Greek eilein to press,
throng, Middle Breton gwal'ch abundance, Welsh gwala sufficiency, enough) [not in Watkins]. Meaning
coarse, low, ill-bred is first recorded 1640s, probably from earlier use (with reference to people)
with meaning belonging to the ordinary class (1530). Related: Vulgarly.


vulgarian (n.)

rich person of vulgar manners, 1804, from vulgar (adj.) + -ian.


vulgarity (n.)

1570s, the common people, from Middle French vulgarit&#233; and directly from Late Latin vulgaritas
the multitude, from vulgaris (see vulgar). Meaning coarseness, crudeness is recorded from 1774.


vulgarize (v.)

to make vulgar (transitive), 1709, from vulgar + -ize. Related: Vulgarized; vulgarizing.


Vulgate (n.)

Latin translation of the Bible, especially that completed in 405 by St. Jerome (c.340-420), c.1600,
from Medieval Latin Vulgata, from Late Latin vulgata common, general, ordinary, popular (in vulgata
editio popular edition), from Latin vulgata, fem. past participle of vulgare make common or public,
spread among the multitude, from vulgus the common people (see vulgar). So called because the
translations made the book accessible to the common people of ancient Rome.


vulnerability (n.)

1767, noun from vulnerable (q.v.).


vulnerable (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin vulnerabilis wounding, from Latin vulnerare to wound, hurt, injure, maim,
from vulnus (genitive vulneris) wound, perhaps related to vellere pluck, to tear (see svelte), or
from PIE *wele-nes-, from *wele- (2) to strike, wound (see Valhalla).


Vulpecula

constellation, Latin vulpecula, volpecula little fox, diminutive of vulpes, volpes fox (see
vulpine).


vulpine (adj.)

pertaining to a fox, fox-like, 1620s, from Latin vulpinus of or pertaining to a fox, from vulpes,
earlier volpes (genitive vulpis, volpis) fox, from PIE *wlpe- fox (cognates: Greek alopex fox).


vulture (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French vultur, Old French voutoir, voutre (Modern French vautour), from Latin
vultur, earlier voltur, perhaps related to vellere to pluck, to tear (see svelte). Figurative sense
is recorded from 1580s. Related: Vulturine; vulturous.


vulva (n.)

late 14c., from Latin vulva, earlier volva womb, female sexual organ, perhaps literally wrapper,
from volvere to turn, twist, roll, revolve, also turn over in the mind, from PIE root *wel- (3) to
turn, revolve, with derivatives referring to curved, enclosing objects (see volvox).


VW (n.)

1958, short for Volkswagen, which is German for people's car (see folk (n.) + wagon).


