-ward

adverbial suffix expressing direction, Old English -weard toward, literally turned toward, sometimes
-weardes, with genitive singular ending of neuter adjectives, from Proto-Germanic *warth (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Frisian -ward, Old Norse -ver&eth;r), variant of PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root
*wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). The original notion is of turned toward.


-worth

as final element in place names, from Old English wor&thorn; enclosed place, homestead.


W

not in the Roman alphabet, but the Modern English sound it represents is close to the devocalized
consonant expressed by Roman -U- or -V-. In Old English, this originally was written -uu-, but by
8c. began to be expressed by the runic character wyn (Kentish wen), which looked like this: &#447;
(the character is a late addition to the online font set and doesn't display properly on many
computers, so it's something like a combination of lower-case -p- and a reversed -y-). In 11c.,
Norman scribes introduced -w-, a ligatured doubling of Roman -u- which had been used on the
continent for the Germanic w sound, and wyn disappeared c.1300. -W- is not properly a letter in the
modern French alphabet, and it is used there only in borrowed foreign words, such as wagon, weekend,
Western, whisky, wombat.


W.C. (n.)

lavatory, by 1871, abbreviation of water-closet.


WAC

1943, American English, acronym from Women's Army Corps, formed 1943.


wack (n.)

crazy person, 1938, back-formation from wacky. Adjective in slang sense of worthless, stupid, is
attested from late 1990s.


wacke (n.)

rock resembling sandstone, 1803, from German Wacke, from Middle High German wacke large stone, rock
projecting from the surface of the ground, from Old High German wacko, waggo gravel, pebble,
probably from Old High German wegan to move. A miner's word, brought into geology by German
geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner (1750-1817).


wacko (n.)

extended form of wack, by 1971.


wacky (adj.)

crazy, eccentric, 1935, variant of whacky (n.) fool, late 1800s British slang, probably ultimately
from whack a blow, stroke, from the notion of being whacked on the head one too many times.


wad (n.)

early 15c., wadde, small bunch of fibrous, soft material for padding or stuffing, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin wadda (14c., source also of French ouate, Italian ovate), or
Dutch watten (source of German Watte), or Middle English wadmal (c.1300) coarse woolen cloth, which
seems to be from Old Norse va&eth;mal a woolen fabric of Scandinavia, probably from va&eth; cloth +
mal measure.    The meaning something bundled up tightly (especially paper currency) is from 1778.
To shoot (one's) wad do all one can do is recorded from 1914. The immediate source of the expression
probably is the sense of disk of cloth used to hold powder and shot in place in a gun. Wad in slang
sense of a load of semen is attested from 1920s, and the expression now often is felt in this sense.
As a suffix, -wad in 1980s joined -bag, -ball, -head in combinations meaning disgusting or
unpleasant person.


wad (v.)

1570s, put a wad into, from wad (n.). From 1670s as form into a wad; 1759 as pad or stuff with
wadding. Related: Wadded; wadding.


wadding (n.)

stuffing, 1620s, verbal noun from wad (v.).


waddle (v.)

to walk with short steps, swaying from side to side; to walk as a duck does, 1590s, frequentative of
wade. Related: Waddled; waddling. The noun is recorded from 1690s.


wade (v.)

Old English wadan to go forward, proceed, move, stride, advance (the modern sense perhaps
represented in oferwaden wade across), from Proto-Germanic *wadan (cognates: Old Norse va&eth;a,
Danish vade, Old Frisian wada, Dutch waden, Old High German watan, German waten to wade), from PIE
root *wadh- (2) to go, found only in Germanic and Latin (cognates: Latin vadere to go, vadum shoal,
ford, vadare to wade). Italian guado, French gu&eacute; ford are Germanic loan-words.
Specifically walk into or through water (or any substance which impedes the free motion of limbs)
c.1200. Originally a strong verb (past tense wod, past participle wad); weak since 16c. Figurative
sense of to go into (action, battle, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Related: Waded; wading.
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,  And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,    [Gray,
Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard]


waders (n.)

waterproof high boots, 1841, plural agent noun from wade.


wadi (n.)

watercourse, 1839, from Arabic wadi seasonal watercourse, prop. participle of wada it flowed. It
forms the Guadal- in Spanish river names.


wae (n.)

obsolete or dialectal Scottish form of woe.


wafer (n.)

late 14c., thin cake of paste, generally disk-shaped, from Anglo-French wafre, Old North French
waufre honeycomb, wafer (Old French gaufre wafer, waffle), probably from Frankish *wafel or another
Germanic source (compare Flemish wafer, altered from Middle Dutch wafel honeycomb; see waffle (n.)).
Eucharistic bread first so called 1550s.


waffle (n.)

kind of batter-cake, baked crisp in irons and served hot, 1744, from Dutch wafel waffle, from Middle
Dutch or Middle Low German wafel, from Proto-Germanic *wabila- web, honeycomb (cognates: Old High
German waba honeycomb, German Wabe), related to Old High German weban, Old English wefan to weave
(see weave (v.)). Sense of honeycomb is preserved in some combinations referring to a weave of
cloth. Waffle iron is from 1794.


waffle (v.)

1690s, to yelp, bark, frequentative of provincial waff to yelp, to bark like a puppy (1610);
possibly of imitative origin. Figurative sense of talk foolishly (c.1700) led to that of vacillate,
equivocate (1803), originally a Scottish and northern English usage. Late 17c. Scottish also had
waff act of waving, variant of waft, which might have influenced the sense. Related: Waffled;
waffler; waffling.


waft (v.)

c.1500, transitive, to move gently (through the air), probably from Middle Dutch or Middle Low
German, ultimately from wachten to guard (perhaps via notion of a ship that guards another as it
sails), related to waken rouse from sleep, from Proto-Germanic *waht- (see wake (n.1)). Possibly
influenced by northern dialect waff cause to move to and fro (1510s), a variant of wave.
Intransitive sense from 1560s. Related: Wafted; wafting.


wag (v.)

early 13c. (intransitive), waver, vacillate, lack steadfastness, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse vagga a cradle, Danish vugge rock a cradle, Old Swedish wagga fluctuate, rock a
cradle), and in part from Old English wagian move backwards and forwards; all from Proto-Germanic
*wag- (cognates: Old High German weggen, Gothic wagjan to wag), probably from PIE root *wegh- to
move about (see weigh).    Transitive meaning move (something) back and forth or up and down is from
c.1300; of dogs and their tails from mid-15c.: and whanne they [hounds] see the hure maystre they
wol make him cheere and wagge hur tayles upon him. [Edward, Duke of York, The Master of Game, 1456].
Related: Wagged; wagging. Wag-at-the-wall (1825) was an old name for a hanging clock with pendulum
and weights exposed.


wag (n.1)

person fond of making jokes, 1550s, perhaps a shortening of waghalter gallows bird, person destined
to swing in a noose or halter, applied humorously to mischievous children, from wag (v.) + halter.
Or possibly directly from wag (v.); compare wagger one who stirs up or agitates (late 14c.).


wag (n.2)

act of wagging, 1580s, from wag (v.).


wage (n.)

c.1300, a payment for services rendered, reward, just deserts; mid-14c., salary paid to a provider
of service, from Anglo-French and Old North French wage (Old French gage) pledge, pay, reward, from
Frankish *wadja- or another Germanic source (compare Old English wedd pledge, agreement, covenant,
Gothic wadi pledge), from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see wed (v.)).    Also from mid-14c., a pledge,
guarantee, surety (usually in plural), and (c.1400) a promise or pledge to meet in battle. The
payment for service sense by late 14c. extended to allotments of money paid at regular intervals for
continuous or repeated service. Traditionally in English wages were payment for manual or mechanical
labor and somewhat distinguished from salary or fee. Modern French cognate gages (plural) means
wages of a domestic, one of a range of French pay words distinguished by class, such as traitement
(university professor), paye, salaire (workman), solde (soldier), r&eacute;compense, prix. The Old
English word was lean, related to loan and representing the usual Germanic word (Gothic laun, Dutch
loon, German lohn). Wage-earner attested from 1871.


wage (v.)

c.1300, give (something) as surety, deposit as a pledge, from Old North French wagier to pledge (Old
French gagier, to pledge, guarantee, promise; bet, wager, pay, Modern French gager), from wage (see
wage (n.)). Meaning to carry on, engage in (of war, etc.) is attested from mid-15c., probably from
earlier sense of to offer as a gage of battle, agree to engage in combat (mid-14c.). Related: Waged;
waging.


wager (n.)

c.1300, wajour a promise, a vow, something pledged or sworn to; also a bet, a wager; stakes,
something laid down as a bet, from Anglo-French wageure, Old North French wagiere (Old French
gagiere, Modern French gageure) pledge, security, from wagier to pledge (see wage (n.)).


wager (v.)

c.1600 (intransitive); 1610s (transitive), from wager (n.). Related: Wagered; wagering.


waggish (adj.)

willing to make a fool of oneself, and fond of doing so to others, 1580s, from wag (n.) + -ish.
Related: Waggishly; waggishness.


waggle (v.)

late 15c. (implied in waggling), frequentative of wag (v.). Compare Dutch waggelen to waggle, Old
High German wagon to move, shake, German wackeln to totter. Transitive sense from 1590s. Related:
Waggled.


wagon (n.)

four-wheeled vehicle to carry heavy loads, late 15c., from Middle Dutch wagen, waghen, from Proto-
Germanic *wagnaz (cognates: Old English w&aelig;gn, Modern English wain, Old Saxon and Old High
German wagan, Old Norse vagn, Old Frisian wein, German Wagen), from PIE *wogh-no-, suffixed form of
root *wegh- to carry, to move (cognates: Sanskrit vahanam vessel, ship, Greek okhos, Latin
vehiculum, Old Church Slavonic voz&#365; carriage, chariot, Russian povozka, Lithuanian va &#382;is
a small sledge, Old Irish fen, Welsh gwain carriage, cart; see weigh).    In Dutch and German, the
general word for a wheel vehicle; English use is a result of contact through Flemish immigration,
Dutch trade, or the Continental wars. It has largely displaced the native cognate, wain. Spelling
preference varied randomly between -g- and -gg- from mid-18c., before American English settled on
the etymological wagon, while waggon remained common in Great Britain. Wagon-train is attested from
1810. Phrase on the wagon abstaining from alcohol is 1904, originally on the water cart.


wagtail (n.)

c.1500, kind of small bird that has its tail in continuous motion (late 12c. as a surname), earlier
wagstart (mid-15c.), from wag (v.) + tail (n.). From 18c. as a harlot, but this sense seems to be
implied much earlier:    If therefore thou make not thy mistress a goldfinch, thou mayst chance to
find her a wagtaile. [Lyly, Midas, 1592]


wah-wah

1926, in jazz slang, in reference to the effect on brass instruments made by manipulating the mute;
of imitative origin. Later also in reference to an electric guitar effect. As an imitation of the
sound of a baby crying, it is recorded from 1938. Wah-wah pedal is recorded from 1969. Compare
Chinook jargon wawa talk, speak, call, ask, sermon, language; Cree (Algonquian) wehwew goose, Lenape
(Algonquian) wava snow goose, all probably of imitative origin.


Wahabi (n.)

1807, follower of Islamic fundamentalist Abd-el-Wahhab (1691-1787), from his name, with Arabic
genitive suffix -i. Related: Wahabiism; Wahabism.


wahoo (n.)

type of large marine fish caught near Key West, 1884, of unknown origin. As the name of North
American trees or shrubs, 1770, from distortions of native names; especially the burning bush, from
Dakota (Siouan) wahu, from wa- arrow + -hu wood. In reference to the winged elm, it is from Muskogee
vhahwv.


waif (n.)

late 14c., unclaimed property, flotsam, stray animal, from Anglo-French waif (13c., Old French
guaif) ownerless property, something lost; as an adjective, not claimed, outcast, abandoned,
probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veif waving thing, flag, from Proto-Germanic
*waif-, from PIE *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically (see vibrate). Compare Medieval
Latin waivium thing thrown away by a thief in flight. A Scottish/northern English parallel form was
wavenger (late 15c.).    Meaning person (especially a child) without home or friends first attested
1784, from legal phrase waif and stray (1620s), from the adjective in the sense lost, strayed,
homeless. Neglected children being uncommonly thin, the word tended toward this sense. Connotations
of fashionable, small, slender woman began 1991 with application to childishly slim supermodels such
as Kate Moss.


waifish (adj.)

1870, from waif + -ish. Related: Waifishly; waifishness.


wail (v.)

c.1300 (intransitive); mid-14c. (transitive), from Old Norse v&aelig;la to lament, from v&aelig; woe
(see woe). Of jazz musicians, to play very well, attested from 1955, American English slang (wailing
excellent is attested from 1954). Related: Wailed; wailer.


wail (n.)

c.1300; see wail (v.).


wain (n.)

Old English w&aelig;gn wheeled vehicle, wagon, cart, from Proto-Germanic *wagnaz (see wagon).
Largely fallen from use by c.1600, but kept alive by poets, who found it easier to rhyme on than
wagon. As a name for the Big Dipper/Plough, it is from Old English (see Charles's Wain).


wainscot (n.)

mid-14c., imported oak of superior quality (well-grained and without knots), probably from Middle
Dutch or Middle Flemish waghenscote superior quality oak wood, board used for paneling (though
neither of these is attested as early as the English word), related to Middle Low German wagenschot
(late 14c.), from waghen (see wagon) + scote partition, crossbar. So called perhaps because the wood
originally was used for wagon building and coachwork, but the sense evolution is not entirely clear.
Meaning panels lining the walls of rooms is recorded from 1540s. Wainscoting is from 1570s.


wainwright (n.)

wagon-builder, Old English w&aelig;gn-wyrhta; see wain + wright.


waist (n.)

late 14c., middle part of the body, also part of a garment fitted for the waist, portion of a
garment that covers the waist (but, due to fashion styles, often above or below it), probably from
Old English *w&aelig;st growth, hence, where the body grows, from Proto-Germanic *wahs-tu-
(cognates: Old English w&aelig;stm, Old Norse v&#246;xtr, Swedish v&auml;xt, Old High German wahst
growth, increase, Gothic wahstus stature, Old English weaxan to grow see wax (v.)), from PIE *wegs-,
extended form of root *aug- to increase (see augment).


waistband (n.)

1580s, from waist + band (n.1).


waistcoat (n.)

1510s, from waist + coat (n.).


waisted (adj.)

c.1400, fitted with a (specified type of) waist, from waist.


waistline (n.)

also waist-line, 1867, from waist + line (n.).


wait (v.)

c.1200, to watch with hostile intent, lie in wait for, plot against, from Anglo-French and Old North
French waitier to watch (Old French gaitier defend, watch out, be on one's guard; lie in wait for;
Modern French guetter), from Frankish *wahton or another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *waht-
(cognates: Dutch wacht a watching, Old High German wahten, German wachten to watch, to guard; Old
High German wahhon to watch, be awake, Old English wacian to be awake; see wake (v.)). General sense
of remain in some place is from late 14c.; that of to see to it that something occurs is late 14c.
Meaning to stand by in attendance on is late 14c.; specific sense of serve as an attendant at a
table is from 1560s. Related: Waited; waiting.    To wait (something) out endure a period of waiting
is recorded from 1849. Waiting room is attested from 1680s. Waiting list is recorded from 1841; the
verb wait-list to put (someone) on a waiting list is recorded from 1960. Waiting game is recorded
from 1835, originally in horse-racing.    When speed, not stoutness, is the best of a horse, quite a
contrary system is practised. With such a horse, the jockey plays a waiting game; that is, he
carefully nurses him through the race, so as not to distress him by overpacing him; as the finish
approaches, he creeps up to his horses by degrees, but does not quit them to go in front till he
sees that the pace has made them safe, -- when he lets loose and wins. [James Christie Whyte,
History of the British Turf, London, 1840]


wait (n.)

early 13c., a watcher, onlooker, from Old North French wait (Old French gait look-out, watch,
sentry), from Old North French waitier (Old French gaitier; see wait (v.)). Compare Old High German
wahta, German Wacht a watchman. From late 14c. as an ambush, a trap (as in lie in wait). From 1855
as time occupied in waiting; 1873 as an act of waiting. From the sense civic employee responsible
for signaling the hour or an alarm by sounding on a trumpet, etc. comes the old sense town musicians
(mid-15c.).


waiter (n.)

late 14c., attendant, watchman, agent noun from wait (v.). Sense of attendant at a meal, servant who
waits at tables is from late 15c., originally in reference to household servants; in reference to
inns, eating houses, etc., it is attested from 1660s.


waitress (n.)

woman who waits tables at a restaurant, 1834, from waiter + -ess.


waitstaff (n.)

1981, American English; see waiter + staff (n.).


waive (v.)

c.1300, deprive of legal protection, from Anglo-French weyver to abandon, waive (Old French guever
to abandon, give back), probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veifa to swing about,
from Proto-Germanic *waif- (see waif). In Middle English legal language, used of rights, goods, or
women.    If the defendant be a woman, the proceeding is called a waiver; for as women were not
sworn to the law by taking the oath of allegiance in the leet (as men anciently were when of the age
of twelve years and upwards), they could not properly be outlawed, but were said to be waived, i.e.,
derelicta, left out, or not regarded. [from section subtitled Outlawry in J.J.S. Wharton, Law-
Lexicon, or Dictionary of Jurisprudence, London, 1867]    Related: Waived; waiving.


waiver (n.)

act of waiving, 1620s (modern usage is often short for waiver clause); from Anglo-French legal usage
of infinitive as a noun (see waive). Baseball waivers is recorded from 1907. Other survivals of noun
use of infinitives in Anglo-French legalese include disclaimer, merger, rejoinder, misnomer, ouster,
retainer, attainder.


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


wake (n.2)

state of wakefulness, Old English -wacu (in nihtwacu night watch), related to watch (n.); and partly
from Old Norse vaka vigil, eve before a feast, related to vaka be awake (cognates: Old High German
wahta watch, vigil, Middle Dutch wachten to watch, guard; see wake (v.)). Meaning a sitting up at
night with a corpse is attested from early 15c. (the verb in this sense is recorded from mid-13c.;
as a noun lichwake is from late 14c.). The custom largely survived as an Irish activity. Wakeman
(c.1200), which survives as a surname, was Middle English for watchman.


wake (n.1)

track left by a moving ship, 1540s, perhaps from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch wake hole in the
ice, from Old Norse v&#246;k, vaka hole in the ice, from Proto-Germanic *wakwo. The sense perhaps
evolved via track made by a vessel through ice. Perhaps the English word is directly from
Scandinavian. Figurative use (such as in the wake of following close behind) is recorded from 1806.


wake-up (n.)

something that brings one to alertness or out of sleep, 1965, often in the 1960s in reference to a
shot of heroin in the morning. Phrase wake-up call is attested from 1968, originally a call one
received from the hotel desk in the morning. Verbal phrase wake up is from 1530s; earlier the adverb
was out (late 14c.)


wakeful (adj.)

c.1400, diligent, from wake (n.2) + -ful. Related: Wakefully; wakefulness.


waken (v.)

to become awake, cease to sleep, Old English w&aelig;cnan, w&aelig;cnian to rise, awake; spring
from, come into being, from the same source as wake (v.). OED regards the ending as the -n- suffix
of inchoative verbs of state, but Barnhart rejects this and says it is simply -en (1). Figurative
sense was in Old English. Transitive sense of to rouse (someone or something) from sleep is recorded
from c.1200. Related: Wakened; wakening.


Waldensian

c.1600, from Waldenses (plural), mid-15c., from Medieval Latin, apparently from Waldensis, a variant
form of the surname of Peter Waldo, the preacher who originated the sect c.1170 in southern France.
Excommunicated 1184, they eventually were swept into the Protestant revolt (16c.).


Waldorf salad

1911, from Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York, where it first was served.


wale (n.)

Old English walu ridge, bank of earth or stone, later ridge made on flesh by a lash (related to weal
(n.2)); from Proto-Germanic *walo (cognates: Low German wale weal, Old Frisian walu rod, Old Norse
v&ouml;lr round piece of wood, Gothic walus a staff, stick, Dutch wortel, German wurzel root), from
PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, roll (see volvox). The common notion perhaps is raised line. Used in
reference to the ridges of textile fabric from 1580s. Wales horizontal planks which extend along a
ship's sides is attested from late 13c.


Wales

see Welsh.


walk (v.)

travel on foot, c.1200, a merger of two verbs, 1. Old English wealcan to toss, roll, move round
(past tense weolc, past participle wealcen), and 2. wealcian to roll up, curl, from Proto-Germanic
*welk- (cognates: Old Norse valka to drag about, Danish valke to full (cloth), Middle Dutch walken
to knead, press, full (cloth), Old High German walchan to knead, German walken to full), perhaps
ultimately from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, roll (see volvox).    The shift in sense is perhaps from
a colloquial use of the Old English word or via the sense of to full cloth (by treading on it),
though this sense does not appear until after the change in meaning. In 13c. it is used of snakes
and the passage of time, and in 15c. of wheeled carts. Rarely is there so specific a word as NE
walk, clearly distinguished from both go and run [Buck]. Meaning to go away is recorded from mid-
15c. Transitive meaning to exercise a dog (or horse) is from late 15c.; meaning to escort (someone)
in a walk is from 1620s. Meaning move (a heavy object) by turning and shoving it in a manner
suggesting walking is by 1890. To walk it off, of an injury, etc., is from 1741. Related: Walked;
walking.


walk (n.)

c.1200, a tossing, rolling; mid-13c., an act of walking, a going on foot; late 14c., a stroll, also
a path, a walkway; from walk (v.). The meaning broad path in a garden is from 1530s. Meaning
particular manner of walking is from 1650s. Meaning manner of action, way of living is from 1580s;
hence walk of life (1733). Meaning range or sphere of activity is from 1759. Sports sense of base on
balls is recorded from 1905; to win in a walk (1854) is from horse racing (see walk-over). As a type
of sponsored group trek as a fund-raising event, by 1971 (walk-a-thon is from 1963).


walk-in (adj.)

1928, without appointment, from the verbal phrase, from walk (v.) + in (adv.). As a noun, meaning
walk-in closet, by 1946.


walk-on (n.)

minor non-speaking role, 1902, theatrical slang, from the verbal phrase walk on, attested in theater
jargon by 1897 with a sense appear in crowd scenes, from walk (v.) + on (adv.). Meaning actor who
has such a part is attested from 1946. The sports team sense is recorded from 1974.


walk-out (n.)

strike, 1888, from walk (v.) + out (adv.). Phrase walk out to leave is attested by 1840. To walk out
on a person desert, forsake is by 1913.


walk-over (n.)

easy victory, 1838, such as one that happens in the absence of competitors, when the solitary
starter, being obliged to complete the event, can traverse the course at a walk. Transferred sense
of anything accomplished with great ease is attested from 1902. To walk (all) over (someone) treat
with contempt is from 1851.


walk-through (n.)

also walkthrough, 1944, an easy part (in a theatrical production), from walk (v.) + through. Meaning
dry run, full rehearsal is from 1959, from the notion of walking (someone) through something.


walk-up (adj.)

in reference to an apartment not accessible by elevator, 1909, from the verbal phrase; see walk (v.)
+ up (adv.). As a noun from 1920 in reference to that type of apartment.


walkabout (n.)

periodic migration by a westernized Aboriginal into the bush, 1828, Australian English, from walk
(v.) + about.


Walker

surname, early 13c., probably an agent noun from walk (v.) in the sense to full cloth. preserves the
cloth-fulling sense (walker with this meaning is attested from c.1300). Walker or Hookey Walker was
a common slang retort of incredulity in early and mid-19c. London, for which Various problematic
explanations have been offered [Century Dictionary].    Is it? said Scrooge. Go and buy it.    Walk-
ER! exclaimed the boy.  No, no, said Scrooge. I am in earnest (etc.)  [Dickens, A Christmas Carol]


walkie-talkie (n.)

1939, popularized in World War II army slang, from walk (v.) + talk (v.).


walking (adj.)

c.1400, present participle adjective from walk (v.). Walking sickness, one in which the sufferer is
able to get about and is not bed-ridden, is from 1846. Walking wounded is recorded from 1917.
Walking bass is attested from 1939 in jazz slang. Walking stick is recorded from 1570s; the insect
so called from 1760.


walkway (n.)

1865, American English, from walk (v.) + way (n.).


wall (n.)

Old English weall, Anglian wall rampart, dike, earthwork (natural as well as man-made), dam, cliff,
rocky shore, also defensive fortification around a city, side of a building, an Anglo-Frisian and
Saxon borrowing (Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wal) from Latin vallum
wall, rampart, row or line of stakes, apparently a collective form of vallus stake, from PIE *walso-
a post. Swedish vall, Danish val are from Low German.    Meaning interior partition of a structure
is mid-13c. In this case, English uses one word where many languages have two, such as German Mauer
outer wall of a town, fortress, etc., used also in reference to the former Berlin Wall, and wand
partition wall within a building (compare the distinction, not always rigorously kept, in Italian
muro/parete, Irish mur/fraig, Lithuanian muras/siena, etc.). The Latin word for defensive wall was
murus (see mural).    Anatomical use from late 14c. To give (someone) the wall allow him or her to
walk on the (cleaner) wall side of the pavement is from 1530s. To turn (one's) face to the wall
prepare to die is from 1570s. Phrase up the wall angry, crazy is from 1951; off the wall unorthodox,
unconventional is recorded from 1966, American English student slang. To go over the wall escape
(originally from prison) is from 1933. Wall-to-wall (adj.) recorded 1939, of shelving, etc.;
metaphoric use (usually disparaging) is from 1967.


wall (v.)

to enclose with a wall, late Old English *weallian (implied in geweallod), from the source of wall
(n.). Meaning fill up (a doorway, etc.) with a wall is from c.1500. Meaning shut up in a wall,
immure is from 1520s. Related: Walled; walling.


Wall Street (n.)

U.S. financial world, 1836, from street in New York City that is home to many investment firms and
stock traders, as well as NYSE. The street so called because it ran along the interior of the
defensive wall of the old Dutch colonial town.


wall-eyed (adj.)

c.1300, wawil-eghed, wolden-eiged, having very light-colored eyes, also having parti-colored eyes,
from Old Norse vagl-eygr having speckled eyes, from vagl speck in the eye; beam, upper cross-beam,
from Proto-Germanic *walgaz. Meaning having one or both eyes turned out (and thus showing much
white) is first recorded 1580s.


wallaby (n.)

kind of small kangaroo, 1826, from native Australian wolaba.


Wallach (n.)

also Walach, one of a Rumanian people, 1786, from German Wallache, from Old Church Slavonic Vlachu,
from Old High German wahl foreigner, one speaking a foreign language (see Vlach). Related:
Wallachia; Wallachian.


wallah (n.)

also walla, person employed (in some specified business), Anglo-Indian, from Hindi -wala, suffix
forming adjectives with the sense pertaining to, connected with; the functional equivalent of
English -er (1). Europeans took it to mean man, fellow and began using it as a word.


wallbanger (n.)

cocktail made from vodka, Galliano, and orange juice, by 1969, in full Harvey wallbanger. Probably
so called from its effect on the locomotive skills of the consumer.


wallboard (n.)

1912, American English, from wall (n.) + board (n.1).


wallet (n.)

late 14c., bag, knapsack, of uncertain origin, probably from an unrecorded Old North French *walet
roll, knapsack, or similar Germanic word in Anglo-French or Old French, from Proto-Germanic *wall-
roll, from PIE *wel- (3) (see volvox). Meaning flat case for carrying paper money is first recorded
1834, American English.


walleye (n.)

type of fish (pike-perch), 1876, American English, said to be so-called from the positioning of the
eyes (see wall-eyed).


wallflower (n.)

1570s, type of flowering plant cultivated in gardens, native to southern Europe, where it grows on
old walls and in rocky places, from wall (n.) + flower (n.). Colloquial sense of woman who sits by
the wall at parties, often for want of a partner is first recorded 1820.


Walloon (adj.)

1520s, of a people of what is now souther and southeastern Belgium, also of their language, from
Middle French Wallon, literally foreigner, of Germanic origin (compare Old High German walh
foreigner). The people are of Gaulish origin and speak a French dialect. The name is a form of the
common appellation of Germanic peoples to Romanic-speaking neighbors. See Vlach, also Welsh. As a
noun from 1560s; as a language name from 1640s.


wallop (v.)

late 14c., to gallop, possibly from Old North French *waloper (13c., Old French galoper), from
Frankish compound *walalaupan to run well (compare Old High German wela well, see well (adv.); and
Old Low Franconian loupon to run, leap, from Proto-Germanic *hlaupan; see leap (v.)). The meaning to
thrash (1820) and the noun meaning heavy blow (1823) may be separate developments, of imitative
origin. Related: Walloped; walloping.


wallow (v.)

Old English wealwian to roll, from West Germanic *walwon, from PIE root *wel- (3) to roll (see
volvox). Figurative sense of to plunge and remain in some state or condition is attested from early
13c. Related: Wallowed; wallowing. The noun is recorded from 1590s as act of rolling; 1841 as place
where an animal wallows.


wallpaper (n.)

also wall-paper, 1827, from wall (n.) + paper (n.).


wally (n.)

term of admiration, Scottish, early 16c., of unknown origin. As a masc. proper name, a diminutive of
Walter, and this might be the source of the teen slang term unfashionable person (1969).


walnut (n.)

Old English walhnutu nut of the walnut tree, literally foreign nut, from wealh foreign (see Welsh) +
hnutu (see nut). Compare Old Norse valhnot, Middle Low German walnut, Middle Dutch walnote, Dutch
walnoot, German Walnu&szlig;, So called because it was introduced from Gaul and Italy,
distinguishing it from the native hazel nut. Compare the Late Latin name for it, nux Gallica,
literally Gaulish nut. Applied to the tree itself from 1600 (earlier walnut tree, c.1400).


Walpurgis night

1820, from German Walpurgisnacht, witches' revel, especially on the Brocken in the Harz Mountains,
on May-day eve, literally the night of (St.) Walpurgis, from Walburga, English abbess who migrated
to Heidenheim, Germany, and died there c.780; May 1 being the day of the removal of her bones from
Heidenheim to Eichst&auml;dt.


walrus (n.)

1650s, from Dutch walrus, which was probably a folk-etymology alteration (by influence of Dutch
walvis whale and ros horse) of a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse rosmhvalr walrus, hrosshvalr a
kind of whale, or rostungr walrus. Old English had horschw&aelig;l, and later morse, from Lapp morsa
or Finnish mursu, which ultimately might be the source, much garbled, of the first element in Old
Norse rosmhvalr.


Walter

masc. proper name, from Old North French Waltier (Old French Gualtier, Modern French Gautier), of
Germanic origin and cognate with Old High German Walthari, Walthere, literally ruler of the army,
from waltan to rule (see wield) + hari host, army (see harry). Walter Mitty (1939) is from title
character in The Secret Life of Walter Mitty by U.S. short story writer James Thurber (1894-1961).


waltz (n.)

round dance performed to music in triple time, extraordinarily popular as a fashionable dance from
late 18c. to late 19c., the dance itself probably of Bohemian origin, 1781, from German Waltzer,
from walzen to roll, dance, from Old High German walzan to turn, roll, from Proto-Germanic *walt-
(cognate with Old Norse velta), from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see volvox). Described in
1825 as a riotous and indecent German dance [Walter Hamilton, A Hand-Book or Concise Dictionary of
Terms Used in the Arts and Sciences].    The music struck up a beautiful air, and the dancers
advanced a few steps, when suddenly, to my no small horror and amazement, the gentlemen seized the
ladies round the waist, and all, as if intoxicated by this novel juxtaposition, began to whirl about
the room, like a company of Bacchanalians dancing round a statue of the jolly god. A waltz!
exclaimed I, inexpressibly shocked, have I lived to see Scotch women waltz? [The Edinburgh Magazine,
April, 1820]


waltz (v.)

1794, from waltz (n.). Meaning to move nimbly (as one does in dancing a waltz) is recorded from
1862. Related: Waltzed; waltzing.


wampum (n.)

string of seashell beads used as money by Native Americans, 1630s, shortened from New England
Algonquian wampumpeag (1620s), string of white (shell beads); said to be compounded from wab white +
ompe string + plural suffix -ag.


wan (adj.)

Old English wann dark, dusky, lacking luster, later leaden, pale, gray, of uncertain origin, and not
found in other Germanic languages. The connecting notion is colorlessness. Perhaps related to wane.
Related: Wanly; wanness.


wand (n.)

c.1200, from Old Norse vondr rod, switch (cognate with Gothic wandus rod, Middle Swedish vander),
from Proto-Germanic *wend- to turn, see wind (v.)). The notion is of a bending, flexible stick.
Compare cognate Old Norse veggr, Old English wag wall, Old Saxon, Dutch wand, Old High German want,
German Wand wall, originally wickerwork for making walls, or wall made of wattle-work (an insight
into early Germanic domestic architecture). Magic wand is attested from c.1400 and shows the
etymological sense of suppleness already had been lost.


wander (v.)

Old English wandrian move about aimlessly, wander, from West Germanic *wandran to roam about
(cognates: Old Frisian wondria, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wanderen, German wandern to wander,
a variant form of the root represented in Old High German wantalon to walk, wander), from PIE root
*wendh- to turn, wind, weave (see wind (v.1)). In reference to the mind, affections, etc., attested
from c.1400. Related: Wandered; wandering. The Wandering Jew of Christian legend first mentioned
13c. (compare French le juif errant, German der ewige Jude).


wanderlust (n.)

1902, from German Wanderlust, literally desire for wandering (see wander + lust).


wane (v.)

Old English wanian make or become smaller gradually, diminish, decline, fade, from Proto-Germanic
*wanen (cognates: Old Saxon wanon, Old Norse vana, Old Frisian wania, Middle Dutch waenen, Old High
German wanon to wane, to grow less), from *wano- lacking, from PIE *we-no-, from root *eue- to
leave, abandon, give out (see vain). Related: Waned; waning; wanes.


wang (n.)

penis, 1933, slang, probably from whangdoodle, an earlier term for gadget, thing for which the
correct name is not known. Many such words (thingy, dingus, etc.) have been used in slang for penis,
not because the actual name was unknown, but because it was unmentionable. Another possibility is
that the slang word is a variant of whang large, thick slice (1630s), which earlier was used in the
sense of thong (1530s) and is itself a variant of thwang, an alternative form of thong (see thong).
In Old English, wang meant cheek, jaw, hence wangto&#240; cheek-tooth, molar.


wangle (v.)

obtain something by trickery, 1888, originally British printer's slang for fake by manipulation;
perhaps an alteration of waggle, or of wankle (now dialectal) unsteady, fickle, from Old English
wancol (see wench (n.)). Brought into wider use by World War I soldiers.


waning (adj.)

Old English wanunge, wonunge, present participle of wanian (see wane).


wank (n.)

act of (male) masturbation, 1948, slang. As a verb, from 1950. Related: Wanked; wanking.


Wankel (n.)

type of rotary internal combustion engine, 1961, from name of German engineer Felix Wankel
(1902-1988).


wanker (n.)

1940s, masturbator, British slang, from wank to masturbate, of unknown origin. General sense of
contemptible person is attested from 1972. Compare sense evolution of jerk (n.).


wanna (v.)

representing the casual pronunciation of want to, by 1896.


wannabe (n.)

1981, originally American English surfer slang, from casual pronunciation of want to be; popularized
c.1984 in reference to female fans of pop singer Madonna.


want (v.)

c.1200, to be lacking, from Old Norse vanta to lack, want, earlier *wanaton, from Proto-Germanic
*wanen, from PIE *we-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (see vain). The meaning
desire, wish for, feel the need of is recorded by 1706.


want (n.)

c.1200, deficiency, insufficiency, shortage, from want (v.) and from Old Norse vant, neuter of vanr
wanting, deficient; related to Old English wanian to diminish (see wane). Meaning state of
destitution, poverty is recorded from early 14c. Meaning thing desired, that which is lacking but
needed is from 1560s. Phrase for want of is recorded from c.1400. Newspaper want ad is recorded from
1897. Middle English had wantsum (c.1200) in want, deprived of, literally want-some.


wanted (adj.)

1690s, lacking; 1812, sought by the police; past participle adjective from want (v.). Wanted poster
attested by 1945.


wanting (adj.)

early 14c., wantand, deficient, lacking, present participle adjective from want (v.). Modern
spelling from 16c.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


wanton (n.)

one who is ill-behaved, mid-15c., especially lascivious, lewd person (1520s), from wanton (adj.).


wanton (v.)

to revel, frolic unrestrainedly, 1580s, from wanton (adj.). Related: Wantoned; wantoning.


wap (n.)

a hit, a blow, late 14c., probably of imitative origin. The verb (late 14c.) originally meant to
throw quickly or with violence, and in slang c.1560-1730 it meant to copulate. Related: Wapped;
wapping.


wapentake (n.)

division of certain English counties (equivalent to a hundred in other places), Old English
w&aelig;penget&aelig;c division of a riding, from Old Norse vapnatak, from vapna, genitive plural of
vapn weapon (see weapon) + tak a touching, a taking hold, a grasping, from taka to take, grasp, from
Proto-Germanic *tak- (see take (v.)). Perhaps it originally was an armed muster with inspection of
weapons, or else an assembly where consent was expressed by brandishing swords and spears.


war (n.)

late Old English wyrre, werre large-scale military conflict, from Old North French werre war (Old
French guerre difficulty, dispute; hostility; fight, combat, war; Modern French guerre), from
Frankish *werra, from Proto-Germanic *werz-a- (cognates: Old Saxon werran, Old High German werran,
German verwirren to confuse, perplex), from PIE *wers- (1) to confuse, mix up. Cognates suggest the
original sense was to bring into confusion.    Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian guerra also are from
Germanic; Romanic peoples turned to Germanic for a word possibly to avoid Latin bellum because its
form tended to merge with bello- beautiful. There was no common Germanic word for war at the dawn of
historical times. Old English had many poetic words for war (wig, gu&eth;, hea&eth;o, hild, all
common in personal names), but the usual one to translate Latin bellum was gewin struggle, strife
(related to win (v.)).    First record of war time is late 14c. Warpath (1775) is originally in
reference to North American Indians, as are war-whoop (1761), war-paint (1826), and war-dance
(1757). War crime first attested 1906 (in Oppenheim's International Law). War chest is attested from
1901; now usually figurative. War games translates German Kriegspiel (see kriegspiel).


war (v.)

to make war on, mid-12c.; see war (n.). Related: Warred; warring.


War of 1812

In reference to the conflict between the U.S. and Great Britain, so called in U.S. by 1815.


war-path (n.)

also warpath, 1775, in reference to North American Indians, from war (n.) + path (n.).


war-song (n.)

1757, from war (n.) + song (n.).


war-time (n.)

late 14c., from war (n.) + time (n.).


warble (v.)

late 14c., from Old North French werbler to sing with trills and quavers (Old French guerbloiier),
from Frankish *werbilon (cognate with Old High German wirbil whirlwind, German Wirbel whirl,
whirlpool, tuning peg, vertebra, Middle Dutch wervelen to turn, whirl); see whirl (v.). Related:
Warbled; warbling. The noun is recorded from late 14c.


warbler (n.)

1610s, agent noun from warble (v.). Applied to Old World songbirds by 1773 and to North American
birds that look like them but sing little by 1783.


warcraft (n.)

military science, c.1400, from war (n.) + craft (n.).


ward (n.)

Old English weard a guarding, protection; watchman, sentry, keeper, from Proto-Germanic *wardaz
guard (cognates: Old Saxon ward, Old Norse v&ouml;r&eth;r, Old High German wart), from PIE *war-o-,
from root *wer- (4) perceive, watch out for (cognates: Latin vereri to observe with awe, revere,
respect, fear; Greek ouros a guard, watchman, and possibly horan to see; Hittite werite- to see).
Used for administrative districts (at first in the sense of guardianship) from late 14c.; of
hospital divisions from 1749. Meaning minor under control of a guardian is from early 15c. Ward-
heeler is 1890, from heeler loafer, one on the lookout for shady work (1870s).


ward (v.)

Old English weardian to keep guard, watch, protect, preserve, from Proto-Germanic *wardon to guard
(cognates: Old Saxon wardon, Old Norse var&eth;a to guard, Old Frisian wardia, Middle Dutch waerden
to take care of, Old High German warten to guard, look out for, expect, German warten to wait, wait
on, nurse, tend), from PIE *war-o- (see ward (n.)). French garder, Italian guardare, Spanish guardar
are Germanic loan-words. Meaning to parry, to fend off (now usually with off) is recorded from
1570s. Related: Warded; warding.


warden (n.)

c.1200, one who guards, from Old North French wardein, from Frankish *warding- (which became Old
French guardenc), from Proto-Germanic *wardon to watch, guard (see ward (v.)). Meaning governor of a
prison is recorded from c.1300.


warder (n.)

c.1400, guardian of an entrance, from Anglo-French wardere, wardour guardian, keeper, custodian (Old
French gardeor), agent noun from Old North French warder to guard, keep, maintain, uphold (Old
French garder), from Frankish *wardon, from Proto-Germanic *wardon to guard (see ward (v.)).


Wardour-street (n.)

affected pseudo-archaic diction of historical novels, 1888, from street in London lined with shops
selling imitation-antique furniture.    This is not literary English of any date; this is Wardour-
Street Early English -- a perfectly modern article with a sham appearance of the real antique about
it. [A. Ballantyne, Wardour-Street English, Longman's Magazine, October, 1888]


wardrobe (n.)

early 14c., room where wearing apparel is kept, earlier a private chamber (c.1300), from Old North
French warderobe, wardereube (Old French garderobe) dressing-room, place where garments are kept,
from warder to keep, guard (see ward (v.)) + robe garment (see robe (n.)). Meaning a person's stock
of clothes for wearing is recorded from c.1400. Sense of movable closed cupboard for wearing apparel
is recorded from 1794. Meaning room in which theatrical costumes are kept is attested from 1711.
Wardrobe malfunction is from 2004.


ware (n.)

manufactured goods, goods for sale, Old English waru article of merchandise, also protection, guard,
hence probably originally object of care, that which is kept in custody, from Proto-Germanic *waro
(cognates: Swedish vara, Danish vare, Old Frisian were, Middle Dutch were, Dutch waar, Middle High
German, German ware goods), from PIE *wer- (4) to perceive, watch out for (see ward (n.)). Usually
wares, except in compounds such as hardware, earthenware, etc. Lady ware was a jocular 17c.
euphemism for a woman's private parts, and Middle English had ape-ware deceptive or false ware;
tricks (mid-13c.).


ware (v.)

to take heed of, beware, Old English warian to guard against, beware; protect, defend, from Proto-
Germanic *waraz (cognates: Old Frisian waria, Old Norse vara), from PIE *war-o- to guard, watch,
from root *wer- (4) to perceive, watch out for (see ward (n.)).


warehouse (n.)

mid-14c., from ware (n.) + house. Compare Dutch warenhuis, German warenhaus. Meaning large
impersonal institution is American English colloquial, first attested 1970.


warehouse (v.)

1799, deposit or secure in a warehouse, from warehouse (n.). In the colloquial sense, especially of
mentally disabled persons, from 1972. Related: Warehoused; warehousing.


warf

see Warfarin.


warfare (n.)

mid-15c., from war (n.) + fare (see fare (n.)).


Warfarin (n.)

1950, from WARF, acronym from Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation + -arin, from Coumarin. The
organization describes itself as an independent, nonprofit foundation chartered to support research
at the U[niversity of] W[isconsin]-Madison and the designated technology transfer organization for
the university.


warhead (n.)

also war-head, 1898, explosive part of a torpedo, from war (n.) + head (n.). Later transferred to
any missile (1944).


warhorse (n.)

also war-horse, 1650s, powerful horse ridden into war, from war (n.) + horse (n.). Figurative sense
of seasoned veteran of anything is attested from 1837. In reference to women perceived as tough, by
1921.


Waring

brand name of a type of food blender, 1944, manufactured by Waring Products Corp., N.Y., U.S.


warlike (adj.)

early 15c., from war (n.) + like (adj.).


warlock (n.)

Old English w&aelig;rloga traitor, liar, enemy, devil, from w&aelig;r faith, fidelity; a compact,
agreement, covenant, from Proto-Germanic *wera- (cognates: Old High German wara truth, Old Norse
varar solemn promise, vow), from PIE *were-o- true, trustworthy (see very, also Varangian). Second
element is an agent noun related to leogan to lie (see lie (v.1); and compare Old English wordloga
deceiver, liar).    Original primary sense seems to have been oath-breaker; given special
application to the devil (c.1000), but also used of giants and cannibals. Meaning one in league with
the devil is recorded from c.1300. Ending in -ck (1680s) and meaning male equivalent of a witch
(1560s) are from Scottish. Related: Warlockery.


warlord (n.)

also war-lord, 1856, from war (n.) + lord (n.). Often a translation of German Kriegsherr or Chinese
junfa.


warm (adj.)

Old English wearm warm, from Proto-Germanic *warmaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch,
Old High German, German warm, Old Norse varmr, Gothic warmjan to warm), of uncertain origin. On one
guess it is from PIE *gwher- (cognates: Sanskrit gharmah heat; Old Persian Garmapada-, name of the
fourth month, corresponding to June/July, from garma- heat; Armenian jerm warm; Greek thermos warm;
Latin formus warm, fornax oven; Old Irish fogeir heated; Hittite war- to burn). On another guess it
is connected to the source of Old Church Slavonic goriti to burn, var&#365; heat, variti to cook,
boil; and Lithuanian v&#233;rdu to seethe.    The use of distinct words, based on degree of heat,
for warm and hot is general in Balto-Slavic and Germanic, but in other languages one word often
covers both (Greek thermos; Latin calidus, French chaud, Spanish caliente). In reference to
feelings, etc., attested from late 15c. Of colors from 1764. Sense in guessing games first recorded
1860, from earlier hunting use in reference to scent or trail (1713). Warm-blooded in reference to
mammals is recorded from 1793. Warm-hearted first recorded c.1500.


warm (v.)

Old English wyrman make warm and wearmian become warm; from the root of warm (adj.). Phrase warm the
bench is sports jargon first recorded 1907. Related: Warmed; warming.    SCOTCH WARMING PAN. A
wench. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


warm-up (n.)

act or practice of exercising or practicing before an activity, 1915; earlier in literal sense, a
heating (of something), 1878, from verbal phrase warm up, which is from 1868 in the sense exercise
before an activity. Earlier in reference to heating food (1848), and earliest (c.1400),
figuratively, of persons. In reference to appliances, motors, etc., attested from 1947.


warmly (adv.)

1520s, of feelings; 1590s, of temperature, from warm (adj.) + -ly (2).


warmonger (n.)

also war-monger, 1580s, from war (n.) + monger (n.). First attested in Spenser's Faerie Queene, and
perhaps coined by him.


warmth (n.)

late 12c., wearmth, Proto-Germanic *warmitho- (cognates: Middle Low German wermede, Dutch warmte),
from *warmo- (see warm (adj.); also see -th (2)).


warn (v.)

Old English warnian to give notice of impending danger, also intransitive, to take heed, from Proto-
Germanic *war-non (cognates: Old Norse varna to admonish, Old High German warnon to take heed,
German warnen to warn), from PIE *wer- (5) to cover (see weir). Related: Warned; warning.


warning (n.)

notice beforehand of the consequences that will probably follow continuance in some particular
course [Century Dictionary], Old English warnung, verbal noun from warnian (see warn (v.)).


warp (v.)

to bend, twist, distort, Old English weorpan to throw, throw away, hit with a missile, from Proto-
Germanic *werpan to fling by turning the arm (cognates: Old Saxon werpan, Old Norse verpa to throw,
Swedish v&auml;rpa to lay eggs, Old Frisian werpa, Middle Low German and Dutch werpen, German
werfen, Gothic wairpan to throw), from PIE *werp- to turn, wind, bend (cognates: Latin verber whip,
rod; Greek rhabdos rod, rhombos magic wheel), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Connection between turning and throwing is perhaps in the notion of rotating the arm in the act of
throwing; compare Old Church Slavonic vre&#353;ti to throw, from the same PIE root. The meaning
twist out of shape is first recorded c.1400; intransitive sense is from mid-15c. Related: Warped;
warping.


warp (n.)

threads running lengthwise in a fabric, Old English wearp, from Proto-Germanic *warpo- (cognates:
Middle Low German warp, Old High German warf warp, Old Norse varp cast of a net), from PIE *werp- to
turn, bend (see warp (v.)). The warp of fabric is that across which the woof is thrown. Applied in
20c. astrophysics to the fabric of space-time, popularized in noun phrase warp speed by 1960s TV
series Star Trek.


warrant (n.)

c.1200, protector, defender, from Old North French warant defender; surety, pledge; justifying
evidence (Old French garant), from Frankish *warand, from Proto-Germanic *war- to warn, guard,
protect (cognates: Old High German werento guarantor, noun use of present participle of weren to
authorize, warrant; German gew&auml;hren to grant), from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover (see weir).
Sense evolved via notion of permission from a superior which protects one from blame or
responsibility (early 14c.) to document conveying authority (1510s). A warrant officer in the
military is one who holds office by warrant (as from a government department), rather than by
commission (from a head of state).


warrant (v.)

late 13c., to keep safe from danger, from Old North French warantir safeguard, protect; guarantee,
pledge (Old French garantir), from warant (see warrant (n.)). Meaning to guarantee to be of quality
is attested from late 14c.; sense of to guarantee as true is recorded from c.1300. Related:
Warranted; warranting; warrantable.


warrantee (n.)

person to whom a warranty is given, 1706, from warrant (v.) + -ee.


warranty (n.)

mid-14c., legal term for various types of clauses in real estate transactions, from Anglo-French and
Old North French warantie protection, defense, safeguard (Old French garantie), from warant (see
warrant (n.)).


warren (n.)

late 14c., piece of land enclosed for breeding beasts and fowls, from Anglo-French and Old North
French warenne (Old French garenne) game park, hunting reserve, possibly from Gaulish *varenna
enclosed area, related to *varros post. More likely from the present participle of Old North French
warir (Old French garir) defend, keep, from Proto-Germanic *war- to protect, guard (see warrant
(n.)). Later especially piece of land for breeding of rabbits (c.1400), which led to the transferred
sense of cluster of densely populated living spaces (1640s).


warrior (n.)

c.1300, from Old North French werreier (Old French guerroieor) a warrior, soldier, combatant, one
who wages war, from werreier wage war, from werre (see war (n.)).


warry (adj.)

war-like, 1901, from war (n.) + -y (2).


Warsaw

Polish capital, Polish Warszawa, of unknown origin. The Warsaw Pact Cold War Eastern Bloc military
alliance is from the Treaty of Warsaw, signed there May 14, 1955. Signatories were the Soviet Union,
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Albania.


warship (n.)

1530s, from war (n.) + ship (n.).


wart (n.)

Old English weart wart, from Proto-Germanic *warton- (cognates: Old Norse varta, Old Frisian warte,
Dutch wrat, Old High German warza, German warze wart), from PIE root *wer- (1) high, raised spot on
the body, or other bodily infirmity (cognates: Latin verruca swelling, wart; see vary). Phrase warts
and all without concealment of blemishes is attested from 1763, supposedly from Oliver Cromwell's
instruction to his portrait painter.


wart-hog (n.)

1840, from wart + hog (n.).


Warwickshire

11c., from Old English W&aelig;rincwicum + scir district. The first element means dwellings by the
weir or river-dam, from *w&aelig;ring + wic (see wick (2)).


wary (adj.)

late 15c., with -y (2) + ware, from Old English w&aelig;r prudent, aware, alert, wary, from Proto-
Germanic *waraz (cognates: Old Norse varr attentive, Gothic wars cautious, Old Saxon giwar, Middle
Dutch gheware, Old High German giwar, German gewahr aware), from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive,
watch out for (see ward (n.)). Related: Warily; wariness.


was (v.)

Old English wesan, w&aelig;s, w&aelig;ron 1st and 3rd person singular of wesan to remain, from
Proto-Germanic *was- (cognates: Old Saxon wesan, Old Norse vesa, Old Frisian wesa, Middle Dutch
wesen, Dutch wezen, Old High German wesen being, existence, Gothic wisan to be), from PIE root *wes-
(3) remain, abide, live, dwell (cognates Sanskrit vasati he dwells, stays; compare vestal). Wesan
was a distinct verb in Old English, but it came to supply the past tense of am. This probably began
to develop in Proto-Germanic, because it is also the case in Gothic and Old Norse. See be.


wasabi (n.)

herb root used in cooking, 1903, from Japanese.


wash (v.)

Old English wascan to wash, cleanse, bathe, transitive sense in late Old English, from Proto-
Germanic *watskan to wash (cognates: Old Norse vaska, Middle Dutch wasscen, Dutch wassen, German
waschen), from stem *wed- water, wet (see water (n.1)). Related: Washed; washing.    Used mainly of
clothes in Old English (the principal verb for washing the body, dishes, etc. being &thorn;wean).
Old French gaschier to stain, soil; soak, wash (Modern French g&#226;cher) is from Frankish *waskan,
from the same Germanic source. Italian guazzare also is a Germanic loan-word. To wash (one's) hands
of something id 1550s, from Pilate in Matt. xxvii.24. To wash up clean utensils after a meal is from
1751. Washed up no longer effective is 1923, theater slang, from notion of washing up at the end of
a job.


wash (n.)

late Old English w&aelig;sc act of washing, from wash (v.). Meaning clothes set aside to be washed
is attested from 1789; meaning thin coat of paint is recorded from 1690s; sense of land alternately
covered and exposed by the sea is recorded from mid-15c.


wash-basket (n.)

1851, from wash (n.) + basket (n.).


wash-cloth (n.)

1861, from wash (v.) + cloth (n.).


wash-out (n.)

also washout, 1877, act of washing out (a drain, etc.), from verbal phrase; see wash (v.) + out
(adv.). From 1873 as excavation of a roadbed, etc., by erosion is from 1873. Meaning a disappointing
failure is from 1902, from verbal phrase wash out obliterate, cancel (something written in ink),
attested from 1570s. Hence also the colloquial sense of to call off (an event) due to bad weather,
etc. (1917). Of colored material, washed-out faded is from 1837.


wash-stand (n.)

1789, from wash (v.) + stand (n.).


wash-tub (n.)

c.1600, from wash (v.) + tub (n.).


washable (adj.)

1620s, from wash (v.) + -able. Related: Washables (n.), 1892.


washboard (n.)

also wash-board, clothes-cleaning device, 1882, from wash (v.) + board (n.1). As a percussion
instrument, attested from 1925; in reference to abdominal muscles, recorded from 1950 in boxing
jargon.


washdown (n.)

also wash-down, 1949, from verbal phrase, from wash (v.) + down (adv.).


washer (n.2)

flat ring for sealing joints or holding nuts, mid-14c., generally considered an agent noun of wash
(v.), but the sense connection is difficult, and the noun may derive instead from the ancestor of
French vis screw, vise (see vise).


washer (n.1)

1520s, person who washes, agent noun from wash (v.). From 1808 as machine that washes. Washer-woman
is from 1630s; earlier wash-woman (1580s).


washing (n.)

Old English w&#230;scing action of washing clothes, verbal noun from wash (v.). Meaning clothes
washed at one time is from 1854. Washing machine attested from 1754.


Washington

U.S. capital, founded 1791, named for President George Washington (1732-1799); the family name is
from a town in northeastern England, from Old English, literally estate of a man named Wassa. The
U.S. state was named when it was formed as a territory in 1853 (admitted to the union 1889).
Related: Washingtonian.


washroom (n.)

1806, from wash + room (n.).


washy (adj.)

1610s, over-diluted, from wash (n.) + -y (2). Sense of feeble, weak is from 1630s. Related:
Washiness.


wasp (n.)

Old English w&aelig;ps, w&aelig;sp wasp, altered (probably by influence of Latin vespa) from Proto-
Germanic *wabis- (cognates: Old Saxon waspa, Middle Dutch wespe, Dutch wesp, Old High German wafsa,
German Wespe, Danish hveps), from PIE *wopsa-/*wospa- wasp (cognates: Latin vespa, Lithuanian vapsa,
Old Church Slavonic vosa wasp, Old Irish foich drone), perhaps from *webh- weave (see weave (v.)).
If that is the correct derivation, the insect would be so called for the shape of its nest. Of
persons with wasp-like tendencies, from c.1500. Wasp-waist in reference to women's figures is
recorded from 1870 (wasp-waisted is from 1775).


WASP (n.)

acronym for White Anglo-Saxon Protestant, by 1955.


waspish (adj.)

irrascible, quick to take offense; spiteful, 1560s, from wasp + -ish. Related: Waspishly;
waspishness.


wassail

mid-12c., from Old Norse ves heill be healthy, a salutation, from ves, imperative of vesa to be (see
was) + heill healthy, from Proto-Germanic *haila- (see health). Use as a drinking phrase appears to
have arisen among Danes in England and spread to native inhabitants.    A similar formation appears
in Old English wes &thorn;u hal, but this is not recorded as a drinking salutation. Sense extended
c.1300 to liquor in which healths were drunk, especially spiced ale used in Christmas Eve
celebrations. Meaning a carousal, reveling first attested c.1600. Wassailing custom of going
caroling house to house at Christmas time is recorded from 1742.


Wassermann (n.)

test for syphillis, 1909, from German bacteriorologist August Paul Wassermann (1866-1925), who
devised it in 1906.


wassup (interj.)

slang form of common greeting what's up?, popular 2000.


wastage (n.)

1673, a hybrid from waste (v.) + -age.


waste (v.)

c.1200, devastate, ravage, ruin, from Anglo-French and Old North French waster to waste, squander,
spoil, ruin (Old French gaster; Modern French g&#226;ter), altered (by influence of Frankish
*wostjan) from Latin vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate, waste (see vain). Related:
wasted; wasting.    The Germanic word also existed in Old English as westan to lay waste, ravage.
Spanish gastar, Italian guastare also are from Germanic. Meaning to lose strength or health; pine;
weaken is attested from c.1300; the sense of squander, spend or consume uselessly is first recorded
mid-14c.; meaning to kill is from 1964. Waste not, want not attested from 1778.


waste (n.)

c.1200, desolate regions, from Anglo-French and Old North French wast waste, damage, destruction;
wasteland, moor (Old French gast), from Latin vastum, neuter of vastus waste (see waste (v.)).
Replaced or merged with Old English westen, woesten a desert, wilderness, from the Latin word.
Meanings consumption, depletion, also useless expenditure are from c.1300; sense of refuse matter is
attested from c.1400. Waste basket first recorded 1850.


waste (adj.)

c.1300, of land, desolate, uncultivated, from Anglo-French and Old North French waste (Old French
gaste), from Latin vastus (see waste (v.)). From c.1400 as superfluous, excess; 1670s as unfit for
use. Waste-paper attested from 1580s.


wasted (adj.)

late 14c., enfeebled, past participle adjective from waste (v.). Slang meaning intoxicated is from
1950s.


wasteful (adj.)

early 14c., destructive, from waste (n.) + -ful. Meaning lavish is from mid-15c. Related:
Wastefully; wastefulness.


wasteland (n.)

1825 as one word, from waste (adj.) + land (n.). Figurative sense is attested from 1868. Eliot's
poem is from 1922.    April is the cruellest month, breeding     Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing
Memory and desire, stirring        Dull roots with spring rain.


wastewater (n.)

also waste-water, mid-15c., from waste (adj.) + water (n.1).


wastrel (n.)

spendthrift, idler, 1847, from waste (v.) + pejorative suffix -rel. Earlier something useless or
imperfect (1790).


wat (n.)

Thai Buddhist temple, said to be from Sanskrit vata enclosure, grove.


watch (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ccan keep watch, be awake, from Proto-Germanic *wakjan, from PIE *weg- (2) to be
strong, lively; essentially the same word as Old English wacian be or remain awake (see wake (v.));
perhaps a Northumbrian form of it. Meaning be vigilant is from c.1200. That of to guard (someone or
some place), stand guard is late 14c. Sense of to observe, keep under observance is mid-15c.
Related: Watched; watching.


watch (n.)

Old English w&aelig;cce a watching, state of being or remaining awake, wakefulness; also act or
practice of refraining from sleep for devotional or penitential purposes; from w&aelig;ccan (see
watch (v.)). From c.1200 as one of the periods into which the night is divided, in reference to
ancient times translating Latin vigilia, Greek phylake, Hebrew ashmoreth.    The Hebrews divided the
night into three watches, the Greeks usually into four (sometimes five), the Romans (followed by the
Jews in New Testament times) into four. [OED]   <hr />   On &#254;is niht be&#240; fowuer niht
wecches: Biforen euen &#254;e bilimpe&#240; to children; Mid-niht &#240;e bilimpe&#240; to
frumberdligges; hanecrau &#254;e bilimpe&#240; &#254;owuene men; morgewile to alde men. [Trinity
Homilies, c.1200]     From mid-13c. as a shift of guard duty; an assignment as municipal watchman;
late 13c. as person or group obligated to patrol a town (especially at night) to keep order, etc.
Also in Middle English, the practice of remaining awake at night for purposes of debauchery and
dissipation; hence wacches of wodnesse late-night revels and debauchery. The alliterative
combination watch and ward preserves the old distinction of watch for night-time municipal patrols
and ward for guarding by day; in combination, they meant continuous vigilance.    Military sense of
military guard, sentinel is from late 14c. General sense of careful observation, watchfulness,
vigilance is from late 14c.; to keep watch is from late 14c. Meaning period of time in which a
division of a ship's crew remains on deck is from 1580s. The meaning small timepiece is from 1580s,
developing from that of a clock to wake up sleepers (mid-15c.).


watch-chain (n.)

1739, from watch (n.) in the timepiece sense + chain (n.).


watch-work (n.)

1660s, from watch (n.) in the timepiece sense + work (n.).


watchdog (n.)

also watch-dog, c.1600, from watch (v.) + dog (n.). Figurative sense is attested by 1845.


watcher (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. as a surname), agent noun from watch (v.).


watchful (adj.)

c.1500, waccheful, from watch (v.) + -ful. Related: Watchfulness.


watchmaker (n.)

1620s, from watch (n.) in the timepiece sense + maker.


watchman (n.)

also watch-man, c.1400, guard, sentinel, lookout (late 12c. as a surname), figuratively guardian,
protector (mid-15c.), from watch (n.) + man (n.). Also person characterized by wakefulness (mid-
15c.).


watchtower (n.)

also watch-tower, 1540s, from watch (v.) + tower (n.).


watchword (n.)

also watch-word, c.1400, password, from watch (n.) in the military sense of period of standing guard
duty + word (n.). In the sense of motto, slogan it dates from 1738.


water (n.1)

Old English w&aelig;ter, from Proto-Germanic *watar (cognates: Old Saxon watar, Old Frisian wetir,
Dutch water, Old High German wazzar, German Wasser, Old Norse vatn, Gothic wato water), from PIE
*wod-or, from root *wed- (1) water, wet (cognates: Hittite watar, Sanskrit udrah, Greek hydor, Old
Church Slavonic and Russian voda, Lithuanian vanduo, Old Prussian wundan, Gaelic uisge  water; Latin
unda wave).    To keep (one's) head above water in the figurative sense is recorded from 1742. Water
cooler is recorded from 1846; water polo from 1884; water torture from 1928. Linguists believe PIE
had two root words for water: *ap- and *wed-. The first (preserved in Sanskrit apah as well as
Punjab and julep) was animate, referring to water as a living force; the latter referred to it as an
inanimate substance. The same probably was true of fire (n.).


water (v.)

Old English w&aelig;terian moisten, irrigate, supply water to; lead (cattle) to water; from water
(n.1). Meaning to dilute is attested from late 14c.; now usually as water down (1850). To make water
urinate is recorded from early 15c. Related: Watered; watering.


water (n.2)

measure of quality of a diamond, c.1600, from water (n.1), perhaps as a translation of Arabic ma'
water, which also is used in the sense lustre, splendor.


water-closet (n.)

privy with a waste-pipe and means to carry off the discharge by a flush of water, 1755, from water
(n.1) + closet (n.).


water-ice (n.)

sugared water, flavored and frozen, 1818, from water (n.1) + ice (n.).


water-lily (n.)

1540s, from water (n.1) + lily (n.).


water-moccasin (n.)

type of snake in the U.S. South, 1821, from water (n.1) + moccasin (q.v.).


water-pipe (n.)

c.1400, conduit for water, from water (n.1) + pipe (n.1). The smoking sense is first attested 1824.


water-ski (n.)

1931, from water (n.1) + ski (n.). As a verb from 1953.


water-table (n.)

level of saturated ground, 1879, from water (n.1) + table (n.).


water-wheel (n.)

c.1400, from water (n.1) + wheel (n.).


waterbed (n.)

also water-bed, 1610s, a bed on board a ship, from water (n.1) + bed (n.). As a water-tight mattress
filled with water, it is recorded from 1844, originally for invalids to prevent bedsores. Reinvented
c.1970 as a stylish furnishing.


waterboard (n.)

1610s (n.), gutter, from water (n.1) + board (n.1). Waterboarding as the name of a type of torture
is from 2005, but the practice is older.


watercolor (n.)

also water-color, 1590s, pigment that dissolves in water, from water (n.1) + color (n.). Meaning
picture painted in watercolors is attested from 1854.


watercourse (n.)

also water-course, c.1500, from water (n.1) + course (n.).


watercress (n.)

also water-cress, c.1300, from water (n.1) + cress. Compare Middle Low German, Middle Dutch
waterkerse, German wasserkresse. It grows in or near streams.


waterfall (n.)

Old English w&aelig;tergefeall; see water (n.1) + fall (n.). The modern English word is perhaps a
re-formation from c.1500. Similar formation in German wasserfall, Old Norse vatnfall.


Waterford

city in southeastern Ireland; 1783 in reference to a type of glassware manufactured there.


waterfowl (n.)

early 14c., from water (n.1) + fowl (n.). Similar formation in Old High German wazzarvogel, Dutch
watervogel.


waterfront (n.)

also water-front, 1834, American English, from water (n.1) + front (n.). To cover the waterfront
deal with thoroughly is attested from 1913; I Cover the Waterfront was a 1932 best-seller by San
Diego newspaperman Max Miller.


watergate (n.)

mid-14c., channel for water; late 14c., flood-gate; from water (n.1) + gate (n.). The name of a
building in Washington, D.C., that housed the headquarters of the Democratic Party in the 1972
presidential election, it was burglarized June 17, 1972, which led to the resignation of President
Nixon.


watering (n.)

Old English w&aelig;terunge a carrying water, verbal noun from water (v.). From late 14c. as a
soaking with water; mid-15c. as a giving water to (an animal); c.1600 as salivation. Watering-can is
from 1690s (earlier water-can, late 14c.); watering-hole is from 1882 (earlier water-hole, 1670s,
watering-place, mid-15c.); by 1965 in the figurative sense place where people meet and socialize
over drinks.


waterline (n.)

also water-line, 1620s, line where the water rises to on the hull of a ship afloat, from water (n.1)
+ line (n.).


waterlogged (adj.)

1759 (in an account of the Battle of Lagos in Universal Magazine, September), from water (n.1) + log
(n.); the notion apparently is of reduce to a log-like condition.     WATER LOGGED, the state of a
ship when, by receiving a great quantity of water into her hold, by leaking, &amp;c.;, she has
become heavy and inactive upon the sea, so as to yield without resistance to the efforts of every
wave rushing over her decks. As, in this dangerous situation, the center of gravity is no longer
fixed, but fluctuating from place to place, the stability of the ship is utterly lost. She is
therefore almost totally deprived of the use of her sails, which would operate to overset her, or
press the head under water. Hence there is no resource for the crew, except to free her by the
pumps, or to abandon her by the boats as soon as possible. [William Falconer, An Universal
Dictionary of the Marine, London, 1784]    The verb waterlog (1779) appears to be a back-formation.


Waterloo (n.)

village near Brussels; the great battle there took place June 18, 1815; extended sense of a final,
crushing defeat is first attested 1816 in letter of Lord Byron. The second element in the place name
is from Flemish loo sacred wood.


watermark (n.)

also water-mark, 1708, distinctive mark on paper, from water (n.1) + mark (n.1). Similar formation
in German wassermarke. Not produced by water, but probably so called because it looks like a wet
spot. The verb is recorded from 1866. Related: Watermarked.


watermelon (n.)

1610s, from water (n.1) + melon. So called for being full of thin juice. Compare French melon d'eau.


waterproof (adj.)

also water-proof, 1725, from water (n.1) + proof (n.). Noun meaning garment of waterproof material
is from 1799. The verb is first recorded 1843. Related: Waterproofed; waterproofing.


watershed (n.)

line separating waters flowing into different rivers, 1803, from water (n.1) + shed in a
topographical sense of ridge of high ground between two valleys or lower ground, a divide, perhaps
from shed (v.) in its extended noun sense of the part of the hair of the head (14c.). Perhaps a
loan-translation of German Wasser-scheide. Figurative sense is attested from 1878. Meaning ground of
a river system is from 1878.


waterspout (n.)

late 14c., drainpipe, from water (n.1) + spout (n.). Meaning whirlwind on open water is recorded
from 1738.


watertight (adj.)

also water-tight, late 14c., from water (n.1) + tight (adj.). Figurative use from 1640s.


waterway (n.)

Old English w&aelig;terweg; see water (n.1) + way (n.).


waterworks (n.)

mid-15c., from water (n.1) + work (n.).


watery (adj.)

Old English w&aelig;terig; see water (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Wateriness.


watt (n.)

unit of electrical power, 1882, in honor of James Watt (1736-1819), Scottish engineer and inventor.
The surname is from an old pet form of Walter and also is in Watson.


wattage (n.)

1897, from watt + -age.


wattle (n.2)

fleshy appendage below the neck of certain birds, 1510s (extended jocularly to human beings, 1560s),
of uncertain origin and of doubtful relationship to wattle (n.1). Related: Wattled.


wattle (n.1)

stakes interlaced with twigs and forming the framework of the wall of a building, Old English watol
hurdle, in plural twigs, thatching, tiles, related to we&eth;el bandage, from Proto-Germanic
*wadlaz, from PIE *au- (3) to weave (see weeds). Surviving in wattle-and-daub building material for
huts, etc. (1808).


Watusi (n.)

racial group in Rwanda and Burundi (also called Tutsi), 1899. As the name of a popular dance,
attested from 1964.


wave (v.)

move back and forth, Old English wafian to wave, fluctuate (related to w&aelig;fre wavering,
restless, unstable), from Proto-Germanic *wab- (cognates: Old Norse vafra to hover about, Middle
High German waben to wave, undulate), possibly from PIE root *webh- to move to and fro; to weave
(see weave (v.)). Transitive sense is from mid-15c.; meaning to make a sign by a wave of the hand is
from 1510s. Related: Waved; waving.    I was much further out than you thought  And not waving but
drowning.  [Stevie Smith]


wave (n.)

moving billow of water, 1520s, alteration (by influence of wave (v.)) of Middle English waw, which
is from Old English wagian to move to and fro (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German wag, Old Frisian
weg, Old Norse vagr water in motion, wave, billow, Gothic wegs tempest; see wag (v.)). The usual Old
English word for moving billow of water was y&eth;.    The hand motion meaning is recorded from
1680s; meaning undulating line is recorded from 1660s. Of people in masses, first recorded 1852; in
physics, from 1832. Sense in heat wave is from 1843. The crowd stunt in stadiums is attested under
this name from 1984, the thing itself said to have been done first Oct. 15, 1981, at the Yankees-A's
AL championship series game in the Oakland Coliseum; soon picked up and popularized at University of
Washington. To make waves cause trouble is attested from 1962.


wavelength (n.)

also wave-length, 1850, distance between peaks of a wave, from wave (n.) + length. Originally of
spectra; radio sense is attested by 1925. Figurative sense of mental harmony is recorded from 1927,
on analogy of radio waves.


waveless (adj.)

1590s, from wave (n.) + -less.


wavelet (n.)

1808, mainly in poetry, from wave (n.) + diminutive suffix -let.


waver (v.)

late 13c., weyveren, to show indecision, probably related to Old English w&aelig;fre restless,
wavering, from Proto-Germanic *w&aelig;braz (cognates: Middle High German wabern to waver, Old Norse
vafra to hover about), a frequentative form from the root of wave (v.). Related: Wavered; wavering.


wavy (adj.)

1580s, from wave (n.) + -y (2). Related: Waviness.


wax (n.)

Old English weax substance made by bees, from Proto-Germanic *wahsam (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High
German wahs, Old Norse vax, Dutch was, German Wachs), from PIE root *wokso- wax (cognates: Old
Church Slavonic vosk&#365;, Lithuanian va&#353;kas, Polish wosk, Russian vosk wax (but these may be
from Germanic). Used of other similar substances from 18c. Slang for gramophone record is from 1932,
American English (until the early 1940s, most original records were made by needle-etching onto a
waxy disk which was then metal-plated to make a master). Waxworks exhibition of wax figures
representing famous or notorious persons first recorded 1796.


wax (v.)

grow bigger or greater, Old English weaxan to increase, grow (class VII strong verb; past tense
weox, past participle weaxen), from Proto-Germanic *wahsan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
wahsan, Old Norse vaxa, Old Frisian waxa, Dutch wassen, German wachsen, Gothic wahsjan to grow,
increase), from PIE *weg- (cognates: Sanskrit vaksayati cause to grow, Greek auxein to increase),
extended form of root *aug- to increase (see augment). Strong conjugation archaic after 14c.
Related: Waxed; waxing.


wax-paper (n.)

1812, from wax (n.) + paper (n.).


waxen (adj.)

Old English wexen; see wax (n.) + -en (2).


waxwing (n.)

1817, from wax (n.) + wing (n.). So called for appendages at the tips of its feathers which look
like red sealing-wax.


waxy (adj.)

early 15c., made of wax, from wax (n.) + -y (2). Figurative use from 1590s. Meaning like wax is from
1799. Related: Waxiness.


way (n.)

Old English weg road, path; course of travel; room, space, freedom of movement; also, figuratively,
course of life especially, in plural, habits of life as regards moral, ethical, or spiritual
choices, from Proto-Germanic *wegaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Dutch weg, Old Norse vegr, Old Frisian
wei, Old High German weg, German Weg, Gothic wigs way), from PIE *wegh- to move (see weigh).    From
c.1300 as manner in which something occurs. Adverbial constructions attested since Middle English
include this way in this direction, that way in that direction, both from late 15c.; out of the way
remote (c.1300). In the way so placed as to impede is from 1560s.    From the course of life sense
comes way of life (c.1600), get (or have) one's way (1590s), have it (one's) way (1709). From the
course of travel sense comes the figurative go separate ways (1837); one way or (the) other (1550s);
have it both ways (1847); and the figurative sense of come a long way (1922).    Adverbial phrase
all the way completely, to conclusion is by 1915; sexual sense implied by 1924. Make way is from
c.1200. Ways and means resources at a person's disposal is attested from early 15c. Way out means of
exit is from 1926. Encouragement phrase way to go is short for that's the way to go.


way (adv.)

c.1200, short for away (adv.). Many expressions involving this are modern and American English
colloquial, such as way-out far off; way back a long time ago (1887); way off quite wrong (1892).
Any or all of these might have led to the slang adverbial meaning very, extremely, attested by 1984
(as in way cool).


way-out (adj.)

1868, far off, from way (adv.), short for away,  + out. Sense of original, bold, is jazz slang from
1940s, probably suggesting far off from what is conventional or expected.


wayfarer (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from way (n.) + fare (v.). Earlier was wayferer (late 14c.). The brand of
sunglasses (manufactured by Ray-Ban) dates to 1952.


wayfaring (n.)

14c., modification of Old English wegfarende wayfaring; see way (n.) + fare (v.).


waylay (v.)

to ambush, 1510s, from way (n.) + lay (v.), on model of Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wegelagen
besetting of ways, lying in wait with evil or hostile intent along public ways. Related: Waylaid;
waylaying.


Wayne

surname, by 1319, variant of Wain, representing wainwright, wainer (see wain) or perhaps one who
dwells by the tavern with the sign of the wain.


wayside (n.)

the side of the road, c.1400, from way (n.) + side (n.). To fall by the wayside is from Luke viii:5.


wayward (adj.)

late 14c., shortening of aweiward turned away, from way (adv.), shortening of away + -ward. Related:
Waywardly; waywardness.


we (pron.)

Old English we, first person plural pronoun, I and another or others, from Proto-Germanic *wiz
(cognates: Old Saxon wi, Old Norse ver, Danish vi, Old Frisian wi, Dutch wij, Old High German and
German wir, Gothic weis we), from PIE *we- (cognates: Sanskrit vayam, Old Persian vayam, Hittite
wesh we, Old Church Slavonic ve we two, Lithuanian vedu we two).    The royal we (use of plural
pronoun to denote oneself) is at least as old as Beowulf (c.725); use by writers to establish an
impersonal style is also from Old English; it was especially common 19c. in unsigned editorials, to
suggest staff consensus, and was lampooned as such since at least 1853 (see wegotism).


weak (adj.)

c.1300, from Old Norse veikr weak, cognate with Old English wac weak, pliant, soft, from Proto-
Germanic *waikwa- yield (cognates: Old Saxon wek, Swedish vek, Middle Dutch weec, Dutch week weak,
soft, tender, Old High German weih yielding, soft, German weich soft), from PIE root *weik- (4) to
bend, wind (see vicarious).    Sense of lacking authority is first recorded early 15c.; that of
lacking moral strength late 14c. In grammar, denoting a verb inflected by regular syllabic addition
rather than by change of the radical vowel, from 1833. Related: Weakly. Weak-kneed wanting in
resolve is from 1870.


weaken (v.)

late 14c., to become feeble, from weak + -en (1). Transitive sense from 1560s. Related: Weakened;
weakening.


weakfish (n.)

1838, from Dutch weekvisch, from week soft (see weak). So called because it does not pull hard when
hooked.


weakling (n.)

1520s, coined by Tyndale from weak (adj.) + -ling as a loan-translation of Luther's Weichling
effeminate man (from German weich soft) in I Cor. vi.9, where the Greek is malakoi, from malakos
soft, soft to the touch, Like the Lat. mollis, metaph. and in a bad sense: effeminate, of a
catamite, a male who submits his body to unnatural lewdness [Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the
New Testament].


weakness (n.)

c.1300, quality of being weak, from weak + -ness. Meaning a disadvantage, vulnerability is from
1590s. That of self-indulgent fondness is from 1712; meaning thing for which one has an indulgent
fondness is from 1822.


weal (n.1)

well-being, Old English wela wealth, in late Old English also welfare, well-being, from West
Germanic *welon-, from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (see will (v.)). Related to well (adv.).


weal (n.2)

raised mark on skin, 1821, alteration of wale (q.v.).


weald (n.)

Old English (West Saxon) weald forest, woodland, specifically the forest between the North and South
Downs in Sussex, Kent, and Surrey; a West Saxon variant of Anglian wald (see wold). Related:
Wealden.


wealth (n.)

mid-13c., happiness, also prosperity in abundance of possessions or riches, from Middle English wele
well-being (see weal (n.1)) on analogy of health.


wealthy (adj.)

late 14c., happy, prosperous, from wealth + -y (2). Meaning rich, opulent is from early 15c. Noun
meaning wealthy persons collectively is from late 14c.


wean (v.)

Old English wenian to accustom, habituate, from Proto-Germanic *wanjan (cognates: Old Norse venja,
Dutch wennen, Old High German giwennan, German gew&ouml;hnen to accustom), from PIE *won-eyo-, from
root *wen- (1) to desire, strive for. The sense of accustom a child to not suckling from the breast
in Old English was generally expressed by gewenian or awenian, which has a sense of unaccustom
(compare German abgew&ouml;hnen, entw&ouml;hnen to wean, literally to unaccustom). The prefix
subsequently wore off. Figurative extension to any pursuit or habit is from 1520s.


weanling (n.)

1530s, from wean + -ling.


weapon (n.)

Old English w&aelig;pen instrument of fighting and defense, sword, also penis, from Proto-Germanic
*w&aelig;pnan (cognates: Old Saxon wapan, Old Norse vapn, Danish vaaben, Old Frisian wepin, Middle
Dutch wapen, Old High German wafan, German Waffe weapon), from *webno-m, of unknown origin with no
cognates outside Germanic.


weaponry (n.)

1812, from weapon + -ry.


weapons of mass destruction (n.)

nuclear, biological and chemical weapons attested by 1946, apparently first used (in Russian) by the
Soviets.    The terms weapons of mass destruction and WMD mean chemical, biological, and nuclear
weapons, and chemical, biological, and nuclear materials used in the manufacture of such weapons.
[United States Code: Title 50, War and National Defense, chapter 43, Â§ 2902, 2009]


wear (v.)

Old English werian to clothe, put on, cover up, from Proto-Germanic *wazjan (cognates: Old Norse
verja, Old High German werian, Gothic gawasjan to clothe), from PIE *wos-eyo-, from root *wes- (4)
to clothe (cognates: Sanskrit vaste he puts on, vasanam garment; Avestan vah-; Greek esthes
clothing, hennymi to clothe, eima garment; Latin vestire to clothe; Welsh gwisgo, Breton gwiska; Old
English w&aelig;stling sheet, blanket; Hittite washshush garments, washanzi they dress).    The
Germanic forms were homonyms of the vb. for 'prevent, ward off, protect' (Goth. warjan, O.E. werian,
etc.), and this was prob. a factor in their early displacement in most of the Gmc. languages [Buck].
Shifted from a weak verb (past tense and past participle wered) to a strong one (past tense wore,
past participle worn) in 14c. on analogy of rhyming strong verbs such as bear and tear. Secondary
sense of use up, gradually damage (late 13c.) is from effect of continued use on clothes. To wear
down (transitive) overcome by steady force is from 1843. To wear off diminish by attrition or use is
from 1690s.


wear (n.)

action of wearing (clothes), mid-15c., from wear (v.). Meaning what one wears is 1560s. To be the
worse for wear is attested from 1782; noun phrase wear and tear is first recorded 1660s, implying
the sense process of being degraded by use.


wearisome (adj.)

mid-15c., weary, also causing weariness, from weary + -some (1).


weary (adj.)

Old English werig tired, exhausted; miserable, sad, related to worian to wander, totter, from Proto-
Germanic *worigaz (cognates: Old Saxon worig weary, Old High German wuorag intoxicated), of unknown
origin.


weary (v.)

Old English wergian to be or become tired (intransitive), gewergian to exhaust, to make tired
(transitive), from the source of weary (adj.). Related: Wearied; wearying.


weasel (n.)

Old English weosule, wesle weasel, from Proto-Germanic *wisulon (cognates: Old Norse visla, Middle
Dutch wesel, Dutch wezel, Old High German wisula, German Wiesel), probably related to Proto-Germanic
*wisand- bison (see bison), with a base sense of stinking animal, because both animals have a foul,
musky smell (compare Latin vissio stench). A John Wesilheued (John Weaselhead) turns up on the
Lincolnshire Assize Rolls for 1384, but the name seems not to have endured, for some reason.
Related: Weaselly.


weasel (v.)

to deprive (a word or phrase) of its meaning, 1900, from weasel (n.); so used because the weasel
sucks out the contents of eggs, leaving the shell intact. Both this and weasel-word are first
attested in The Stained-Glass Political Platform, a short story by Stewart Chaplin, first printed in
Century Magazine, June 1900:    Why, weasel words are words that suck all the life out of the words
next to them, just as a weasel sucks an egg and leaves the shell. If you heft the egg afterward it's
as light as a feather, and not very filling when you're hungry; but a basketful of them would make
quite a show, and would bamboozle the unwary.    They were picked up at once in American political
slang. The sense of extricate oneself (from a difficult place) like a weasel is first recorded 1925;
that of to evade and equivocate is from 1956. Related: Weasled; weasling.


weather (v.)

come through safely, 1650s, from weather (n.). The notion is of a ship riding out a storm. Sense of
wear away by exposure is from 1757. Related: Weathered; weathering. Old English verb wederian meant
exhibit a change of weather.


weather (n.)

Old English weder air, sky; breeze, storm, tempest, from Proto-Germanic *wedram wind, weather
(cognates: Old Saxon wedar, Old Norse ve&eth;r, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Dutch weder, Old High
German wetar, German Wetter storm, wind, weather), from PIE *we-dhro-, weather (cognates: Lithuanian
vetra storm, Old Church Slavonic vedro good weather), from root *we- to blow (see wind (n.1)).
Alteration of -d- to -th- begins late 15c., though such pronunciation may be older (see father
(n.)).    In nautical use, as an adjective, toward the wind (opposed to lee). Greek had words for
good weather (aithria, eudia) and words for storm and winter, but no generic word for weather until
kairos (literally time) began to be used as such in Byzantine times. Latin tempestas weather (see
tempest) also originally meant time; and words for time also came to mean weather in Irish (aimsir),
Serbo-Croatian (vrijeme), Polish (czas), etc. Weather-report is from 1863. Weather-breeder fine,
serene day which precedes and seems to prepare a storm is from 1650s.


weather-beaten (adj.)

1520s, from weather (n.) + beaten.


weather-cast (n.)

also weathercast, 1866, from weather (n.) + ending from forecast (n.).


weather-vane (n.)

also weathervane, mid-15c., wederfane; see weather (n.) + vane. Weathercock also is mid-15c.
(wedurkoke).


weatherize (v.)

1946, from weather (n.) + -ize. Related: Weatherized; weatherizing.


weatherman (n.)

one who observes the weather, 1869, from weather (n.) + man (n.). Weather-prophet is from 1784 as
barometer; 1827 as person who predicts the weather.    Clerk of the Weather, I deplore  That all thy
greatness is no more,  As should a gentle bard;  That Nature, or that Nature's law  When you
politely called for thaw,  Gave frost was rather hard.  [from Consolatory Address to Mr. Murphy, the
Weather Prophet, Colburn's New Monthly Magazine, 1838]


weave (v.1)

Old English wefan to weave, form by interlacing yarn, figuratively devise, contrive, arrange  (class
V strong verb; past tense w&aelig;f, past participle wefen), from Proto-Germanic *weban (cognates:
Old Norse vefa, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch weven, Old High German weban, German weben to
weave), from PIE *webh- to weave; also to move quickly (cognates: Sanskrit ubhnati he laces
together, Persian baftan to weave, Greek hyphe, hyphos web, Old English webb web).    The form of
the past tense altered in Middle English from wave to wove. Extended sense of combine into a whole
is from late 14c.; meaning go by twisting and turning is from 1640s. Related: Wove; woven; weaving.


weave (n.)

1580s, something woven, from weave (v.). Meaning method or pattern of weaving is from 1888.


weave (v.2)

c.1200, to move from one place to another, of uncertain origin, perhaps from weave (v.1). From early
14c. as move to and fro; 1590s as move side to side. Use in boxing is from 1818. Related: Weaved;
weaving.


weaver (n.)

mid-14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), agent noun from weave (v.). The weaver-bird (1826) so called from
the ingenuity of its nests.


web (n.)

Old English webb woven fabric, woven work, tapestry, from Proto-Germanic *wabjam fabric, web
(cognates: Old Saxon webbi, Old Norse vefr, Dutch webbe, Old High German weppi, German gewebe web),
from PIE *webh- to weave (see weave (v.)).    Meaning spider's web is first recorded early 13c.
Applied to the membranes between the toes of ducks and other aquatic birds from 1570s. Internet
sense is from 1992, shortened from World Wide Web (1990). Web browser, web page both also attested
1990.


webbed (adj.)

1660s, from web.


Weber

surname attested from 1255; literally weaver (see web).


weblog (n.)

by 1994; see blog.


webmaster (n.)

1993, from web in the Internet sense + master (n.).


website (n.)

also web site, 1994, from web in the Internet sense + site.


webster (n.)

a weaver, Old English webbestre a female weaver, from web (q.v.) + fem. suffix -ster. Noah Webster's
dictionary first published 1828.


wed (v.)

Old English weddian to pledge oneself, covenant to do something, vow; betroth, marry, also unite
(two other people) in a marriage, conduct the marriage ceremony, from Proto-Germanic *wadi-
(cognates: Old Norse ve&eth;ja, Danish vedde to bet, wager, Old Frisian weddia to promise, Gothic
ga-wadjon to betroth), from PIE root *wadh- (1) to pledge, to redeem a pledge (cognates: Latin vas,
genitive vadis bail, security, Lithuanian vaduoti to redeem a pledge).    The sense has remained
closer to pledge in other Germanic languages (such as German Wette a bet, wager); development to
marry is unique to English. Originally 'make a woman one's wife by giving a pledge or earnest
money', then used of either party [Buck]. Passively, of two people, to be joined as husband and
wife, from c.1200. Related: Wedded; wedding.


wedding (n.)

Old English weddung state of being wed; pledge, betrothal; action of marrying, verbal noun from wed
(v.). Meaning nuptials, ceremony of marriage is recorded from early 13c.; the usual Old English word
for the ceremony was bridelope, literally bridal run, in reference to conducting the bride to her
new home. Wedding ring is from late 14c.; wedding cake is recorded from 1640s, as a style of
architecture from 1879. Wedding-dress attested from 1779; wedding-reception from 1856.


wedge (n.)

Old English wecg a wedge, from Proto-Germanic *wagjaz (cognates: Old Norse veggr, Middle Dutch
wegge, Dutch wig, Old High German weggi wedge, dialectal German Weck wedge-shaped bread roll), of
uncertain origin; perhaps related to Latin vomer plowshare. From 1610s in reference to other things
shaped like a wedge. Of women's shoes or shoe-heels, from 1939. Wedge issue is attested from 1999.


wedge (v.)

early 15c., jam in place with a wedge; tighten with a wedge, from wedge (n.). Figurative sense drive
or pack (into) is from 1720. Meaning split (something) apart with a wedge attested by 1853. Related:
Wedged; wedging.


wedgie (n.)

1940, wedge-heeled shoe, from wedge (n.) + -ie. The underwear prank so called by 1970s, from the
effect it gives the victim.


wedgwood (n.)

type of English pottery, 1787, from Josiah Wedgwood (1730-1795), English potter.


wedlock (n.)

Old English wedlac pledge-giving, marriage vow, from wed + -lac, noun suffix meaning actions or
proceedings, practice, attested in about a dozen Old English compounds (feohtlac warfare), but this
is the only surviving example. Suffix altered by folk etymology through association with lock (n.1).
Meaning condition of being married is recorded from early 13c.


Wednesday (n.)

fourth day of the week, Old English wodnesd&aelig;g Woden's day, a Germanic loan-translation of
Latin dies Mercurii day of Mercury (compare Old Norse O&eth;insdagr, Swedish Onsdag, Old Frisian
Wonsdei, Middle Dutch Wudensdach). For Woden, see Odin.    Contracted pronunciation is recorded from
15c. The Odin-based name is missing in German (mittwoch, from Old High German mittwocha, literally
mid-week), probably by influence of Gothic, which seems to have adopted a pure ecclesiastical (i.e.
non-astrological) week from Greek missionaries. The Gothic model also seems to be the source of
Polish &#347;roda, Russian sreda Wednesday, literally middle.


wee (adj.)

extremely small, mid-15c., from earlier noun use in sense of quantity, amount (such as a littel wei
a little thing or amount, c.1300), from Old English w&aelig;ge weight (see weigh). Adjectival use
wee bit apparently developed as parallel to such forms as a bit thing a little thing. Wee hours is
attested by 1891, from Scottish phrase wee sma' hours (1819). Wee folk faeries is recorded from
1819. Weeny tiny, small is from 1790.


weed (n.)

plant not valued for use or beauty, Old English weod, uueod grass, herb, weed, from Proto-Germanic
*weud- (cognates: Old Saxon wiod, East Frisian wiud), of unknown origin. Also applied to trees that
grow abundantly. Meaning tobacco is from c.1600; that of marijuana is from 1920s. The chemical weed-
killer is attested by 1885.


weed (v.)

to clear the ground of weeds, late Old English weodian to weed, from the source of weed (n.).
Figurative use by c.1400. Related: Weeded; weeding; weeder.


weeds (n.)

garments (now surviving, if at all, in widow's weeds), plural of archaic weed, from Old English
w&aelig;d, w&aelig;de robe, dress, apparel, garment, clothing, from Proto-Germanic *wedo (cognates:
Old Saxon wadi, Old Frisian wede garment, Old Norse va&eth; cloth, texture, Old High German wat
garment), probably from PIE *wedh-, extended form of root *au- (3) to weave. Archaic since early
19c.


weedy (adj.)

early 15c., from weed + -y (2). In old slang, in reference to horses, not of good blood or strength,
scraggy, worthless for breeding or racing, from 1800; hence, of persons, thin and weakly (1852).


week (n.)

Old English wucu, wice, etc., from Proto-Germanic *wikon (cognates: Old Norse vika, Old Frisian
wike, Middle Dutch weke, Old High German wecha, German woche), probably originally with the sense of
a turning or succession (compare Gothic wikon in the course of, Old Norse vika sea-mile, originally
change of oar, Old English wican yield, give way), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (see
vicarious). The vowel sound seems to have been uncertain in Old and Middle English and -e-, -i-,
-o-, -u-, -y-, and various diphthongs are attested for it.    Meaning primarily 'change,
alteration,' the word may once have denoted some earlier time division, such as the 'change of moon,
half month,' ... but there is no positive evidence of this [Buck]. No evidence of a native Germanic
week before contact with the Romans. The seven-day week is ancient, probably originating from the
28-day lunar cycle, divisible into four periods of seven day, at the end of each of which the moon
enters a new phase. Reinforced during the spread of Christianity by the ancient Jewish seven-day
week.    As a Roman astrological convention it was borrowed by other European peoples; the Germanic
tribes substituting their own deities for those of the Romans, without regard to planets. The
Coligny calendar suggests a Celtic division of the month into halves; the regular Greek division of
the month was into three decades; and the Romans also had a market week of nine days.    Greek
planetary names [for the days of the week] ... are attested for the early centuries of our era, but
their use was apparently restricted to certain circles; at any rate they never became popular. In
Rome, on the other hand, the planetary names became the established popular terms, too strongly
intrenched to be displaced by the eccl[esiastical] names, and spreading through most of western
Europe. [Buck]    Phrase a week, as in eight days a week recorded by 1540s; see a- (1).


weekday (n.)

Old English wicud&aelig;ge, wucud&aelig;ge day of the week (similar formation in Old High German
wehhatag, Old Norse vikudagr). See week + day. In Middle English, any day other than Sunday.


weekend (n.)

also week-end, 1630s, from week + end (n.). Originally a northern word (referring to the period from
Saturday noon to Monday morning); it became general after 1878. As an adjective, only on weekends,
it is recorded from 1935. Long weekend attested from 1900; in reference to Great Britain in the
period between the world wars, 1944.


weekly

mid-15c. (adv.); late 15c. (adj.), from week + -ly (2). As a noun meaning weekly newspaper it is
recorded from 1833.


weel (n.)

deep pool, Old English w&aelig;l whirlpool, eddy; pool; sea, cognate with West Frisian wiel, Old Low
Frankish wal, Middle Dutch wael, German wehl, wehle.


ween (v.)

be of the opinion, have the notion (archaic), Old English wenan to fancy, imagine, believe; expect,
hope, from Proto-Germanic *wenjan to hope (cognates: Old Saxon wanian, Old Norse v&aelig;na, Old
Frisian wena, Old High German wanen, German w&auml;hnen, Gothic wenjan to expect, suppose, think),
from *woeniz expectation, from PIE root *wen- (1) to wish, desire, strive for (see Venus). Archaic
since 17c.


weenie (n.)

frankfurter, 1906, with slang sense of penis following soon after, from German wienerwurst Vienna
sausage (see wiener). Meaning ineffectual person, effeminate young man is slang from 1963;
pejorative sense via penis shape, or perhaps from weenie in the sense of small (see wee).


weep (v.)

Old English wepan shed tears, cry; bewail, mounr over; complain (class VII strong verb; past tense
weop, past participle wopen), from Proto-Germanic *wopjan (cognates: Old Norse op, Old High German
wuof shout, shouting, crying, Old Saxon wopian, Gothic wopjan to shout, cry out, weep), from PIE
*wab- to cry, scream (cognates: Latin vapulare to be flogged; Old Church Slavonic vupiti to call,
vypu gull). Of water naturally forming on stones, walls, etc., from c.1400. Related: Wept; weeping;
weeper.


weeping (adj.)

late Old English, present participle adjective from weep (v.). Used of various trees whose branches
arch downward and suggest drooping, such as weeping elm (c.1600); weeping cherry (1824). Weeping
willow (French saule pleureur, German trauerweide) is recorded from 1731. The tree is native to
Asia; the first brought to England were imported 1748, from the Euphrates. It replaced the cypress
as a funerary emblem.


weepy (adj.)

1825, from weep + -y (2). Related: Weepily; weepiness. Weepie (n.) sentimental film is from 1928.


weet (v.)

to know (archaic), 1540s, from Middle English weten, variant of witen to know (see wit (v.)).


weevil (n.)

Old English wifel small beetle, from Proto-Germanic *webilaz (cognates: Old Saxon wibil, Old High
German wibil, German Wiebel beetle, chafer, Old Norse tordyfill dung beetle), cognate with
Lithuanian vabalas beetle, from PIE root *webh- to weave, also to move quickly (see weave (v.)). The
sense gradually narrowed by 15c. to a particular kind of beetle that, in larval or adult stages,
bores into plants, often destroying them.


weft (n.)

threads which run across the web from side to side, Old English weft, wefta weft, related to wefan
to weave, from Proto-Germanic *weftaz (see weave (v.)).


wegotism (n.)

1797, from we + egotism; an obtrusive and too frequent use of the first person plural by a speaker
or writer [OED].


Wehrmacht (n.)

the armed forces of Germany, 1935, from German Wehrmacht (name of the armed forces 1921-1945), from
Wehr defense (see weir) + Macht might (see might (n.)).


Weigela (n.)

shrub genus, 1846, from the name of German physician and botanist C.E. Weigel (1748-1831).


weigh (v.)

Old English wegan (class V strong verb, past tense w&#230;g, past participle w&#230;gon) find the
weight of, measure; have weight; lift, carry, support, sustain, bear; move, from Proto-Germanic
*wegan (cognates: Old Saxon wegan, Old Frisian wega, Dutch wegen to weigh, Old Norse vega, Old High
German wegan to move, carry, weigh, German wiegen to weigh), from PIE *wegh- to move (cognates:
Sanskrit vahati carries, conveys, vahitram vessel, ship; Avestan vazaiti he leads, draws; Greek
okhos carriage; Latin vehere to carry, convey; Old Church Slavonic vesti to carry, convey;
Lithuanian ve&#382;u to carry, convey; Old Irish fecht campaign, journey).    The original sense was
of motion, which led to that of lifting, then to that of measure the weight of. The older sense of
lift, carry survives in the nautical phrase weigh anchor. Figurative sense of to consider, ponder
(in reference to words, etc.) is recorded from mid-14c. To weigh in in the literal sense is from
1868, originally of jockeys; figurative meaning bring one's influence to bear is from 1909.


weight (n.)

Old English gewiht weighing, weight, downward force of a body, heaviness, from Proto-Germanic
*wihti- (cognates: Old Norse v&aelig;tt, Danish vegt, Old Frisian wicht, Middle Dutch gewicht,
German Gewicht), from *weg- (see weigh).    Figurative sense of burden is late 14c. To lose weight
get thinner is recorded from 1961. Weight Watcher as a trademark name dates from 1960. To pull one's
weight (1921) is from rowing. To throw (one's) weight around figuratively is by 1922. Weight-
training is from 1945. Weight-lifting is from 1885; weight-lifter (human) from 1893.


weight (v.)

to load with weight, 1747 (figuratively, of the mind, from 1640s), from weight (n.). Of horses in a
handicap race, 1846. Sense in statistics is recorded from 1901. Related: Weighted; weighting.


weightage (n.)

1893, from weight (n.) + -age.


weightless (adj.)

having no weight, 1540s, from weight (n.) + -less. Related: Weightlessly; weightlessness (1867).


weighty (adj.)

late 14c., heavy; late 15c., important, serious, grave; from weight (n.) + -y (2). Related:
Weightiness.


Weimar (adj.)

in reference to the pre-1933 democratic government of Germany, 1932, from name of city in Thuringia
where German constitution was drawn up in 1919. The place name is a compound of Old High German wih
holy + mari lake (see mere (n.)).


Weimaraner (n.)

dog breed, 1943, from Weimar, german city, + German suffix -aner indicating of this place.
Originally bred as a hunting dog in the Weimar region.


weir (n.)

Old English wer dam, fence, enclosure, especially one for catching fish (related to werian dam up),
from Proto-Germanic *wer-jon- (cognates: Old Norse ver, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch were, Dutch
weer, Old High German wari, German Wehr defense, protection, Gothic warjan to defend, protect), from
PIE *wer- (5) to cover, shut (cognates: Sanskrit vatah enclosure, vrnoti covers, wraps, shuts;
Lithuanian u&#382;veriu to shut, to close; Old Persian *pari-varaka protective; Latin (op)erire to
cover, (ap)erire open, uncover (with ap- off, away); Old Church Slavonic vora sealed, closed, vreti
shut; Old Irish feronn field, properly enclosed land).


weird (adj.)

c.1400, having power to control fate, from wierd (n.), from Old English wyrd fate, chance, fortune;
destiny; the Fates, literally that which comes, from Proto-Germanic *wurthiz (cognates: Old Saxon
wurd, Old High German wurt fate, Old Norse ur&eth;r fate, one of the three Norns), from PIE *wert-
to turn, to wind, (cognates: German werden, Old English weor&eth;an to become), from root *wer- (3)
to turn, bend (see versus). For sense development from turning to becoming, compare phrase turn into
become.    The sense uncanny, supernatural developed from Middle English use of weird sisters for
the three fates or Norns (in Germanic mythology), the goddesses who controlled human destiny. They
were portrayed as odd or frightening in appearance, as in Macbeth (and especially in 18th and 19th
century productions of it), which led to the adjectival meaning odd-looking, uncanny (1815); odd,
strange, disturbingly different (1820). Related: Weirdly; weirdness.


weirdo (n.)

strange person, 1955, from weird. Compare earlier Scottish weirdie young man with long hair and a
beard (1894).


welch (v.)

1857, racing slang, to refuse or avoid payment of money laid as a bet, probably a disparaging use of
the national name Welsh. Related: Welched; welching.


welcome (n.)

Old English wilcuma welcome! exclamation of kindly greeting, from earlier wilcuma (n.) welcome
guest, literally one whose coming suits another's will or wish, from willa pleasure, desire, choice
(see will (n.)) + cuma guest, related to cuman (see come). Similar formation in Old High German
willicomo, Middle Dutch wellecome. Meaning entertainment or public reception as a greeting is
recorded from 1530. The adjective is from Old English wilcuma. You're welcome as a formulaic
response to thank you is attested from 1907. Welcome mat is from 1908; welcome wagon is attested
from 1940.


welcome (v.)

Old English wilcumian to welcome, greet gladly, from wilcuma (see welcome (n.)). Related: Welcomed;
welcoming.


weld (n.2)

joint formed by welding, 1831, from weld (v.).


weld (v.)

1590s, unite or consolidate by hammering or compression, often after softening by heating,
alteration of well (v.) to boil, rise; influenced by past participle form welled. Related: Welded;
welding.


weld (n.1)

plant (Resedo luteola) producing yellow dye, late 14c., from Old English *wealde, perhaps a variant
of Old English wald forest (see wold). Spanish gualda, French gaude are Germanic loan-words.


welder (n.)

1828, agent noun from weld (v.).


welfare (n.)

c.1300, from Old English wel faran condition of being or doing well, from wel (see well (adv.)) +
faran get along (see fare (v.)). Similar formation in Old Norse velfer&eth;. Meaning social concern
for the well-being of children, the unemployed, etc. is first attested 1904; meaning organized
effort to provide for maintenance of members of a group is from 1918. Welfare state is recorded from
1941.


welkin (n.)

sky (poetic), Old English wolcen cloud, also sky, heavens, from Proto-Germanic *welk- (cognates: Old
Saxon wolkan, Old Frisian wolken, Middle Dutch wolke, Dutch wolk, Old High German wolka, German
Wolke cloud, from PIE *welg- wet (cognates: Lithuanian vilgyti to moisten, Old Church Slavonic vlaga
moisture, Czech vlhky damp).


well (adv.)

in a satisfactory manner, Old English wel abundantly, very, very much; indeed, to be sure; with good
reason; nearly, for the most part, from Proto-Germanic *welo- (cognates: Old Saxon wela, Old Norse
vel, Old Frisian wel, Dutch wel, Old High German wela, German wohl, Gothic waila well), from PIE
root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit prati varam at will, Old Church Slavonic vole well,
Welsh gwell better, Latin velle to wish, will, Old English willan to wish; see will (v.)).    Also
used in Old English as an interjection and an expression of surprise. The adjective was in Old
English in the sense in good fortune, happy, from the adverb; sense of satisfactory is from late
14c.; agreeable to wish or desire is from mid-15c.; in good health, not ailing is from 1550s. Well-
to-do prosperous is recorded from 1825.


well (v.)

to spring, rise, gush, Old English wiellan (Anglian w&aelig;llan), causative of weallan to boil,
bubble up, rise (in reference to a river) (class VII strong verb; past tense weoll, past participle
weallen), from Proto-Germanic *wall- roll (cognates: Old Saxon wallan, Old Norse vella, Old Frisian
walla, Old High German wallan, German wallen, Gothic wulan to bubble, boil), from PIE root *wel- (3)
to turn, roll (see volvox), on notion of roiling or bubbling water.


well (n.)

hole dug for water, spring of water, Old English wielle (West Saxon), welle (Anglian) spring of
water, fountain, from wiellan (see well (v.)). As soon as a spring begins to be utilized as a source
of water-supply it is more or less thoroughly transformed into a well [Century Dictionary].
Figurative sense of source from which anything is drawn was in Old English.


well-acquainted (adj.)

1728, having good acquaintance with, from well (adv.) + acquainted.


well-adjusted (adj.)

1735, in reference to mechanisms, etc., from well (adv.) + past participle of adjust (v.). In
reference to emotional balance, recorded from 1959.


well-balanced (adj.)

1620s, from well (adv.) + past participle of balance (v.).


well-behaved (adj.)

1590s, from well (adv.) + past participle of behave (v.).


well-being (n.)

1610s, from well (adv.) + gerundive of be.


well-beloved (adj.)

late 14c., from well (adv.) + beloved.


well-born (adj.)

Old English welboren; see well (adv.) + born.


well-bred (adj.)

1590s, from well (adv.) + bred.


well-done (adj.)

c.1200, wise, prudent, from well (adv.) + done. Meaning thoroughly cooked, in reference to meat, is
attested from 1747. Well done! as an exclamation of approval is recorded from mid-15c.


well-earned (adj.)

1730, from well (adv.) + past participle of earn (v.).


well-endowed (adj.)

1680s, with ample material endowments, from well (adv.) + past participle of endow (v.). Sexual
sense is attested from 1951.


well-fed (adj.)

mid-14c., from well (adv.) + past participle of feed (v.).


well-founded (adj.)

late 14c., from well (adv.) + past participle of found (v.1).


well-heeled (adj.)

well-off, having much money, in good circumstances; also well-equipped, 1872, American English slang
(originally in the money sense), from well (adv.) + colloquial sense of heeled. [A]pplied to a
player at cards who has a good hand, to a person who possesses plenty of money, or to a man who is
well armed [Century Dictionary]. From 1817 in a literal sense, in reference to shoes.


well-hung (adj.)

1610s, in male genital sense, from well (adv.) + hung (adj.).


well-informed (adj.)

mid-15c., from well (adv.) + past participle of inform (v.).


well-intentioned (adj.)

1590s, from well (adv.) + intentioned (see intention).


well-kept (adj.)

c.1400, from well (adv.) + past participle of keep (v.).


well-known (adj.)

late 15c., from well (adv.) + past participle of know (v.).


well-mannered (adj.)

late 14c., moral, virtuous, from well (adv.) + mannered. Meaning with good manners is from 1540s.


well-meaning (adj.)

late 14c., from well (adv.) + present participle of mean (v.).


well-meant (adj.)

late 15c., from well (adv.) + past participle of mean (v.).


well-nigh (adv.)

Old English wel neah, from well (adv.) + nigh.


well-off (adj.)

1733, comfortable,  from well (adv.) + off. Meaning prosperous, not poor is recorded from 1849.


well-ordered (adj.)

c.1600, from well (adv.) + past participle of order (v.).


well-read (adj.)

1590s, from well (adv.) + read (adj.).


well-regulated (adj.)

1709 (Shaftsbury), from well (adv.) + past participle of regulate (v.).


well-respected (adj.)

1590s, from well (adv.) + past participle of respect (v.).


well-rounded (adj.)

1796, symmetrically proportioned, complete in all parts, from well (adv.) + past participle of round
(v.). Figurative sense is from mid-19c.


well-spoken (adj.)

mid-15c., from well (adv.) + spoken.


well-wisher (n.)

1580s, from well (adv.) + agent noun from wish (v.). Well-wishing is recorded from 1560s.


wellaway

mid-13c., alteration (by influence of Scandinavian forms) of Old English wa la wa, literally woe,
lo, woe! from wa woe (see woe).


Wellington (n.)

boot so called from 1817, for Arthur, 1st Duke of Wellington (1769-1852), who also in his lifetime
had a style of coat, hat, and trousers named for him as well as a variety of apple and pine tree.


wellness (n.)

1650s, from well (adv.) + -ness.


wellspring (n.)

Old English welspryng living spring, fountainhead, literal and figurative; see well (n.) + spring
(n.2).


Welsh (adj.)

Old English Wielisc, Wylisc (West Saxon), Welisc, W&aelig;lisc (Anglian and Kentish) foreign;
British (not Anglo-Saxon), Welsh; not free, servile, from Wealh, Walh Celt, Briton, Welshman, non-
Germanic foreigner; in Tolkien's definition, common Gmc. name for a man of what we should call
Celtic speech, but also applied in Germanic languages to speakers of Latin, hence Old High German
Walh, Walah Celt, Roman, Gaulish, and Old Norse Val-land France, Valir Gauls, non-Germanic
inhabitants of France (Danish v&aelig;lsk Italian, French, southern); from Proto-Germanic
*Walkhiskaz, from a Celtic tribal name represented by Latin Volc&aelig; (Caesar) ancient Celtic
tribe in southern Gaul.    As a noun, the Britons, also the Welsh language, both from Old English.
The word survives in Wales, Cornwall, Walloon, walnut, and in surnames Walsh and Wallace. Borrowed
in Old Church Slavonic as vlachu, and applied to the Rumanians, hence Wallachia. Among the English,
Welsh was used disparagingly of inferior or substitute things (such as Welsh cricket louse (1590s);
Welsh comb thumb and four fingers (1796), and compare welch (v.)). Welsh rabbit is from 1725, also
perverted by folk-etymology as Welsh rarebit (1785).


Welshman (n.)

Old English Wilisc mon; see Welsh + man (n.).


welt (n.)

early 15c., a shoemaker's term, perhaps related to Middle English welten to overturn, roll over
(c.1300), from Old Norse velta to roll (related to welter (v.)). Meaning ridge on the skin from a
wound is first recorded 1800.


weltanschauung (n.)

1868 (William James), from German Weltanschauung, from welt world (see world) + anschauung
perception (related to English show).


welter (v.)

to roll or twist, early 14c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German welteren to roll, from Proto-
Germanic *waltijan (cognates: Old English wieltan, Old Norse velta, Old High German walzan to turn,
revolve, German w&auml;lzen to roll, Gothic waltjan to roll), from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn,
revolve (see volvox). Related: Weltered; weltering.


welter (n.)

1590s, confusion, from welter (v.). The meaning confused mass is first recorded 1851.


welterweight (n.)

1831, heavyweight horseman, later boxer or wrestler of a certain weight (1896), from earlier welter
heavyweight horseman or boxer (1804), possibly from welt (v.) beat severely (c.1400).    ... but at
the end of the first German mile, Nature gave way, and this excellent mare was obliged to knock
under to the extraordinary exertions she had made, and to the welter weight she carried, upwards of
13 stone. [The Sporting Magazine, September 1831]


weltschmerz (n.)

pessimism about life, 1872 (1863 as a German word in English), from German Weltschmerz, coined 1810
by Jean Paul Richter, from Welt world (see world) + Schmerz pain (see smart (n.)). Popularized in
German by Heine.


wen (n.)

Old English wenn a wen, tumor, wart, from Proto-Germanic *wanja- a swelling (cognates: Middle Low
German wene, Dutch wen, dialectal German Wenne), from PIE *wen- (2) to beat, wound (see wound (n.)).


Wenceslas

masc. proper name, from Medieval Latin Venceslaus (modern Czech Vaclav), from Old Czech
Veceslav&#365;, literally having greater glory, from Slavic *vetye- greater + *-slavu fame, glory,
from PIE *klou-, from root *kle- to hear (see listen).


wench (n.)

late 13c., wenche  girl, young woman, especially if unmarried, also female infant, shortened from
wenchel child, also in Middle English girl, maiden, from Old English wencel, probably related to
wancol unsteady, fickle, weak, from Proto-Germanic *wankila- (cognates: Old Norse vakr child, weak
person, Old High German wanchal fickle), from PIE *weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).    The
wenche is nat dead, but slepith. [Wyclif, Matt. ix:24, c.1380]    In Middle English occasionally
with disparaging suggestion, and secondary sense of concubine, strumpet is attested by mid-14c. Also
serving-maid, bondwoman, young woman of a humble class (late 14c.). It retained this in the 19c.
U.S. South in reference to slave women of any age.


wench (v.)

to associate with common women, 1590s, from wench (n.). Related: Wenched; wencher; wenching.


wend (v.)

to proceed on, Old English wendan to turn, direct, go; convert, translate, from Proto-Germanic
*wanjan (cognates: Old Saxon wendian, Old Norse venda, Swedish v&#228;nda, Old Frisian wenda, Dutch
wenden, German wenden, Gothic wandjan to turn), causative of PIE *wendh- to turn, wind, weave (see
wind (v.1)). Surviving only in to wend one's way, and in hijacked past tense form went. Originally
weak; strong past participle is from c.1200.


Wend (n.)

member of a Slavic people of eastern Germany, 1610s (implied in Wendish), from German Wende, from
Old High German Winida, related to Old English Winedas Wends, of uncertain origin. Perhaps
ultimately from Celtic *vindo- white, or from PIE *wen-eto- beloved, from *wen- (1) to desire.
Related: Wendish.


Wendy

as a woman's given name, apparently coined by James M. Barrie (Peter and Wendy, 1911); it first
registers on the U.S. Social Security list of popular baby names in 1936 and was in the top 40 names
for girls born in the U.S. from 1965 to 1976


went (v.)

past tense of go; originally the strong past tense and past participle of wend (v.). The original
past tense forms of wend were wende, wended, but variants wente, went developed from c.1200 and
these then began to replace older past tenses of go. By c.1500 they were fully employed in that
function, and wend was given a new past tense form, wended.


were (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ron (past plural indicative of wesan) and w&aelig;re (second person singular
past indicative); see was. The forms illustrate Verner's Law (named for Danish linguist Karl Verner,
1875), which predicts the s to z sound shift, and rhotacism, which changed z to r. Wast (second
person singular) was formed 1500s on analogy of be/beest, displacing were. An intermediate form,
wert, was used in literature 17c.-18c., before were reclaimed the job.


werewolf (n.)

late Old English werewulf person with the power to turn into a wolf, from wer man, male person (see
virile) + wulf (see wolf (n.); also see here for a short discussion of the mythology). Belief in
them was widespread in the Middle Ages. Similar formation in Middle Dutch weerwolf, Old High German
werwolf, Swedish varulf. In the ancient Persian calendar, the eighth month (October-November) was
Varkazana-, literally (Month of the) Wolf-Men.


wergeld (n.)

set sum of money as the value of a free man, based on social rank, and paid as compensation for his
murder or injury in discharge of punishment or vengeance, Old English wergeld (Anglian, Kentish),
wergield (West Saxon), from wer man (see virile) + geld payment, tribute (see geld (n.)).


Werther

love-lorn hero of Goethe's Die Leiden des jungen Werthers (The Sorrows of Young Werther), popular
and influential short novel published in 1774. His name was used as a type of morbid sentimentality.


Wesleyan (adj.)

pertaining to Wesley, 1771, in reference to John Wesley (1703-1791), founder of Methodism. The
surname is from various places in England named West Leigh (or some variant). Related: Wesleyanism.


Wessex

Anglo-Saxon kingdom in southern England, literally (land of the) West Saxons; see west + Saxon.
Modern use in reference to southwestern England (excluding Cornwall) is from Hardy's novels.


west

Old English west (adv.) in or toward the west, in a westerly direction, from Proto-Germanic *west-
(cognates: Old Norse vestr, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Dutch west, Old High German -west, only in
compounds, German west), from PIE *wes-, reduced form of *wes-pero- evening, night (cognates: Greek
hesperos, Latin vesper evening, west; see vesper). Compare also High German dialectal abend west,
literally evening. French ouest, Spanish oeste are from English.    As an adjective from late 14c.;
as a noun from late 12c. West used in geopolitical sense from World War I (Britain, France, Italy,
as opposed to Germany and Austria-Hungary); as contrast to Communist Russia (later to the Soviet
bloc) it is first recorded in 1918. West Coast of the U.S. is from 1850; West End of London is from
1776; West Side of Manhattan is from, 1858. The U.S. West western states and territories originally
(1790s) meant those just west of the Alleghenies; the sense gradually extended as the country grew.
To go west die was common during the Great War [OED, 2nd ed.], perhaps from Celtic imagery or from
the notion of the setting sun. In U.S. use, in a literal sense emigrate to the western states or
territories, from 1830.


West Bank

in reference to the former Jordanian territory west of the River Jordan, 1967.


West Indies

Caribbean islands explored by Columbus, 1550s, reflecting the belief (or hope) that they were
western outliers of the Indies of Asia. Related: West Indian, which is from 1580s in reference to
the native inhabitants, 1650s in reference to European settlers there, and 1928 in reference to
people of West Indian ancestry.


wester (v.)

to go west, travel westward, late 14c., from west (adv.), and compare westerly. Related: Westered;
westering.


westerlies (n.)

prevailing winds in certain latitudes, 1876, from westerly (see west).


westerly (adv.)

late 15c., in a westerly direction; facing toward the west, from Middle English wester (adj.)
western (mid-14c.), from Old English westra, variant of westerne (see western) + -ly (2). As an
adjective, coming from the west, 1570s. Contradictory sense of going to the west attested by 1630s.


western (adj.)

toward or of the west, late Old English westerne western, westerly, coming from the west, from west
+ -erne, suffix denoting direction. The noun meaning book or movie about the Old West is first
attested 1909. Westerner is from 1837 as person from the U.S. West, 1880 as Euro-American, as
opposed to Oriental.


westernization (n.)

also westernisation, 1873, noun of action from westernize (v.). Earliest reference is to Japan.
[The mikado's] late rapid and radical progress in westernization (to evolve a word that the Japanese
will need) justifies great expectations of him. [Coates Kinney, Japanning the English Language, The
Galaxy, July-Dec. 1873]


westernize (adj.)

also westernise, 1837, originally in reference to the U.S. West, from western + -ize.    Emigrants
from Europe have brought the peculiarities of the nations and countries from whence they have
originated, but are fast losing their national manners and feelings, and, to use a provincial term,
will soon become westernized. [J.M. Peck, A New Guide for Emigrants to the West, Boston, 1837]    In
reference to Europeanizing of Middle Eastern or Asian places and persons, from 1867. Related:
Westernized; westernizing.


westernmost (adj.)

1550s, from western + -most.


Westphalia

former duchy of Germany; the treaties which ended the Thirty Years War were signed there Oct. 24,
1648. Related: Westphalian.


westward (adv.)

toward the west, Old English westweard; see west + -ward.


wet (adj.)

Old English w&aelig;t moist, rainy, liquid, also as a noun. moisture, liquid drink, from Proto-
Germanic *weta- (source also of Old Frisian wet ). Also from cognate Old Norse vatr; all from PIE
*wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). Of paint, ink, etc., not yet dry from 1510s. Opposed to dry
in reference to the U.S. battles over prohibition from 1870. Wet blanket person who has a
dispiriting effect is recorded from 1871, from use of blankets drenched in water to smother fires
(the phrase is attested in this literal sense from 1660s).    Do we not know them, those wet
blankets who come down on our pleasant little fires and extinguish them, with no more ruth than the
rain feels when it pours on the encampment of the merry picnic party, or floods the tents of a
flower show? [Wet Blankets, in Godey's Lady's Book and Magazine, February, 1871]   All wet in the
wrong is recorded from 1923, American English; earlier simply wet ineffectual, and perhaps
ultimately from slang meaning drunken (c.1700). Wet-nurse is from 1610s. The diver's wet-suit is
from 1955. Wet dream is from 1851; in the same sense Middle English had ludificacioun an erotic
dream.    He knew som tyme a man of religion, &thorn;at gaff hym gretelie vnto chastitie bothe of
his harte &amp; of his body noghtwithstondyng he was tempid with grete ludificacions on &thorn;e
nyght. [Alphabet of Tales, c.1450]


wet (v.)

Old English w&aelig;tan to wet, moisten, water; be or become wet; see wet (adj.). From mid-15c. as
to intoxicate (oneself). Meaning urinate is by 1925. Related: Wetted; wetting.


wet (n.)

Old English w&#230;t (see wet (adj.)).


wetback (n.)

illegal Mexican immigrant to the U.S., c.1924, from wet (adj.) + back (n.); from notion of wading
the Rio Grande.


wether (n.)

male sheep, especially a castrated one, Old English we&eth;er ram, from Proto-Germanic *wethruz
(cognates: Old Saxon wethar, Old Norse ve&eth;r, Old High German widar, German Widder, Gothic
wi&thorn;rus lamb), literally yearling, from PIE root *wet- (2) year (cognates: Sanskrit vatsah
calf, Greek etalon yearling, Latin vitulus calf, literally yearling).


wetland (n.)

1743, from wet (adj.) + land (n.).


wetness (n.)

Old English wetnise; see wet (adj.) + -ness.


wey (n.)

dry goods weight of fixed amount (but varying over time and place), Old English weg scales, balance,
weight (see weigh).


wh-

respelling of Old English hw- attested from 11c., but not the common form until after c.1400. It
represents PIE *kw-; in German reduced to simple w-, in Scandinavian as hv-, kv-, or v-.    Also
added to some borrowed words (whisk, whiskey) and some native words formerly spelled with simple w-
or h- (whole, whore). In the 15c. flowering of its use it also threatened to change the spelling of
hot, home and many more. In northern English 16c.-18c., sometimes altered to quh- (see Q). Proper
pronunciation has been much in dispute in educated speech.


whack (v.)

to strike sharply, 1719, probably of imitative origin. The noun is from 1737. The word in out of
whack (1885) is perhaps the slang meaning share, just portion (1785), which may be from the notion
of the blow that divides, or the rap of the auctioneer's hammer. To have (or take) a whack at
something make an attempt is from 1891. Related: Whacked; whacking. Whacked out is from 1969.


whale (n.)

Old English hw&aelig;l whale, also walrus, from Proto-Germanic *hwalaz (cognates: Old Saxon hwal,
Old Norse hvalr, hvalfiskr, Swedish val, Middle Dutch wal, walvisc, Dutch walvis, Old High German
wal, German Wal), from PIE *(s)kwal-o- (cognates: Latin squalus a kind of large sea fish). Phrase
whale of a excellent or large example is c.1900, student slang. Whale-oil attested from mid-15c.


whale (v.2)

beat, whip severely, 1790, possibly a variant of wale (v.) to mark with 'wales' or stripes (early
15c.), from <span class=crossrederence>wale (n.). Related: Whaled; whaling.


whale (v.1)

pursue the business of whale-fishing, 1700, from whale (n.). Whale-fishing is attested from 1570s.


whalebone (n.)

also whale-bone, c.1200, from whale (n.) + bone (n.).


whaler (n.)

1680s of a person, 1806 of a boat, agent noun from whale (v.). Old English had hw&aelig;lhunta.


whaling (n.)

whale-fishing, 1716, verbal noun from whale (v.).


wham (n.)

a heavy blow, 1923, of echoic origin.


whammo

exclamation signifying violence or surprise, 1932, from wham (q.v.).


whammy (n.)

often double whammy, hex, evil eye, 1932, of unknown origin, popularized 1941 in Al Capp's comic
strip Li'l Abner, where it was the specialty of Evil-Eye Fleegle.


whangdoodle (n.)

name of an imaginary creature or thing, 1858, American English, fanciful formation.


wharf (n.)

late Old English hwearf shore, bank where ships can tie up, earlier dam, embankment, from Proto-
Germanic *hwarfaz (cognates: Middle Low German werf mole, dam, wharf, German Werft shipyard,
dockyard); related to Old English hwearfian to turn, perhaps in a sense implying busy activity, from
PIE root *kwerp- to turn, revolve (cognates: Old Norse hverfa to turn round, German werben to
enlist, solicit, court, woo, Gothic hvairban to wander, Greek kartos wrist, Sanskrit surpam
winnowing fan). Wharf rat is from 1812 as type of rat common on ships and docks; extended sense
person who hangs around docks is recorded from 1836.


wharfinger (n.)

operator or manager of a wharf, 1550s, from wharfage provision or accomodation at wharves (mid-
15c.), from wharf + agent noun suffix -er (1) + intrusive -n- as in messenger.


what (pron.)

Old English hw&aelig;t, referring to things in abstraction; also why, wherefore; indeed, surely,
truly, from Proto-Germanic pronoun *hwat (cognates: Old Saxon hwat, Old Norse hvat, Danish hvad, Old
Frisian hwet, Dutch wat, Old High German hwaz, German was, Gothic hva what), from PIE *kwod, neuter
singular of *kwos who (see who). Corresponding to Latin quid.    Meaning what did you say? is
recorded from c.1300. As an adjective and adverb, in Old English. As a conjunction in late Old
English. Exclamatory use was in Old English. What the _____ (devil, etc.) as an exclamation of
surprise is from late 14c. As an interrogative expletive at the end of sentences from 1891; common
in affected British speech. Or what as an alternative end to a question is first attested 1766. What
have you anything else one can think of is from 1925. What's up? what is happening? first recorded
1881.     To give one what for is to respond to his remonstrant what for? by further assault
[Weekley]. The phrase is attested from 1873; what for? as introducing a question is from 1760. To
know what is what is from c.1400; I'll tell you what to emphasize what is about to be said is in
Shakespeare.


whatchamacallit (n.)

1928, compressed form of phrase what you may call it. What-do-you-call-it is from 1630s. Earliest
recorded variant is what-calle-ye-hym, attested from late 15c. What's-his-name for unspecified
person is attested from 1690s; variant what's-his-face is first recorded 1967.


whatever (pron.)

mid-14c., what in the world, emphatic of what, with ever. From late 14c. as anything at all; all of;
no matter what or who. From late 14c. as an adjective, any sort of, any, every; no matter what,
regardless of what. From 1870 as whatever may be the cause, at any event, which could be the source
of the modern teen slang dismissive use.


whatnot (n.)

also what-not, 1530s, anything, from what + not. Elliptical for what may I not say, implying
everything else. As the name of a furniture item, first attested 1808, so named for the objects it
is meant to hold.


whatsoever (pron.)

of whatever nature, kind, or sort, mid-13c., quuat-so-euere, from whatso whatever (c.1200; see
what), an emphatic referring to things, + ever. A double intensive of what. As an adjective from
mid-15c.


wheal (n.)

mark made on the skin by a whip, 1808, perhaps an alteration of wale, possibly by confusion with
weal welt, and obsolete wheal pimple, pustule (mid-15c.), from Old English verb hwelian to form pus,
bring to a head.


wheat (n.)

Old English hw&aelig;te wheat, from Proto-Germanic *hwaitjaz (cognates: Old Saxon hweti, Old Norse
hveiti, Norwegian kveite, Old Frisian hwete, Middle Dutch, Dutch weit, Old High German weizzi,
German Weizen, Gothic hvaiteis wheat), literally that which is white (in reference to the grain or
the meal), from PIE *kwoid-yo-, suffixed variant form of root *kweid-, *kweit- to shine (see white;
and compare Welsh gwenith wheat, related to gwenn white). The Old World grain was introduced into
New Spain in 1528. Wheaties, the cereal brand name, was patented 1925.


wheatear (n.)

type of bird, 1590s, back-formation from white-ears, literally white-arse (see white + arse). So
called for its color markings; compare French name for the bird, cul-blanc, literally white rump.


wheaten (adj.)

made of wheat, Old English hw&#230;ten; see wheat + -en (2).


whee

exclamation of exhilaration, 1920.


wheedle (v.)

to influence by flattery, 1660s, of uncertain origin, perhaps connected with Old English
w&aelig;dlian to beg, from w&aelig;dl poverty [OED], or borrowed by English soldiers in the 17c.
German wars from German wedeln wag the tail, hence fawn, flatter (compare adulation). Related:
Wheedled; wheedling.


wheel (n.)

Old English hweol, hweogol wheel, from Proto-Germanic *hwewlaz- (cognates: Old Norse hvel, Old
Swedish hiughl, Old Frisian hwel, Middle Dutch weel), from PIE *kw(e)-kwl-o- wheel, circle,
suffixed, reduplicated form of root *kwel- (1) (see cycle (n.)).    The root wegh-, to convey,
especially by wheeled vehicle, is found in virtually every branch of Indo-European, including now
Anatolian. The root, as well as other widely represented roots such as aks- and nobh-, attests to
the presence of the wheel -- and vehicles using it -- at the time Proto-Indo-European was spoken.
[Watkins, p. 96]    Figurative sense is early 14c. Wheel of fortune attested from early 15c. Slang
wheels a car is recorded from 1959. Wheeler-dealer is from 1954, a rhyming elaboration of dealer.


wheel (v.)

to turn like a wheel, c.1200, from wheel (n.); transitive sense attested from late 14c. Related:
Wheeled; wheeling.


wheel-house (n.)

also wheelhouse, 1835, structure enclosing a large wheel, especially one over the steering wheel of
a steamboat, thus pilot house; from wheel (n.) + house (n.). Baseball slang sense of a hitter's
power zone attested by 1990.


wheelbarrow (n.)

mid-14c., from wheel (n.) + barrow (n.1).


wheelchair (n.)

also wheel-chair, c.1700, from wheel + chair (n.).


wheelie (n.)

1966, from wheel (n.) + -ie.


wheelwright (n.)

one who makes or fits wheels, c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), from wheel (n.) + wright (n.).


wheeze (v.)

mid-15c., probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse hvoesa to hiss, Danish hv&aelig;se
cognate with Old English hw&aelig;st act of blowing, hwosan to cough, from an imitative root.
Related: Wheezed; wheezing. The noun is first recorded 1834.


wheezy (adj.)

1818, from wheeze + -y (2). Related: Wheezily; wheeziness.


whelk (n.)

marine snail with a spiral shell, Old English weoloc, wioloc, from Proto-Germanic *weluka-
(cognates: Middle Dutch willoc, Dutch wulk), perhaps from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see
volvox; also volute). The unetymological spelling with wh- dates from 15c.


whelm (v.)

early 14c., probably from a parallel form of Old English -hwielfan (West Saxon), -hwelfan (Mercian),
in ahwelfan cover over; probably altered by association with Old English helmian to cover, from
Proto-Germanic *hwalbjan, from PIE *kwelp- to arch (see gulf (n.)).


whelp (n.)

Old English hwelp whelp, young of the dog, from a Germanic root related to Old Saxon hwelp, Old
Norse hvelpr, Dutch welp, German hwelf; of unknown origin. Now largely displaced by puppy. Also
applied to wild animals. Sense of scamp first recorded early 14c.


whelp (v.)

c.1200, from whelp (n.). Related: Whelped; whelping.


when (adv.)

Old English hw&aelig;nne, hwenne, hwonne, from Proto-Germanic *hwan- (cognates: Old Saxon hwan, Old
Frisian hwenne, Middle Dutch wan, Old High German hwanne, German wann when, wenn if, whenever), from
pronomial stem *hwa-, from PIE interrogative base *kwo- (see who). Equivalent to Latin quom, cum. As
a conjunction in late Old English. Say when tell me when to stop pouring you this drink is from
1889.


whenas (adv., conj.)

early 15c., from when + as.    Whenas in silks my Julia goes      Then, then (methinks) how sweetly
flows    That liquefaction of her clothes.            [Robert Herrick (1591-1674)]


whence (adv., conj.)

early 13c., whennes, with adverbial genitive -s, from Old English hwanone, related to hw&aelig;nne
(see when). Spelling with -ce (1520s) reflects the voiceless pronunciation.


whenever (adv., conj.)

late 14c., from when + ever.


where (adv.)

Old English hw&aelig;r, hwar at what place, from Proto-Germanic adverb *hwar (cognates: Old Saxon
hwar, Old Norse hvar, Old Frisian hwer, Middle Dutch waer, Old High German hwar, German wo, Gothic
hvar where), equivalent to Latin cur, from PIE interrogative base *kwo- (see who). Where it's at
attested from 1903.


whereabout (adv.)

near what place, early 14c. as an interrogatory word, from where + about.


whereabouts (adv.)

in what place, early 15c., from whereabout + adverbial genitive -s. The noun, place where someone or
something is, is recorded from 1795. Whereabout in this sense is from c.1600.


whereas (adv.)

mid-14c., where; early 15c. as a conjunction, in consideration of the fact that, from where + as.


whereat (adv.)

mid-13c., from where + at.


whereby (adv.)

c.1200, from where + by.


wherefore (adv.)

c.1200, hwarfore, from where + for. Similar formation in Dutch waarvoor, Old Norse hvar fyrir,
Swedish varfor.


wherein (adv.)

early 13c., from where + in. Similar formation in Dutch waarin, German worin, Swedish vari, Danish
hvori.


whereof (adv.)

c.1200, from where + of. Similar formation in Swedish hveraf, Danish hvoraf, Dutch waarvan.


whereon (adv.)

c.1200, from where + on (adv.).


whereupon (conj.)

c.1300, from where + upon.


wherever (adv.)

late 13c., ware euere, from where + ever. Originally an emphatic extension of where. Meaning at any
place, at some place or another is from 1660s.


wherewith (adv.)

c.1200, from where + with.


wherewithal (adv.)

means by which, 1530s, from where + withal. The noun is first recorded 1809.


wherry (n.)

light, shallow rowboat, mid-15c., of unknown origin.


whet (v.)

Old English hwettan to whet, sharpen, figuratively incite, encourage, from Proto-Germanic *hwatjan
(cognates: Old Norse hvetja to sharpen, encourage, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wetten, Old High
German wezzan, German wetzen to sharpen, Gothic ga-hvatjan to sharpen, incite), from PIE root *kwed-
to sharpen (cognates: Sanskrit codati incites, literally sharpens; Old English hw&aelig;t brave,
bold, Old Saxon hwat sharp).


whether (conj.)

Old English hw&aelig;&eth;er, hwe&eth;er which of two, whether, from Proto-Germanic *gihwatharaz
(cognates Old Saxon hwedar, Old Norse hvarr, Gothic hua&thorn;ar, Old High German hwedar which of
the two, German weder neither), from interrogative base *khwa- who (see who) + comparative suffix
*-theraz (cognate compounds in Sanskrit katarah, Avestan katara-, Greek poteros, Latin uter which of
the two, either of two, Lithuanian katras which of the two, Old Church Slavonic koteru which). Its
comparative form is either. Also in Old English as a pronoun and adjective. Phrase whether or not
(also whether or no) recorded from 1650s.


whetstone (n.)

Old English hwetstan; see whet + stone (n.).


whew

exclamation of astonishment, etc., early 15c., a whistling sound, of imitative origin.


whey (n.)

Old English hw&aelig;g whey, from Proto-Germanic *hwaja- (cognates: Middle Dutch wey, Dutch wei), of
unknown origin.


which (pron.)

Old English hwilc (West Saxon, Anglian), hw&#230;lc (Northumbrian) which, short for hwi-lic of what
form, from Proto-Germanic *hwa-lik- (cognates: Old Saxon hwilik, Old Norse hvelikr, Swedish vilken,
Old Frisian hwelik, Middle Dutch wilk, Dutch welk, Old High German hwelich, German welch, Gothic
hvileiks which), from *hwi- who (see who) + *likan body, form (cognates: Old English lic body; see
like (adj.)). In Middle English used as a relative pronoun where Modern English would use who, as
still in the Lord's Prayer. Old English also had parallel forms hwelc and hwylc, which disappeared
15c.


whichever (pron.)

late 14c., from which + ever. Emphatic extended form whichsoever attested from mid-15c.


whicker (v.)

1650s, snigger, imitative (compare snicker). As imitative of a sound made by a horse, from 1753. As
the sound of something beating the air, from 1920. Related: Whickered; whickering.


whiff (n.)

13c., weffe foul scent or odor, of imitative origin. Modern form became popular late 16c. with
tobacco smoking, probably influenced by whiffle blow in gusts or puffs (1560s). The verb in the
baseball slang sense to swing at a ball and miss first recorded 1913.


whiffle (v.)

flicker or flutter as if blown by the wind, 1660s; see whiff. The noun meaning something light or
insignificant (1670s) is preserved in whiffle-ball (1931).


Whig

British political party, 1657, in part perhaps a disparaging use of whigg a country bumpkin (1640s);
but mainly a shortened form of Whiggamore (1649) one of the adherents of the Presbyterian cause in
western Scotland who marched on Edinburgh in 1648 to oppose Charles I. Perhaps originally a horse
drover, from dialectal verb whig to urge forward + mare. In 1689 the name was first used in
reference to members of the British political party that opposed the Tories. American Revolution
sense of colonist who opposes Crown policies is from 1768. Later it was applied to opponents of
Andrew Jackson (as early as 1825), and taken as the name of a political party (1834) that merged
into the Republican Party in 1854-56.    [I]n the spring of 1834 Jackson's opponents adopted the
name Whig, traditional term for critics of executive usurpations. James Watson Webb, editor of the
New York Courier and Enquirer, encouraged use of the name. [Henry] Clay gave it national currency in
a speech on April 14, 1834, likening the whigs of the present day to those who had resisted George
III, and by summer it was official. [Daniel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007, p.390]   Whig
historian is recorded from 1924. Whig history is the tendency in many historians ... to emphasise
certain principles of progress in the past and to produce a story which is the ratification if not
the glorification of the present. [Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History, 1931]


Whiggery (n.)

principles or practices of the Whigs, 1680s, from Whig + -ery.


Whiggish (adj.)

1670s, from Whig + -ish.


while (n.)

Old English hwile, accusative of hwil a space of time, from Proto-Germanic *hwilo (cognates: Old
Saxon hwil, Old Frisian hwile, Old High German hwila, German Weile, Gothic hveila space of time,
while), originally rest (compare Old Norse hvila bed, hvild rest), from PIE *kwi-lo-, suffixed form
of root *kweie- (2) to rest (cognates: Avestan shaitish joy, Old Persian &#353;iyatish joy, Latin
quies rest, repose, quiet, Old Church Slavonic po-koji rest). Notion of period of rest became in
Germanic period of time.    Now largely superseded by time except in formulaic constructions (such
as all the while). Middle English sense of short space of time spent in doing something now only
preserved in worthwhile and phrases such as worth (one's) while. As a conjunction, during or in the
time that; as long as (late Old English), it represents Old English &thorn;a hwile &thorn;e,
literally the while that. Form whiles is recorded from early 13c.; whilst is from late 14c., with
excrescent -st as in amongst, amidst. Service while-you-wait is attested from 1911.


while (v.)

to cause (time) to pass (without dullness), 1630s, earlier to occupy or engage (someone or
something) for a period of time (c.1600), new formation from while (n.), not considered to be from
Middle English hwulen to have leisure, which is from a Germanic verb form of while (n.) (compare
German weilen to stay, linger). An association with phrases such as Shakespearean beguile the day,
Latin diem decipere, French tromper le temps has led to the substitution of WILE v by some modern
writers [OED] (see wile (v.)).


whilom (adv.)

at time past (archaic), c.1200, from Old English hwilum at times, dative case of while (q.v.). As a
conjunction from 1610s. Similar formation in German weiland formerly.


whilst (adv.)

late 14c., from while (q.v.) with adverbial genitive -s-, and excrescent -t- (as in amongst, amidst,
betwixt).


whim (n.)

1640s, play on words, pun, shortened from whimwham fanciful object (q.v.). Meaning caprice, fancy,
sudden turn or inclination of the mind first recorded 1690s, probably a shortened form of whimsy.


whimper (v.)

1510s, probably of imitative origin, or from German wimmern to whimper, moan. Related: Whimpered;
whimpering. The noun is first recorded c.1700.


whimsical (adj.)

1650s, from whimsy + -ical. Related: Whimsically.


whimsy (n.)

c.1600, probably related to whimwham.


whimwham (n.)

whimsical device, trifle, 1520s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Old Norse
hvima to let the eyes wander, Norwegian kvima to flutter), or else an arbitrary native formation
(compare flim-flam).


whine (v.)

Old English hwinan to whiz, hiss, or whistle through the air (only of arrows), also hwinsian to
whine (of dogs), ultimately of imitative origin (compare Old Norse hvina to whiz, German wiehern to
neigh). Meaning to complain in a feeble way is first recorded 1520s. Related: Whined; whining.


whine (n.)

1630s, from whine (v.).


whiney (adj.)

also whiny, from whine + -y (2).


whinge (v.)

to complain peevishly, British, informal or dialectal, ultimately from the northern form of Old
English hwinsian, from Proto-Germanic *hwinison (cognates: Old High German winison, German winseln),
from root of Old English hwinan to whine (see whine (v.)). Related: Whinged; whinging.


whinner (v.)

to whine feebly, c.1700, frequentative of whine. Related: Whinnered; whinnering.


whinny (v.)

1520s, probably related to whine and ultimately imitative (compare Latin hinnire).


whip (v.)

mid-13c., wippen flap violently, not in Old English, of uncertain origin, ultimately from Proto-
Germanic *wipjan to move back and forth (cognates: Danish vippe to raise with a swipe, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wippen to swing, Old High German wipf swing, impetus), from PIE *weip- to turn, vacillate,
tremble (see vibrate). The senses of both [noun and verb] no doubt represent several independent
adoptions or formations [OED]. The cookery sense is from 1670s. Related: Whipped; whipping. Whip
snake first recorded 1774, so called for its shape.


whip (n.)

instrument for flagellating, early 14c., from whip (v.) and perhaps in part from Middle Low German
wippe quick movement. In parliamentary use from 1850 (the verb in this sense is recorded from 1742),
from the sense in fox-hunting. The parliamentary whip's duty originally was to ensure the attendance
of party members on important occasions.


whip-saw (n.)

also whipsaw, 1530s, from whip + saw (n.). As a verb from 1842. Related: Whip-sawed; whip-sawing.


whiplash (n.)

1570s, the lash of a whip, from whip (n.) + lash (n.). The injury caused by sudden head motion so
called by 1955, in reference to the notion of moving to and fro like a cracking whip. The verb in
this sense is recorded by 1971.


whipper-snapper (n.)

also whippersnapper, 1670s, apparently a jingling extension [OED] of *whip-snapper a cracker of
whips, or perhaps an alteration of snipper-snapper (1580s). Compare also late 16c. whipperginnie, a
term of abuse for a woman.


whippet (n.)

small, fast type of dog, c.1600, probably from whip (v.) in the sense of move quickly + diminutive
suffix -et. Used earlier (1540s) in reference to a brisk, nimble woman.


whipping (n.)

1560s, a beating with a whip, verbal noun from whip (v.). As a defeat, 1835, American English
colloquial. Also as a past participle adjective; hence whipping post (c.1600); whipping boy (1640s);
whipping block (1877).


whippoorwill (n.)

1709, imitative of its cry.


whir (v.)

c.1400, Scottish, fling, hurl, probably from Old Norse hvirfla, frequentative of hverfa to turn (see
wharf). Compare Danish hvirvle, Dutch wervelen, German wirbeln to whirl. Related: Whirred; whirring.


whirl (v.)

c.1300, probably from Old Norse hvirfla to go round, spin, related to hvirfill circle, ring, crown,
and to Old English hweorfan to turn (see wharf). Related: Whirled; whirling. Whirlybird helicopter
is from 1951.


whirl (n.)

early 15c., flywheel of a spindle, from whirl (v.). The meaning act of whirling is recorded from
late 15c.; figurative sense of confused activity is recorded from 1550s. Colloquial sense of
tentative attempt is attested from 1884, American English.


whirligig (n.)

mid-15c., a child's toy, from whirl (v.) + gig (see gig (n.1)). Meaning anything in constant motion
is from 1580s; fickle, flighty person is from c.1600; as a type of water beetle, from 1713.


whirlpool (n.)

1520s, from whirl (v.) + pool (n.1). Old English had hwyrfepol and wirfelmere.


whirlwind (n.)

mid-14c., from whirl (v.) + wind (n.), probably on model of Old Norse hvirfilvindr.


whisk (n.)

late 14c., quick stroke, sweeping movement, probably from Old Norse visk wisp of hay, something to
sweep with, from Proto-Germanic *wisk- move quickly (cognates: Danish visk broom, Middle Dutch
wisch, Dutch wis, Old High German wisc, German wisch wisp, brush), from PIE root *weis- to turn,
twist (cognates: Sanskrit veskah noose, Czech vechet a wisp of straw, Old English wiscian to plait,
weoxian to clean with a whisk or brush). Unetymological spelling with wh- is from 1570s. Meaning
implement for beating eggs, etc. first recorded 1660s.


whisk (v.)

late 15c., move with a rapid sweeping motion (intransitive), from a Scandinavian source (compare
Danish viske to wipe, rub, sponge, Norwegian, Swedish viska wipe, also wag the tail), from the
source of whisk (n.). Transitive sense is from 1510s; meaning to brush or sweep (something) lightly
over a surface is from 1620s. Related: Whisked; whisking.


whisker (n.)

hair of a man's face (usually plural), c.1600, originally a playful formation, from Middle English
wisker anything that whisks or sweeps (early 15c.), agent noun from whisk (v.). In reference to
animal lip hair, recorded from 1670s. Related: Whiskered; whiskers.


whiskey (n.)

1715, from Gaelic uisge beatha whisky, literally water of life, from Old Irish uisce water (from PIE
*ud-skio-, from root *wed- (1) water, wet; see water (n.1)) + bethu life (from PIE *gwi-wo-tut-,
suffixed form of *gwi-wo-, from root *gweie- (1) to live; see bio-).    According to Barnhart, the
Gaelic is probably a loan-translation of Medieval Latin aqua vitae, which had been applied to
intoxicating drinks since early 14c. (compare French eau de vie brandy). Other early spellings in
English include usquebea (1706) and iskie bae (1580s). In Ireland and Scotland obtained from malt;
in the U.S. commonly made from corn or rye. Spelling distinction between Scotch whisky and Irish and
American whiskey is a 19c. innovation. Whisky sour is recorded from 1889.


whisky (n.)

see whiskey.


whisper (v.)

Old English hwisprian speak very softly, murmur (only in a Northumbrian gloss for Latin murmurare),
from Proto-Germanic *hwis- (cognates: Middle Dutch wispelen, Old High German hwispalon, German
wispeln, wispern, Old Norse hviskra to whisper), from PIE *kwei- to hiss, whistle, imitative.
Transitive sense is from 1560s. Related: Whispered; whispering. An alternative verb, now obsolete,
was whister (late 14c., from Old English hw&aelig;strian), and Middle English had whistringe
grucchere a slanderer.


whisper (n.)

1590s, from whisper (v.).


whispering (n.)

Old English hwisprung, verbal noun from hwisprian (see whisper (v.)).


whist (n.)

card game for four, 1660s, alteration of whisk, name of a kind of card game, alluded to as early as
1520s, perhaps so called from the notion of whisking up cards after each trick, and thus from whisk
(v.). Altered perhaps on assumption that the word was an interjection invoking silence, by influence
of whist silent (15c.).


whistle (v.)

Old English hwistlian to whistle, from Proto-Germanic *hwis-, of imitative origin (cognates: Old
Norse hvisla to whisper, Danish hvisle to hiss; see whisper (v.)). Used also in Middle English of
the hissing of serpents; in 17c. it also could mean whisper. Transitive use from late 15c. Related:
Whistled; whistling. At public events, often an expression of support or encouragement in U.S., but
often derisive in Britain. To whistle for (with small prospect of getting) is perhaps from nautical
whistling for a wind, an old sailor's superstition during a calm. Such men will not whistle during a
storm [Century Dictionary]. To whistle Dixie is from 1940.


whistle (n.)

tubular musical instrument sounded by blowing, Old English hwistle (see whistle (v.)). Meaning sound
formed by pursing the lips and blowing is from mid-15c. To wet one's whistle take a drink (late
14c.) originally may have referred to pipes, or be an allusion to the throat as a sort of pipe.
Phrase clean as a whistle is recorded from 1878. Railroad whistle-stop (at which trains stop only if
the engineer hears a signal from the station) is recorded from 1934.


whistleblower (n.)

also whistle-blower, 1963 in the figurative sense, American English, from whistle (n.) as something
sounded in an alert + agent noun from blow (v.1).


whistler (n.)

Old English hwistlere piper, literally whistler, agent noun from hwistlian (see whistle (v.)).


whistling (n.)

Old English hwistlung, verbal noun from hwistlian (see whistle (v.)).


whit (n.)

smallest particle, 1520s, from na whit no amount (c.1200), from Old English nan wiht, from wiht
amount, originally person, human being (see wight).


white (adj.)

Old English hwit bright, radiant; clear, fair, also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-
Germanic *hwitaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit, Old Norse hvitr, Dutch wit, Old High
German hwiz, German wei&szlig;, Gothic hveits), from PIE *kweid-o-, suffixed form of root *kweit-
white; to shine (cognates: Sanskrit svetah white; Old Church Slavonic sviteti to shine, svetu light;
Lithuanian &#353;viesti to shine, svaityti to brighten).    As a surname, originally with reference
to fair hair or complexion, it is one of the oldest in English, being well-established before the
Conquest. Meaning morally pure was in Old English. Association with royalist causes is late 18c.
Slang sense of honorable, fair is 1877, American English; in Middle English it meant gracious,
friendly, favorable. The racial sense of those races (chiefly European or of European extraction)
characterized by light complexion is recorded from c.1600; meaning characteristic of or pertaining
to white people is from 1852, American English. White supremacy attested from 1884, American
English; white flight is from 1966, American English.   White way brightly illuminated street in a
big city is from 1908. White flag of truce or surrender is from c.1600. White lie is attested from
1741. White Christmas is attested from 1847. White House as the name of the U.S. presidential
residence is recorded from 1811. White water river rapids is recorded from 1580s. White Russian
language of Byelorussia is recorded from 1850; the mixed drink is from c.1978. Astronomical white
dwarf is from 1924. White witch, one who used the power for good, is from 1620s.


white (n.)

Old English hwit whiteness, white food, white of an egg, from white (adj.). Also in late Old English
a highly luminous color devoid of chroma. Meaning white part of the eyeball is from c.1400. Meaning
white man, person of a race distinguished by light complexion is from 1670s; white man in this sense
is from 1690s. White man's burden is from Kipling's 1899 poem.    Take up the White Man's burden--
The savage wars of peace--  Fill full the mouth of Famine  And bid the sickness cease;  And when
your goal is nearest  The end for others sought,  Watch sloth and heathen Folly  Bring all your
hopes to nought.


white bread (n.)

c.1300, as opposed to darker whole-grain type, from white (adj.) + bread (n.). Its popularity among
middle-class America led to the slang adjectival sense of conventional, bourgeois (c.1980). Old
English had hwitehlaf.


white elephant (n.)

inconvenient thing that can't be got rid of, 1851, supposedly from the practice of the King of Siam
of presenting one of the sacred albino elephants to a courtier who had fallen from favor; the gift
was a great honor, but the proper upkeep of one was ruinously expensive.


white feather (n.)

as a symbol of cowardice, 1785, supposedly from game-cocks, where having a white feather, is proof
he is not of the true game breed [Grose].


white hope (n.)

1911, originally in U.S. sporting use in reference to the quest for a white man capable of beating
champion pugilist Jack Johnson.


white meat (n.)

meat of poultry, pigs, etc., as opposed to red meat, 1752, from white (adj.) + meat (n.). Earlier it
meant foods prepared from milk (early 15c.). Black slang sense of white women as sex partners is
from 1920s.


white noise (n.)

sound made up of a random mixture of frequencies and intensities, by 1970, from white (adj.) + noise
(n.).


white trash (n.)

1824, originally Southern U.S. black slang.    The slaves themselves entertain the very highest
contempt for white servants, whom they designate as 'poor white trash.' [Fanny Kemble, journal, Jan.
6, 1833]


white-collar (adj.)

by 1911, perhaps 1909, from white (adj.) + collar (n.).    The white collar men are your clerks;
they are your bookkeepers, your cashiers, your office men. We call them the 'white collar men' in
order to distinguish them from the men who work with uniform and overalls and carry the dinner
pails. The boys over on the West side got that name for them. It was supposed to be something a
little better than they were. [Malcolm McDowell, quoted in Chicago Commerce, June 12, 1914]   White-
collar crime attested by 1957 (there is a white-collar criminaloids from 1934).


white-hot (adj.)

heated to full incandescence, 1820, from white (adj.) + hot (adj.). White heat is from 1710;
figurative sense of state of intense or extreme emotion first recorded 1839.


white-out (n.)

1946 as an extreme snow condition on the U.S. prairie, from white as a verb + out (adv.). From 1977
as a liquid correction for paper.


white-tail (n.)

type of North American deer, 1872, from white (adj.) + tail (n.).


whiteboard (n.)

1966, from white (adj.) + board (n.1).


whitecap (n.)

1660s, of birds, from white (adj.) + cap (n.). Attested from 1773 in reference to breaking waves,
from 1818 of mushrooms, and from 1891 in reference to one of a self-constituted band in U.S. who
committed outrages under pretense of regulating public morals [OED].


whitefish (n.)

mid-15c., from white (adj.) + fish (n.).


whiten (v.)

c.1300, to make white, from white (adj.) + -en (1). Intransitive sense become white is from 1630s.
Earlier verb was simply white (late Old English). Related: Whitened; whitening; whitener.


whiteness (n.)

Old English hwitnes; see white (adj.) + -ness.


whitewash (v.)

1590s, to wash a building surface with white liquid, from white (adj.) + wash (v.). Figurative sense
of to cover up, conceal, give a false appearance of cleanness to is attested from 1762. Related:
Whitewashed; whitewashing. The noun is recorded from 1690s; in the figurative sense from 1851. The
earlier verb was whitelime (c.1300).


whitey (n.)

'white' person, person of European descent, 1828, also whity, from white (adj.) + -y (2) and -y (3).
Earlier as an adjective, and Whitey-brown was a 19c. descriptive color name, used to describe, among
other things, mulatto skin.    Negro troops doing provost duty in Norfolk; keeping the white people
in order. On a visit to Norfolk one can see white Southerners, arrested for sundry misdemeanors,
working on the public streets, under negro guards. ... It is quite a change to see, in Norfolk,
negroes forcing white men to work, at the point of the bayonet; calling out to them: No loaf'n dar!
Move quicker, Sah! Hurry up dar, Old Whitey! and similar orders. Tables turned! [diary of Lieut. S.
Millett Thompson, 13th New Hampshire Volunteer regiment, U.S. Army, Jan. 25, 1864; diary published
1888 by Houghton, Mifflin &amp; Co.]


whither (adv., conj.)

Old English hwider, from Proto-Germanic *hwithre-, from *hwi- who (see who) + ending as in hither
and thither. Compare Gothic hvadre.


whithersoever (adv.)

early 13c., from whither + so + ever.


whitish (adj.)

late 14c., from white (adj.) + -ish.


whitlow (n.)

inflammation on a finger or toe, mid-15c., alteration of whitflaw (c.1400), from flaw, with first
element possibly from Dutch vijt or Low German fit abscess.


Whitsun

late 13c., contraction of Whitsunday.


Whitsunday

Pentecost, late Old English Hwita Sunnand&aelig;g white Sunday (see white (adj.)); possibly so
called from the white baptismal robes worn by newly baptized Christians on this day. Related:
Whitsuntide.


whittle (v.)

1550s, to cut thin shavings from (something) with a knife, from Middle English whittel a knife,
especially a large one (c.1400), variant of thwittle (late 14c.), from Old English &thorn;witan to
cut, from Proto-Germanic *thwit- (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;veita to hew), from PIE root *twei- to
agitate, shake, toss. Figurative sense is attested from 1746. Related: Whittled; whittling.


whiz (n.)

clever person, 1914, probably a special use of whiz something remarkable (1908), an extended sense
of whizz; or perhaps a shortened and altered form of wizard. Noun phrase whiz kid is from 1930s, a
take-off on a radio show's quiz kid.


whizbang (n.)

also whiz-bang, whizz-bang, 1915, originally a soldier's name for a type of German artillery shell
in World War I, so called by the Allied troops in reference to its characteristic sound. From whizz
+ bang (v.).


whizz (v.)

make or move with a humming, hissing sound, 1540s, of imitative origin. Meaning to urinate is from
1929. Related: Whizzed; whizzing. The noun is recorded from 1610s. Whizzer something extraordinary
is from 1888.


who (pron.)

Old English hwa who, sometimes what; anyone, someone; each; whosoever, from Proto-Germanic *hwas
(cognates: Old Saxon hwe, Danish hvo, Swedish vem, Old Frisian hwa, Dutch wie, Old High German hwer,
German wer, Gothic hvo (fem.) who), from PIE *kwo-, stem of relative and interrogative pronouns
(cognates: Sanskrit kah who, which; Avestan ko, Hittite kuish who; Latin quis/quid in what respect,
to what extent; how, why, qua where, which way, qui/quae/quod who, which; Lithuanian kas who; Old
Church Slavonic kuto, Russian kto who; Old Irish ce, Welsh pwy who).


whoa (interj.)

1620s, a cry to call attention from a distance, a variant of who. As a command to stop a horse, it
is attested from 1843, a variant of ho. As an expression of delight or surprise (1980s) it has
gradually superseded wow, which was very popular 1960s.


whodunit (n.)

murder mystery, 1930, U.S. slang, originally a semi-facetious formation from who done it? Whydunit
is from 1968.


whoever (pron.)

late Old English hwa efre; see who + ever.


whole (adj.)

Old English hal entire, whole; unhurt, uninjured, safe; healthy, sound; genuine, straightforward,
from Proto-Germanic *haila- undamaged (cognates: Old Saxon hel, Old Norse heill, Old Frisian hal,
Middle Dutch hiel, Dutch heel, Old High German, German heil salvation, welfare), from PIE *kailo-
whole, uninjured, of good omen (cognates: Old Church Slavonic celu whole, complete; see health).
The spelling with wh- developed early 15c. The sense in whole number is from early 14c. Whole milk
is from 1782. On the whole considering all facts or circumstances is from 1690s. For phrase whole
hog, see hog (n.).


whole (n.)

entire body or company; the full amount, late 14c., from whole (adj.).


whole cloth (n.)

early 15c., piece of cloth of full size, as opposed to a piece cut out for a garment; figurative
sense first attested 1570s.


whole nine yards (n.)

by 1970, of unknown origin; perhaps arbitrary (see cloud nine). Among the guesses that have been
made without real evidence: concrete mixer trucks were said to have dispensed in this amount. Or the
yard might be the word used in the slang sense of one hundred dollars. Several similar phrases
meaning everything arose in the 1940s (whole ball of wax, which is likewise of obscure origin, whole
schmear); older examples include whole hog (see hog (n.)) and whole shooting match (1896); whole
shebang (1895).


wholehearted (adj.)

also whole-hearted, 1840, from whole (adj.) + hearted. Related: Wholeheartedly.


wholeness (n.)

mid-14c., from whole (adj.) + -ness. Old English had halnes.


wholesale (adj.)

early 15c., in large quantities, from whole (adj.) + sale; the general sense of extensive is
attested from 1640s. As a verb from 1800. Related: Wholesaling; wholesaler.


wholesome (adj.)

c.1200, of benefit to the soul, from whole (adj.) in the healthy sense + -some (1). Physical sense
first attested late 14c. Related: Wholesomely; wholesomeness. Old English had halwende.


wholistic (adj.)

1941, from holistic crossed with whole (adj.). Related: wholism (1939).


wholly (adv.)

mid-14c., from whole (adj.) + -ly (2), or a modification of unrecorded Old English *hallice.


whom (pron.)

objective case of who, Old English hwam (Proto-Germanic *hwam), dative form of hwa (see who).
Ungrammatical use of who form whom is attested from c.1300.


whomever (pron.)

early 14c., from whom + ever.


whomp (n.)

1926, echoic of the sound of a heavy blow or something falling heavily.


whomp (v.)

1952, from whomp (n.). Related: Whomped; whomping.


whoop (v.)

mid-14c., houpen, partly imitative, partly from Old French huper, houper to cry out, shout, also
imitative. It is attested as an interjection from at least mid-15c. Spelling with wh- is from mid-
15c. The noun is recorded from c.1600. Phrase whoop it up create a disturbance is recorded from
1881. Expression whoop-de-do is recorded from 1929. Whooping cough (1739) is now the prevalent
spelling of hooping cough; whooping crane is recorded from 1791.


whoopee (n.)

1845, noisy, unrestrained revelry, extended form of whoop, originally American English. Popular song
Makin' Whoopee is from 1928. The novelty whoopee cushion is from 1931.


whoops

exclamation of dismay, 1925; see oops.


whoosh (v.)

1856, of imitative origin. Related: Whooshed; whooshing. As a noun from 1880; as an interjection by
1899.


whoot (v.)

early 15c. variant of hoot (v.).


whop (v.)

to beat, strike, mid-15c., of imitative origin. Compare Welsh chwap a stroke, also of imitative
origin; also see wap. Related: Whopped; whopping.


whopper (n.)

1767, uncommonly large thing, originally and especially an audacious lie, formed as if from whop
(v.) to beat, overcome. Whopping large, big, impressive is attested by 1620s.


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


whore (v.)

to have to do with whores, 1580s, from whore (n.). Related: Whored; whoring.


whore-house (n.)

early 14c., from whore (n.) + house (n.). Sometimes translating Latin lupanaria. Obsolete from
c.1700, revived early 20c. in American English.


whore-monger (n.)

1520s, from whore (n.) + monger. A Petrus Hurmonger is in the 1327 Leicestershire Lay Subsidy Rolls.


whoredom (n.)

late 12c., practice of sexual immorality, probably from Old Norse hordomr adultery, from Proto-
Germanic *horaz (see whore (n.)) + Old Norse -domr condition  (see -dom).


whoreson (n.)

c.1300, from whore (n.) + son. Often used affectionately, it translates Anglo-French fiz a putain.
As an adjective, mean, scurvy, contemptuous, from mid-15c.


whorl (n.)

mid-15c., the small flywheel of a spindle, perhaps an alteration of whirl. Meaning circlar
arrangement of leaves or flowers round a stem of a plant is first recorded 1550s. Of seashells or
other spiral structures, from 1828. Related: Whorled.


whortleberry (n.)

1570s, southwestern England variant of hurtleberry (see huckleberry).


whose (pron.)

genitive of who; from Old English hw&aelig;s, genitive of hwa (see who).


whosis (n.)

1923, short for who is this; whosit (who is it) attested by 1948.


whump (v.)

1897, of imitative origin. Related: Whumped; whumping. The noun is recorded from 1915.


why (adv.)

Old English hwi, instrumental case (indicating for what purpose or by what means) of hw&aelig;t (see
what), from Proto-Germanic adverb *hwi (cognates: Old Saxon hwi, Old Norse hvi), from PIE *kwi-
(source of Greek pei where), locative of *kwo- who (see who). As an interjection of surprise or
emphasis, recorded from 1510s. As a noun, cause, reason from c.1300.


wi-fi (n.)

1999, apparently from wireless; the second element perhaps suggested by hi-fi.


wibble (v.)

1871, from wibble-wobble (1847), a colloquial reduplication of wobble (v.).


Wicca (n.)

An Old English masc. noun meaning male witch, wizard, soothsayer, sorcerer, astrologer, magician;
see witch. Use of the word in modern contexts traces to English folklorist Gerald Gardner
(1884-1964), who is said to have joined circa 1939 an occult group in New Forest, Hampshire,
England, for which he claimed an unbroken tradition to medieval times. Gardner seems to have first
used it in print in 1954, in his book Witchcraft Today (Witches were the Wica or wise people, with
herbal  knowledge and a working occult teaching usually used for good ....). In published and
unpublished material, he apparently only ever used the word as a mass noun referring to adherents of
the practice and not as the name of the practice itself. Some of his followers continue to use it in
this sense. According to Gardner's book The Meaning of Witchcraft (1959), the word, as used in the
initiation ceremony, played a key role in his experience:    I realised that I had stumbled upon
something interesting; but I was half-initiated before the word, 'Wica' which they used hit me like
a thunderbolt, and I knew where I was, and that the Old Religion still existed. And so I found
myself in the Circle, and there took the usual oath of secrecy, which bound me not to reveal certain
things.    In the late 1960s the term came into use as the title of a modern pagan movement
associated with witchcraft.  The first printed reference in this usage seems to be 1969, in The
Truth About Witchcraft by freelance  author Hans Holzer:    If the practice of the Old Religion,
which is also called Wicca (Craft of the Wise), and thence, witchcraft, is a reputable and useful
cult, then it is worthy of public interest.    And, quoting witch Alex Sanders:    No, a witch
wedding still needs a civil ceremony to make it legal. Wicca itself as a religion is not registered
yet. But it is about time somebody registered it, I think. I've done all I can to call attention to
our religion.    Sanders was a highly visible representative of neo-pagan Witchcraft in the late
1960s and early 1970s. During this time he appears to have popularized use of the term in this
sense.  Later books c.1989 teaching modernized witchcraft using the same term account for its rise
and popularity, especially in U.S.


wich (n.)

salt works, salt pit, Old English wic, apparently a specialized use of the wic that means dwelling
place, town (see wick (n.2)).


wick (n.1)

bundle of fiber in a lamp or candle, 17c. spelling alteration of wueke, from Old English weoce wick
of a lamp or candle, from West Germanic *weukon (cognates: Middle Dutch wieke, Dutch wiek, Old High
German wiohha, German Wieche), of unknown origin, with no known cognates beyond Germanic. To dip
one's wick engage in sexual intercourse (in reference to males) is recorded from 1958, perhaps from
Hampton Wick, rhyming slang for prick, which would connect it rather to wick (n.2).


wick (n.2)

dairy farm, now surviving, if at all, as a localism in East Anglia or Essex, it was once the common
Old English wic dwelling place, lodging, house, mansion, abode, then coming to mean village, hamlet,
town, and later dairy farm (as in Gatwick Goat-farm). Common in this latter sense 13c.-14c. The word
is from a general Germanic borrowing from Latin vicus group of dwellings, village; a block of
houses, a street, a group of streets forming an administrative unit (see vicinity). Compare Old High
German wih village, German Weichbild municipal area, Dutch wijk quarter, district, Old Frisian wik,
Old Saxon wic village.


wicked (adj.)

c.1200, extended form of earlier wick bad, wicked, false (12c.), which apparently is an adjectival
use of Old English wicca wizard (see wicca). Formed as if a past participle, but there is no
corresponding verb. For evolution, compare wretched from wretch. Slang ironic sense of wonderful
first attested 1920, in F. Scott Fitzgerald. As an adverb from early 15c. Related: Wickedly.


wickedness (n.)

c.1300, from wicked + -ness.


wicker (n.)

mid-14c., wickerwork, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish viger, Middle Swedish viker willow,
willow branch), from Proto-Germanic *wik- (cognates: Old Norse vikja to move, turn, Swedish vika to
bend, Old English wican to give way, yield), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, twine (see weak). The
notion is of pliant twigs. As an adjective, made of wicker, from c.1500.


wickerwork (n.)

1719, from wicker + work (n.).


wicket (n.)

early 13c., small door or gate, especially one forming part of a larger one, from Anglo-French
wiket, Old North French wiket (Old French guichet, Norman viquet) small door, wicket, wicket gate,
probably from Proto-Germanic *wik- (cognates: Old Norse vik nook, Old English wican to give way,
yield), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (see weak). The notion is of something that turns.
Cricket sense of set of three sticks defended by the batsman is recorded from 1733; hence many
figurative phrases in British English.


widdershins (adv.)

1510s, chiefly Scottish, originally contrary to the course of the sun or a clock (movement in this
direction being considered unlucky), probably from Middle Low German weddersinnes, literally against
the way (i.e. in the opposite direction), from widersinnen to go against, from wider against (see
with) + sinnen to travel, go, from Old High German sinnen, related to sind journey (see send).


wide (adj.)

Old English wid vast, broad, long, also used of time, from Proto-Germanic *widaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian wid, Old Norse vi&eth;r, Dutch wijd, Old High German wit, German weit), perhaps
from PIE *wi-ito-, from root *wi- apart, away, in half.    Meaning distended, expanded, spread apart
is from c.1500; sense of embracing many subjects is from 1530s; meaning missing the intended target
is from 1580s. As a second element in compounds (such as nationwide, worldwide) meaning extending
through the whole of, is is from late Old English. As an adverb, Old English wide. Wide open
unguarded, exposed to attack (1915) originally was in boxing, etc. Wide awake (adj.) is first
recorded 1818; figurative sense of alert, knowing is attested from 1833.


widely (adv.)

1660s, from wide + -ly (2).


widen (v.)

c.1600 (transitive), from wide + -en (1). Intransitive sense from 1709. Related: Widened; widening.


widespread (adj.)

also wide-spread, 1705, from wide + past participle of spread (v.). Earlier was wide-spreading
(1590s).


widgeon (n.)

migratory wild duck, 1510s, perhaps from a northern variant of French vigeon, which some trace to
Latin vipionem (nominative vipio), a kind of small crane, a Balearic word, perhaps imitative, with
an evolution of form similar to that which produced pigeon. But the French word is later than the
English one, and OED finds all this very dubious. Applied to different species in Europe and
America.


widget (n.)

gadget, small manufactured item, c.1920, American English, probably an alteration of gadget, perhaps
based on which it.


widow (n.)

Old English widewe, wuduwe, from Proto-Germanic *widuwo (cognates: Old Saxon widowa, Old Frisian
widwe, Middle Dutch, Dutch weduwe, Dutch weeuw, Old High German wituwa, German Witwe, Gothic
widuwo), from PIE adjective *widhewo (cognates: Sanskrit vidhuh lonely, solitary, vidhava widow;
Avestan vithava, Latin vidua, Old Church Slavonic vidova, Russian vdova, Old Irish fedb, Welsh
guedeu widow; Persian beva, Greek eitheos unmarried man; Latin viduus bereft, void), from root
*weidh- to separate (source of second element in Latin di-videre to divide; see with).    Extended
to woman separated from or deserted by her husband from mid-15c. (usually in a combination, such as
grass widow). As a prefix to a name, attested from 1570s. Meaning short line of type (especially at
the top of a column) is 1904 print shop slang. Widow's mite is from Mark xii:43. Widow's peak is
from the belief that hair growing to a point on the forehead is an omen of early widowhood,
suggestive of the peak of a widow's hood. The widow bird (1747) so-called in reference to the long
black tail feathers of the males, suggestive of widows' veils.


widow (v.)

early 14c.; see widow (n.). Related: Widowed; widowing.


widow-maker (n.)

something lethally dangerous (war, the sea, dangerous machinery, etc.), 1590s, from widow (n.) +
maker.


widower (n.)

man who has lost his wife by death, late 14c., extended from widow (n.). The Old English masc. form
was widewa. Similar formation in Middle Dutch weduwer, German Wittwer. Related: Widowerhood.


widowhood (n.)

c.1200, from widow (n.) + -hood. Modifying or replacing Old English wuduwanhad state of a woman who
has no husband.


width (n.)

1620s, formed from wide on model of breadth, and replacing wideness (Old English widnes). Johnson
(1755) calls it a low word. Related: Widthwise.


wield (v.)

Old English weldan (Mercian), wieldan, wealdan (West Saxon) have power over, compel, tame, subdue
(class VII strong verb; past tense weold, past participle gewealden), merged with weak verb wyldan,
both from Proto-Germanic *waldan to rule (cognates: Old Saxon and Gothic waldan, Old Frisian walda
to govern, rule, Old Norse valda to rule, wield, to cause, Old High German waltan, German walten to
rule, govern).    The Germanic words and cognates in Balto-Slavic (Old Church Slavonic vlado to
rule, vlasti power, Russian vladeti to reign, rule, possess, make use of, Lithuanian veldu to rule,
possess) probably are from PIE *woldh-, extended form of root *wal- to be strong, to rule (see
valiant). Related: Wielded; wielding.


wieldy (adj.)

late 14c., capable of wielding, from wield + -y (2). Meaning capable of being weilded is from 1580s.
Old English had wielde powerful, victorious.


wiener (n.)

1900, shortening of wienerwurst (1874, American English), from German Wiener of Vienna (from Wien
Vienna, from Latin Vindo-bona; see Vienna) + Wurst sausage (see wurst). Colloquial wienie is
attested by 1911. Extensive pejorative senses developed from its penis-like shape. Wiener roast is
from 1910.


wife (n.)

Old English wif (neuter) woman, female, lady, also, but not especially, wife, from Proto-Germanic
*wiban (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian wif, Old Norse vif, Danish and Swedish viv, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wijf, Old High German wib, German Weib), of uncertain origin, not found in Gothic.
Apparently felt as inadequate in its basic sense, leading to the more distinctive formation wifman
(source of woman). Dutch wijf now means, in slang, girl, babe, having softened somewhat from earlier
sense of bitch. German cognate Weib also tends to be slighting or derogatory and has been displaced
by Frau.    The more usual Indo-European word is represented in English by queen/quean. Words for
woman also double for wife in some languages. Some proposed PIE roots for wife include *weip- to
twist, turn, wrap, perhaps with sense of veiled person (see vibrate); and more recently  *ghwibh-, a
proposed root meaning shame, also pudenda, but the only examples of it would be the Germanic words
and Tocharian (a lost IE language of central Asia) kwipe, kip female pudenda.    The modern sense of
female spouse began as a specialized sense in Old English; the general sense of woman is preserved
in midwife, old wives' tale, etc. Middle English sense of mistress of a household survives in
housewife; and the later restricted sense of tradeswoman of humble rank in fishwife. By 1883 as
passive partner in a homosexual couple. Wife-swapping is attested from 1954.


wife-beater (n.)

1855, from wife (n.) + beater. Related: Wife-beating. As sleeveless undershirt from 2000.


wifely (adj.)

Old English wiflic womanly, pertaining to a woman, from wife + -ly (1). From late 14c. as befitting
a wife.


Wiffle

hollow, perforated plastic ball, registered trademark name (The Wiffle Ball Inc., Shelton,
Connecticut, U.S.), claiming use from 1954. According to the company, designed in 1953 by David N.
Mullany in response to a lack of field space and numerous broken windows by his baseball-playing
son, the name based on whiff (q.v.), baseball slang for a missed swing.


wig (n.)

1670s, shortened form of periwig. Meaning person who wears a wig (professionally) is from 1828.


wig (v.)

1826, supply with a wig, from wig (n.). The meaning to behave hysterically (usually with out) is
attested from 1955, perhaps from notion in flip one's wig. Compare dash my wig!, a former mild
imprecation (1797), also wigs on the green (1856), Irish colloquial for a fight or rumble (because
wigs are likely to get detached from owners in such an event). The verb also had a colloquial sense
of scold severely, attested by 1829, perhaps related to these. Related: Wigged; wigging.


wiggle (v.)

early 13c., perhaps from Middle Dutch or Middle Flemish wigelen, frequentative of wiegen to rock,
from wiege cradle, from Proto-Germanic *wig- (cognates: Old High German wiga, German Wiege cradle,
Old Frisian widze), from PIE root *wegh- to move (see weigh). Related: Wiggled; wiggling. The noun
is attested from 1816.


wiggly (adj.)

1878, from wiggle (n.) + -y (2).


wight (n.)

Old English wiht living being, creature, person; something, anything, from Proto-Germanic *wihti-
(cognates: Old Saxon wiht thing, demon, Dutch wicht a little child, Old High German wiht thing,
creature, demon, German Wicht creature, little child, Old Norse vettr thing, creature, Swedish
v&auml;tte spirit of the earth, gnome, Gothic waihts something), from PIE *wekti- thing, creature
(source also of Old Church Slavonic ve&#353;ti a thing). Not related to the Isle of Wight, which is
from Latin Vectis (c.150), originally Celtic, possibly meaning place of the division.


wigwam (n.)

1620s, from Algonquian (probably Eastern Abenaki) wikewam a dwelling, said to mean literally their
house; also said to be found in such formations as wikiwam and Ojibwa wiigiwaam and Delaware
wiquoam.


wiki (n.)

web page that can be edited by browsers, by 2002, abstracted from names of such sites (such as
Wikipedia, launched January 2001), the original being WikiWikiWeb, introduced and named by Ward
Cunningham in 1995, from Hawaiian wikiwiki fast, swift.


wilco

1945, in two-way radio slang, abbreviation and conflation of will comply.


wild (n.)

uncultivated or desolate region, 1590s, in the wilds. From wild (adj.). Earlier it meant wild animal
(c.1200).


wild (adj.)

Old English wilde in the natural state, uncultivated, untamed, undomesticated, uncontrolled, from
Proto-Germanic *wilthja- (cognates: Old Saxon wildi, Old Norse villr, Old Frisian wilde, Dutch wild,
Old High German wildi, German wild, Gothic wil&thorn;eis wild, German Wild (n.) game), from PIE root
*welt- woodlands; wild (see wold).    Ursula ... hath bin at all the Salsbury rasis, dancing like
wild with Mr Clarks. [letter, 1674]  Meaning sexually dissolute, loose is attested from mid-13c.
Meaning distracted with excitement or emotion, crazy is from 1590s. U.S. slang sense of exciting,
excellent is recorded from 1955. As an adverb from 1540s. Baseball wild pitch is recorded from 1867.
Wildest dreams attested from 1717. Wild West in a U.S. context recorded by 1826. Wild Turkey brand
of whiskey (Austin Nichols Co.) in use from 1942.


wild (v.)

to run wild, refuse to be tamed, Old English awildian (see wild (adj.)). Wilding (n.) in the teen
gang sense first recorded 1989. Earlier it meant plant that grows without cultivation (1520s).


wild card (n.)

1950 in figurative sense, from literal use in certain forms of poker (1941), from wild (adj.) + card
(n.). The phrase was used occasionally c.1900 in British and Irish writing to mean drinking, free-
spirited man.


wild goose chase (n.)

1592, first attested in Romeo and Juliet, where it evidently is a figurative use of an earlier (but
unrecorded) literal sense in reference to a kind of follow-the-leader steeplechase. Wild goose (as
opposed to a domesticated one) is attested in late Old English (wilde gos).


wild man (n.)

c.1200, man lacking in self-restraint, from wild (adj.) + man (n.). From mid-13c. as primitive,
savage. Late 14c. as a surname.


wildcat (n.)

undomesticated cat, early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from wild (adj.) + cat (n.). Meaning savage
woman is recorded from 1570s; sense of one who forms rash projects is attested from 1812. The
adjective in the financial speculative sense is first recorded 1838, American English.


wildebeest (n.)

1838, from South African Dutch (in modern Afrikaans wildebees, plural wildebeeste), literally wild
beast, from Dutch wild wild (see wild (adj.)) + beest beast, ox (in South African Dutch steer,
cattle), from Middle Dutch beeste, from Old French beste beast (see beast).


wilderness (n.)

c.1200, wild, uninhabited, or uncultivated place, with -ness + Old English wild-deor wild animal,
wild deer; see wild (adj.) + deer (n.). Similar formation in Dutch wildernis, German Wildernis,
though the usual form there is Wildnis.


wildfire (n.)

late Old English wilde fyr destructive fire (perhaps caused by lightning); also erysipelas,
spreading skin disease; see from wild (adj.) + fire (n.). From c.1300 as Greek fire, also fire
rained down from the sky as divine retribution. Figurative sense from late 14c. By 1795 as sheet
lightning.


wildlife (n.)

also wild life, fauna of a region, 1879, from wild (adj.) + life.


wildly (adv.)

early 15c., from wild (adj.) + -ly (2).


wildness (n.)

early 14c., unrestrained behavior, from wild (adj.) + -ness. Late 14c. as frenzy; mid-15c. as
undomesticated state.


wile (n.)

late Old English, wil stratagem, trick, sly artifice, perhaps from Old North French *wile (Old
French guile), or directly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse vel trick, craft, fraud,
vela defraud). Perhaps ultimately related to Old English wicca wizard (see Wicca). Lighter sense of
amorous or playful trick is from c.1600.


wile (v.)

late 14c., to deceive, from wile (n.). Related: Wiled; wiling. Sense of cause (time, etc.) to pass
pleasantly, divert attention pleasantly is by 1796, from confusion with while (v.).


wilful (adj.)

British English spelling of willful. Related: Wilfully; wilfulness.


Wilhelm

German form of William (q.v.). Fem. form is Wilhelmina. Wilhelmine (adj.) is pertaining to the reign
of Wilhelm II, emperor of Germany 1888-1918. Berlin's Wilhelmstrasse was the pre-1945 headquarters
of the German foreign office, hence used metonymically for German foreign policy (compare Quai
d'Orsay).


will (v.1)

Old English *willan, wyllan to wish, desire; be willing; be used to; be about to (past tense wolde),
from Proto-Germanic *willjan (cognates: Old Saxon willian, Old Norse vilja, Old Frisian willa, Dutch
willen, Old High German wellan, German wollen, Gothic wiljan to will, wish, desire, Gothic waljan to
choose).    The Germanic words are from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit vrnoti
chooses, prefers, varyah to be chosen, eligible, excellent, varanam choosing; Avestan verenav- to
wish, will, choose; Greek elpis hope; Latin volo, velle to wish, will, desire; Old Church Slavonic
voljo, voliti to will, veljo, veleti to command; Lithuanian velyti to wish, favor, pa-velmi I will,
viliuos I hope; Welsh gwell better).    Compare also Old English wel well, literally according to
one's wish; wela well-being, riches. The use as a future auxiliary was already developing in Old
English. The implication of intention or volition distinguishes it from shall, which expresses or
implies obligation or necessity. Contracted forms, especially after pronouns, began to appear 16c.,
as in sheele for she will. The form with an apostrophe is from 17c.


will (n.)

Old English will, willa mind, determination, purpose; desire, wish, request; joy, delight, from
Proto-Germanic *wiljon- (cognates: Old Saxon willio, Old Norse vili, Old Frisian willa, Dutch wil,
Old High German willio, German Wille, Gothic wilja will), related to *willan to wish (see will
(v.1)). The meaning written document expressing a person's wishes about disposition of property
after death is first recorded late 14c.


will (v.2)

Old English willian to determine by act of choice, from will (n.). From mid-15c. as dispose of by
will or testament. Often difficult to distinguish from will (v.1).


will-o&#039;-the-wisp (n.)

1660s, earlier Will with the wisp (c.1600), from the masc. proper name Will + wisp bundle of hay or
straw used as a torch. Compare Jack o'lantern.


willful (adj.)

also wilful, c.1200, strong-willed, usually in a bad sense, obstinate, unreasonable, from will (n.)
+ -ful. From late 14c. as eager (to do something). Mid-14c., of actions, done on purpose,
intentional, due to one's own will. Related: Willfullness.


willfully (adv.)

also wilfully, late Old English wilfullice of one's own free will, voluntarily; see willful + -ly
(2). Mid-14c. as deliberately, knowingly. Bad sense of on purpose is attested from late 14c.


William

masc. proper name, from Old North French Willaume, Norman form of French Guillaume, of Germanic
origin (cognates: Old High German Willahelm, German Wilhelm), from willio will (see will (n.)) +
helma helmet, from Proto-Germanic *helmaz protective covering (see helm (n.2)). After the Conquest,
the most popular given name in England until supplanted by John.


willies (n.)

spell of nervousness, 1896, perhaps from the woollies, a dialectal term for nervous uneasiness,
probably in reference to the itchiness of wool garments.


willing (adj.)

early 14c., present participle adjective from will (v.1). Old English had -willendliche in
compounds. Related: Willingly; willingness.


willow (n.)

Old English welig willow, from Proto-Germanic *wel- (cognates: Old Saxon wilgia, Middle Dutch
wilghe, Dutch wilg), probably from PIE *wel- (3) to turn, roll, with derivatives referring to
curved, enclosing objects, cognate with Greek helix (see volvox). The change in form to -ow (14c.)
paralleled that of bellow and fellow. The more typical Germanic word for the tree is represented by
withy.


willowy (adj.)

flexible and graceful, 1791, from willow + -y (2). Earlier bordered or shaded by willows (1751).
Willowish is older (1650s) but only in reference to the color of willow leaves. Related:
Willowiness.


willpower (n.)

also will power, 1847, from will (n.) + power (n.).


willy-nilly

c.1600, contraction of will I, nill I, or will he, nill he, or will ye, nill ye, literally with or
without the will of the person concerned. See nill + will (v.1).


Wilsonian (adj.)

1921, characteristic of the U.S. presidency of Woodrow Wilson (1856-1924), especially in reference
to idealism in foreign policy.


wilt (v.)

1690s, to fade, droop, wither, probably an alteration of welk to wilt, probably from Middle Dutch or
Middle Low German welken to wither, cognate with Old High German irwelhen become soft, from Proto-
Germanic *welk-, from PIE root *welg- wet (see welkin). Transitive sense of cause to fade or droop
is from 1809. Related: Wilted; wilting.


wily (adj.)

subtle, cunning, crafty, early 14c., from wile (n.) + -ly (1). Related: Wiliness. In 16c. English
had wily-pie cunning fellow.


Wimbledon

district of South London, Old English Wunemannedune (10c.), probably Wynnman's hill, from proper
name *Wynnman. The -m- is intrusive; the -n- to -l- substitution was common in Anglo-French. Used
metonymically from 1895 for the lawn tennis championships played annually there.


wimp (n.)

1920 (but not attested again until 1960), perhaps a clipped form of whimper (cf whimp, 1540s),
perhaps influenced by J. Wellington Wimpy, comparatively unaggressive character in Popeye comics.


wimp (v.)

1986, with out (adv.), from wimp (n.). Related: Wimped; wimping.


wimple (n.)

head and neck covering for women, formerly worn out of doors and especially by nuns, Old English
wimpel, from Proto-Germanic *wimpilaz (cognates: Old Saxon wimpal, Old Frisian wimpel, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wimpel, Old High German wimpal, German wimpel, Old Norse vimpill), of obscure origin. Old
French guimple (French guimpe) is from Germanic.


wimpy (adj.)

1967, from wimp (n.) + -y (2). Related: Wimpiness.


win (v.)

be victorious, c.1300 fusion of Old English winnan to labor, toil, struggle for, work at, strive,
fight, and gewinnan to gain or succeed by struggling, conquer, obtain, both from Proto-Germanic
*winn(w)an to seek to gain (cognates: Old Saxon winnan, Old Norse vinna, Old Frisian winna, Dutch
winnen to gain, win, Danish vinde to win, Old High German winnan to strive, struggle, fight, German
gewinnen to gain, win, Gothic gawinnen to suffer, toil), from PIE *wen- (1) desire, strive for
(source of wish; see Venus).    Related: Won; winning. Meaning gain the affection or esteem of is
from c.1600. Breadwinner preserves the sense of toil in Old English winnan. Phrase you can't win
them all (1954) first attested in Raymond Chandler. Winningest is attested by 1804.


win (n.)

Old English winn labor, toil; strife, conflict; profit, gain, from the source of win (v.). Modern
sense of a victory in a game or contest is first attested 1862, from the verb.


wince (v.)

c.1300, wincen; mid-13c. winchen, to recoil suddenly, from Anglo-French *wenchir, Old North French
*wenchier (Old French guenchir) to turn aside, avoid, from Frankish *wenkjan, from Proto-Germanic
*wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon to stagger, totter, Old Norse vakka to stray, hover; see
wink (v.)). Originally of horses. Modern form is attested from late 13c. Related: Winced; wincing.


winch (v.)

to hoist with a winch, 1520s, from winch (n.). Related: Winched; winching.


winch (n.)

late 13c., from Old English wince winch, pulley, from Proto-Germanic *winkja-, from PIE *weng- to
bend, curve (see wink (v.)). Perhaps so called in reference to the bent handle.


Winchester

city in Hampshire, capital of Wessex and later of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom, Old English
Uintanc&aelig;stir (c.730), from Ouenta (c.150), from Venta, a pre-Celtic name perhaps meaning
favored or chief place + Old English ceaster Roman town (see Chester). As the name of a kind of
breech-loading repeating rifle it is from the name of Oliver F. Winchester (1810-1880), U.S.
manufacturer.


wind (n.1)

air in motion, Old English wind wind, from Proto-Germanic *windaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian,
Middle Dutch, Dutch wind, Old Norse vindr, Old High German wind, German Wind, Gothic winds), from
PIE *we-nt-o- blowing, from root *we- to blow (cognates: Sanskrit va-, Greek aemi-, Gothic waian,
Old English wawan, Old High German wajan, German wehen, Old Church Slavonic vejati to blow; Sanskrit
vatah, Avestan vata-, Hittite huwantis, Latin ventus, Old Church Slavonic vetru, Lithuanian vejas
wind; Lithuanian vetra tempest, storm; Old Irish feth air; Welsh gwynt, Breton gwent wind).
Normal pronunciation evolution made this word rhyme with kind and rind (Donne rhymes it with mind),
but it shifted to a short vowel 18c., probably from influence of windy, where the short vowel is
natural. A sad loss for poets, who now must rhyme it only with sinned and a handful of weak words.
Symbolic of emptiness and vanity since late 13c.    I have forgot much, Cynara! gone with the wind.
[Ernest Dowson, 1896]    Meaning breath is attested from late Old English; especially breath in
speaking (early 14c.), so long-winded, also easy or regular breathing (early 14c.), hence second
wind in the figurative sense (by 1830), an image from the sport of hunting.   Winds wind instruments
of an orchestra is from 1876. Figurative phrase which way the wind blows for the current state of
affairs is suggested from c.1400. To get wind of receive information about is by 1809, perhaps
inspired by French avoir le vent de. To take the wind out of (one's) sails in the figurative sense
(by 1883) is an image from sailing, where a ship without wind can make no progress. Wind-chill index
is recorded from 1939. Wind energy from 1976. Wind vane from 1725.


wind (v.1)

move by turning and twisting, Old English windan to turn, twist, plait, curl, brandish, swing (class
III strong verb; past tense wand, past participle wunden), from Proto-Germanic *windan to wind
(cognates: Old Saxon windan, Old Norse vinda, Old Frisian winda, Dutch winden, Old High German
wintan, German winden, Gothic windan to wind), from PIE *wendh- to turn, wind, weave (cognates:
Latin viere twist, plait, weave, vincire bind; Lithuanian vyti twist, wind).    Related to wend,
which is its causative form, and to wander. The past tense and past participle merged in Middle
English. Meaning to twine, entwine oneself around is from 1590s; transitive sense of turn or twist
round and round (on something) is from c.1300. Meaning set a watch, clockwork, etc. in operating
mode by tightening its spring is from c.1600. Wind down come to a conclusion is recorded from 1952;
wind up come to a conclusion is from 1825; earlier in transitive sense put (affairs) in order in
advance of a final settlement (1780). Winding sheet shroud of a corpse is attested from early 15c.


wind (v.2)

to perceive by scent, get wind of, c.1400, from wind (n.1). Of horns, etc., make sound by blowing
through, from 1580s. Meaning tire, put out of breath; render temporarily breathless is from 1802,
originally in pugilism, in reference to the effect of a punch in the stomach. Related: Winded;
winding.


wind (n.2)

an act of winding round, 1825, from wind (v.1) . Earlier, an apparatus for winding, late 14c., in
which use perhaps from a North Sea Germanic word, such as Middle Dutch, Middle Low German winde
windlass.


wind-rose (n.)

1590s, from wind (n.1) + rose (n.1).


wind-sock (n.)

also windsock, 1922, from wind (n.1) + sock (n.).


wind-up (n.)

1570s, conclusion or final adjustment and settlement of some matter, from verbal phrase wind up (see
wind (v.1)). Baseball pitching sense attested from 1906.


windage (n.)

1710, allowance of space between the projectile and the diameter of the tube of a firearm, from wind
(n.1) + -age. Meaning allowance for wind deflection is from 1867.


windbag (n.)

late 15c., bellows for an organ, from wind (n.1) + bag (n.). Figurative sense of person who talks
too much is attested from 1827.


windbreak (n.)

also wind-break, row of trees, etc., to break the force of the wind, 1861, American English, from
wind (n.1) + break (n.).


windbreaker (n.)

type of jacket to keep off the wind (originally a kind of leather shirt), 1918, from wind (n.1) +
agent noun from break (v.).


windfall (n.)

mid-15c., from wind (n.1) + fall (n.1). Originally literal, in reference to wood or fruit blown down
by the wind, and thus free to all. Figurative sense of unexpected acquisition is recorded from
1540s.


windhover (n.)

kestrel, 1670s, from wind (n.1) + hover; so called from the bird's habit of hovering in the wind.
Among the many early names for it was windfucker (1590s).


windlass (n.)

device for raising weights by winding a rope round a cylinder, c.1400, alteration of wyndase (late
13c.), from Anglo-French windas, and directly from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse vindass,
from vinda to wind (see wind (v.1)) + ass pole, beam (cognate with Gothic ans beam, pillar).


windmill (n.)

c.1300, from wind (n.1) + mill (n.). Similar formation in German Windm&uuml;hle, Dutch windmolen,
French moulin &agrave; vent. Verb meaning to swing the arms wildly is recorded from 1888. Related:
Windmilled; windmilling.


window (n.)

c.1200, literally wind eye, from Old Norse vindauga, from vindr wind (see wind (n.1)) + auga eye
(see eye (n.)). Replaced Old English eag&thorn;yrl, literally eye-hole, and eagduru, literally eye-
door.    Originally an unglazed hole in a roof, most Germanic languages adopted a version of Latin
fenestra to describe the glass version (such as German Fenster, Swedish f&#246;nster), and English
used fenester as a parallel word till mid-16c. Window dressing is first recorded 1790; figurative
sense is from 1898. Window seat is attested from 1778. Window of opportunity (1979) is from earlier
figurative use in U.S. space program, such as launch window (1963). Window-shopping is recorded from
1904.    Window shopping, according to the women, is the king of outdoor sports. Whenever a woman
gets down town and has 2 or 3 hours and no money to spend, she goes window shopping. She gives the
Poiret gowns and the thousand dollar furs the double O and then kids herself into believing she'd
look like Lillian Russell or Beverly Bayne if she had 'em on. It's great for developing the
imagination and one of the great secrets of conserving the bankroll. ... [Motor Age, Jan. 27, 1916]


windowless (adj.)

1760, from window (n.) + -less.


windowsill (n.)

also window-sill, 1703, from window (n.) + sill (n.).


windpipe (n.)

trachea, 1520s, from wind (n.1) in the breath sense + pipe (n.1).


windrow (n.)

1520s, from wind (n.1) + row (n.). Because it is exposed to the wind for drying.


windshield (n.)

1902, from wind (n.1) + shield (n.). U.S. alternative to British windscreen (which is attested from
1905 in this sense).


Windsor

town in Berkshire, Old English Windlesoran (c.1060), literally bank or slope with a windlass (Old
English *windels). Site of a royal residence, hence Windsor chair (1724), Windsor tie (1895),
Windsor knot in a necktie (1953).


windstorm (n.)

late 14c., from wind (n.1) + storm (n.).


windsurf (v.)

also wind-surf, 1969, from wind (n.1) + surf (v.). Related: Windsurfed; windsurfing.


windswept (adj.)

1932, originally of hair, from wind (n.1) + past participle of sweep (v.).


windward (adj.)

on the side toward which the wind blows, 1540s, from wind (n.1) + -ward.


windy (adj.)

Old English windig windy, breezy; see wind (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning affected by flatulence is in late
Old English. Chichago has been the Windy City since at least 1885.


wine (n.)

Old English win wine, from Proto-Germanic *winam (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German
win, Old Norse vin, Dutch wijn, German Wein), an early borrowing from Latin vinum wine, from PIE
*win-o-, an Italic noun related to words for wine in Greek (oinos), Armenian, Hittite, and non-Indo-
European Georgian and West Semitic (Arabic wain, Hebrew yayin), probably from a lost Mediterranean
language word *win-/*woin- wine.    Also from Latin vinum are Old Church Slavonic vino, Polish wino,
Russian vino, Lithuanian vynas, Welsh gwin, Old Irish fin, Gaelic fion. Essentially the same word as
vine (q.v.). Wine snob is recorded from 1951. Wine cellar is from late 14c. Wine-cooler is 1815 as
vessel in which bottled wine is kept cool; by 1977 as a type of wine-based beverage.


wine (v.)

entertain with wine, 1862, from wine (n.). Earlier expend in drinking wine (1620s). Related: Wined;
wining.


winebibber (n.)

drunkard, 1530s, loan-translation of German Weins&auml;ufer (Luther), from Wein wine + S&auml;ufer
bibber. See bibber. Related: Winebibbing.


winery (n.)

1867, American English, from wine (n.) + -ery.


Winfred

masc. proper name, from Old English Winfri&eth;, literally friend of peace, from wine friend
(related to winnan to strive, struggle, fight; see win (v.)) + fri&eth;u peace (see free)


wing (n.)

late 12c., wenge, from Old Norse v&aelig;ngr wing of a bird, aisle, etc. (cognates: Danish and
Swedish vinge wing), of unknown origin, perhaps from a Proto-Germanic *we-ingjaz, suffixed form of
PIE root *we- blow (source of Old English wawan to blow; see wind (n.)). Replaced Old English
fe&eth;ra (plural) wings (see feather). The meaning either of two divisions of a political party,
army, etc. is first recorded c.1400; theatrical sense is from 1790.      The slang sense of earn
(one's) wings is 1940s, from the wing-shaped badges awarded to air cadets on graduation. To be under
(someone's) wing protected by (someone) is recorded from early 13c. Phrase on a wing and a prayer is
title of a 1943 song about landing a damaged aircraft.


wing (v.)

c.1600, take flight; 1610s, fit with wings, from wing (n.). Meaning shoot a bird in the wing is from
1802, with figurative extensions to wounds suffered in non-essential parts. Verbal phrase wing it
(1885) is said to be from a theatrical slang sense of an actor learning his lines in the wings
before going onstage, or else not learning them at all and being fed by a prompter in the wings; but
perhaps it is simply an image of a baby bird taking flight from the nest for the first time (the
phrase is attested in this sense from 1875). Related: Winged; winging.


wingding (n.)

1927, originally hobo slang, counterfeit seizures induced to attract sympathy; meaning energetic
celebration first recorded 1949.


winged (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from wing (v.).


wingman (n.)

pilot of the plane beside the lead aircraft in a formation, 1943 (earlier as a football position),
from wing (n.) + man (n.). With figurative extensions, including the dating-sidekick one that was in
use by 2006.


wingnut (n.)

nut with flared sides for turning with the thumb and forefinger; so called for its shape. Meaning
weird person recorded by 1989, probably not from the literal sense but from the secondary sense of
nut, influenced perhaps by slang senses of wing in wing-ding wild party, originally fit, spasm
(1937). An earlier, British, sense of wingnut was person with large, protruding ears (1986).


wingspan (n.)

also wing-span, 1894, from wing (n.) + span (n.1).


wingtip (n.)

also wing-tip, 1867, tip of a wing (originally of insects; by 1870 of birds), from wing (n.) + tip
(n.1). Of airplane wings from 1909. As a type of shoe with a back-curving toe cap suggestive of a
bird's wingtip, from 1928. Related: Wing-tipped.


wink (v.)

Old English wincian to blink, wink, close one's eyes quickly, from Proto-Germanic *wink- (cognates:
Dutch winken, Old High German winkan move sideways, stagger; nod, German winken to wave, wink), a
gradational variant of the root of Old High German wankon to stagger, totter, Old Norse vakka to
stray, hover, from PIE root *weng- to bend, curve. The meaning close an eye as a hint or signal is
first recorded c.1100; that of close one's eyes (to fault or irregularity) first attested late 15c.
Related: Winked; winking.


wink (n.)

a quick shutting and opening of the eyes, c.1300, from wink (v.); meaning very brief moment of time
is attested from 1580s.


winkle (n.)

edible mollusk, 1580s, shortening of periwinkle (n.2).


winless (adj.)

1948, from win (n.) + -less.


winnable (adj.)

1540s, from win (v.) + -able.


Winnebago

Siouan people of eastern Wisconsin, 1766, from Potawatomi winepyekoha, literally person of dirty
water, in reference to the muddy or fish-clogged waters of the Fox River below Lake Winnebago. As a
type of motor vehicle, attested from 1966.


winner (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from win (v.). Adjectival winner-take-all attested from 1901.


winnings (n.)

things gained or won, late 14c., plural verbal noun from win (v.).


Winnipeg

originally the name of the lake, probably from Ojibwa (Algonquian) winipeg dirty water; compare
winad it is dirty. Etymologically related to Winnebago.


winnow (v.)

late 14c., from Old English windwian to fan, winnow, from wind air in motion, paring down, see wind
(n.1). Cognate with Old Norse vinza, Old High German winton to fan, winnow, Gothic diswin&thorn;jan
to throw (grain) apart.


wino (n.)

1915, from wine + suffix as in bucko, kiddo.


winsome (adj.)

Old English wynsum agreeable, pleasant, from wynn pleasure, delight, from Proto-Germanic *wunjo-
(cognates: Old Saxon wunnia, Old High German wunja, German Wonne joy, delight; see win (v.)) + -sum
(see -some (1)). Apparently surviving only in northern English dialect for 400 years until revived
18c. by Hamilton, Burns, and other Scottish poets. Similar formation in Old Saxon wunsam, Old High
German wunnisam. Related: Winsomely; winsomeness.


winter (n.)

Old English winter (plural wintru), the fourth and coldest season of the year, winter, from Proto-
Germanic *wintruz winter (cognates: Old Frisian, Dutch winter, Old Saxon, Old High German wintar,
German winter, Danish and Swedish vinter, Gothic wintrus, Old Norse vetr winter), probably literally
the wet season, from PIE *wend-, from root *wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). On another old
guess, cognate with Gaulish vindo-, Old Irish find white.    As an adjective in Old English. The
Anglo-Saxons counted years in winters, as in Old English &aelig;netre one-year-old; and
wintercearig, which might mean either winter-sad or sad with years. Old Norse Vetrardag, first day
of winter, was the Saturday that fell between Oct. 10 and 16.


winter (v.)

to pass the winter (in some place), late 14c., from winter (n.). Related: Wintered; wintering.


wintergreen (n.)

type of plant, 1540s, from winter (n.) + green. So called from keeping green through the winter.


winterize (v.)

1938, on model of earlier summerize (1935); from winter (n.) + -ize. Related: Winterized;
winterizing.


wintry (adj.)

Old English wintrig (see winter (n.) + -y (2)); also winterlic; but the modern word appears to be a
new formation [Barnhart]. Similar formation in German wintericht.


wipe (n.)

1640s, act of wiping, from wipe (v.). From 1708 as something used in wiping (especially a
handkerchief); 1971 as disposable absorbent tissue.


wipe (v.)

Old English wipian to wipe, cleanse, from Proto-Germanic *wipjan to move back and forth (cognates:
Danish vippe, Middle Dutch, Dutch vippen, Old High German wifan to swing), from PIE *weip- to turn,
vacillate, tremble (source of Latin vibrare to shake; see vibrate).


wipeout (n.)

also wipe-out, 1962, American English, surfer slang, from wipe (v.) + out. Sense of destruction,
defeat, a killing is recorded from 1968. Verbal phrase wipe out destroy, obliterate is from 1610s.


wiper (n.)

1550s as a person, 1580s as a cloth, agent noun wipe (v.). From 1929 as short for windshield wiper.


wire (n.)

Old English wir metal drawn out into a fine thread, from Proto-Germanic *wira- (cognates: Old Norse
viravirka filigree work, Swedish vira to twist, Old High German wiara fine gold work), from PIE
*wei- (1) to turn, twist, plait (cognates: Old Irish fiar, Welsh gwyr bent, crooked; Latin viere to
bend, twist, viri&aelig; bracelets, of Celtic origin). A wire as marking the finish line of a
racecourse is attested from 1883; hence the figurative down to the wire. Wire-puller in the
political sense is 1848, American English, on the image of pulling the wires that work a puppet.


wire (v.)

c.1300, adorn with (gold) wire, from wire (n.). From 1859 as communicate by means of a telegraphic
wire; 1891 as furnish with electrical wires and connections. Related: Wired; wiring.


wire-tapping (n.)

also wiretapping, surreptitiously obtaining information by connecting wires to telegraph (later
telephone) lines and establishing an intermediate station between two legitimate ones, 1878, from
wire (n.) + agent noun from tap (v.2). Earliest references often are to activity during the American
Civil War, but the phrase does not seem to have been used at that time. Related: Wire-tap; wire-
tapper.


wired (adj.)

Old English wired made of wire, past participle adjective from wire (v.). From early 15c. as
stiffened by wires. Meaning nervous, jittery is by 1970s; earlier (1959, perhaps early 1950s) using
narcotic drugs, addicted to drugs.


wiredraw (v.)

1590s, to make wire by drawing metal, from wire (n.) + draw (v.). Related: Wiredrawer; wiredrawing.


wiregrass (n.)

also wire-grass, 1790, from wire (n.) + grass (n.).


wireless (adj.)

1894, in reference to as a type of telegraph, from wire (n.) + -less. As a noun, radio broadcasting,
attested from 1903, subsequently superseded by radio.


wireman (n.)

worker on electrical lines, 1881, from wire (n.) + man (n.).


wiring (n.)

wires collectively, 1809, later especially electrical wirework (1887), from present participle of
wire (v.).


wiry (adj.)

1580s, made of wire, from wire (n.) + -y (2). As resembling wire from 1590s; of persons, lean,
sinewy, by 1808. Related: Wiriness.


Wisconsin

organized as a U.S. territory 1836; admitted as a state 1848. Originally applied to the Wisconsin
River; a native name of unknown origin. Early spellings include Mescousing and Wishkonsing.


wisdom (n.)

Old English wisdom knowledge, learning, experience, from wis (see wise (adj.)) + -dom. A common
Germanic compound (Old Saxon, Old Frisian wisdom, Old Norse visdomr, Old High German wistuom wisdom,
German Weistum judicial sentence serving as a precedent). Wisdom teeth so called from 1848 (earlier
teeth of wisdom, 1660s), a loan-translation of Latin dentes sapientiae, itself a loan-translation of
Greek sophronisteres (used by Hippocrates, from sophron prudent, self-controlled), so called because
they usually appear ages 17-25, when a person reaches adulthood.


wise (adj.)

Old English wis learned, sagacious, cunning; sane; prudent, discreet; experienced; having the power
of discerning and judging rightly, from Proto-Germanic *wissaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
wis, Old Norse viss, Dutch wijs, German weise wise), from past participle adjective *wittos of PIE
root *weid- to see, hence to know (see vision). Modern slang meaning aware, cunning first attested
1896. Related to the source of Old English witan to know, wit.  A wise man has no extensive
knowledge; He who has extensive knowledge is not a wise man. [Lao-tzu, Tao te Ching, c.550 B.C.E.]
Wise man was in Old English. Wise guy is attested from 1896, American English; wise-ass (n.) by
1966, American English (probably a literal sense is intended by the phrase in the 1607 comedy
Westward Hoe by Dekker and Webster). Wisenheimer, with mock German or Yiddish surname suffix, first
recorded 1904.


wise (n.)

way of proceeding, manner, Old English wise way, fashion, custom, habit, manner; condition, state,
circumstance, from the same source as wise (adj.). Compare Old Saxon wisa, Old Frisian wis, Danish
vis, Middle Dutch wise, Dutch wijs, Old High German wisa, German Weise way, manner. Most common in
English now as a word-forming element (as in likewise, clockwide); the adverbial -wise has been used
thus since Old English. For sense evolution from to see to way of proceeding, compare cognate Greek
eidos form, shape, kind, also course of action. Ground sense is to see/know the way.


wise (v.)

Old English wisean make wise or knowing (transitive), cognate with Old Frisian wisa, Old Saxon
wisian, Middle Dutch wisen, Dutch wijzen, Old High German wisan, German weisen; from the source of
wise (adj.). Intransitive wise up is attested by 1905.


wiseacre (n.)

1590s, partial translation of Middle Dutch wijssegger soothsayer (with no derogatory connotation),
probably altered by association with Middle Dutch segger sayer from Old High German wizzago prophet,
from wizzan to know, from Proto-Germanic *wit- to know (see wit (v.)). The deprecatory sense of one
who pretends to know everything may have come through confusion with obsolete English segger sayer,
which also had a sense of braggart (mid-15c.).


wisecrack (n.)

1906, American English, from wise (adj.) + crack in the boast sense (see cracker (n.2)). As a verb
from 1915. Related: Wisecracking.


wisely (adv.)

Old English wislice; see wise (adj.) + -ly (2).


wish (v.)

Old English wyscan to wish, cherish a desire, from Proto-Germanic *wunsk- (cognates: Old Norse
&#339;skja, Danish &oslash;nske, Swedish &ouml;nska, Middle Dutch wonscen, Dutch wensen, Old High
German wunsken, German wunschen to wish), from PIE *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire, be
satisfied (cognates: Sanskrit vanati he desires, loves, wins, Latin venus love, sexual desire,
loveliness, venerari to worship; see Venus). Related: Wished; wishing. Wishing well as an enchanted
water hole attested by 1819.


wish (n.)

early 14c., act of wishing, also what one wishes for, from wish (v.). Cognate with Old Norse osk,
Middle Dutch wonsc, Dutch wens, Old High German wunsc, German Wunsch a wish. Wish fulfillment (1901)
translates German wunscherf&uuml;llung (Freud, Die Traumdeutung, 1900).


wishbone (n.)

also wish-bone, 1860, from wish (n.) + bone (n.); so called from the custom of making a wish while
pulling the bone in two with another person. The wishbone breaking custom dates to the early 17c.,
when the bone was a merrythought.


wishful (adj.)

1520s, from wish (n.) + -ful. Related: Wishfully; wishfulness. Wishful thinking is recorded from
1907.


wishy-washy (adj.)

1690s, feeble or poor in quality, reduplication of washy thin, watery. Meaning vacillating first
recorded 1873.


wisp (n.)

early 14c., handful or bundle of hay, grass, etc., used for burning or cleaning or as a cushion;
perhaps from an unrecorded Old English word, cognate with Norwegian and Swedish visp wisp, of
unknown origin; sometimes said to be connected with whisk or with Middle Low German and Middle Dutch
wispel a measure of grain. Meaning thin, filmy portion first attested 1836.


wispy (adj.)

1717, from wisp + -y (2). Related: Wispiness.


wist (v.)

to know (archaic), c.1500, from Old English past tense of witan to know (cognates: German wusste,
past tense of wissen to know); see wit. Had-I-wiste was used c.1400-1550 in sense regret for
something done rashly or heedlessly; see wist. Proverbial in expression Had-I-wiste cometh ever too
late.    Haddywyst comyth euer to late Whan lewyd woordis beth owte y-spronge. [Commonplace book in
Trinity College, Cambridge, c.1500]


Wisteria (n.)

genus of woody vines, 1819, formed by Thomas Nuttall, English botanist, in recognition of American
anatomist Caspar Wistar (1761-1818) of Philadelphia. The -e- apparently is a misprint. The Wistar
Institute was founded in 1892 by his great-nephew and named for him.


wistful (adj.)

1610s, closely attentive, perhaps from obsolete wistly intently (c.1500), of uncertain origin.
Perhaps formed on the model of wishful. Middle English wistful meant bountiful, well-supplied, from
Old English wist provisions. The meaning of longingly pensive, musing is by 1714. Related:
Wistfully; wistfulness.


wit (n.)

mental capacity, Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit understanding, intellect, sense;
knowledge, consciousness, conscience, from Proto-Germanic *wit- (cognates: Old Saxon wit, Old Norse
vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi knowledge, understanding,
intelligence, mind, German Witz wit, witticism, joke, Gothic unwiti ignorance), from PIE *weid- to
see, metaphorically to know (see vision). Related to Old English witan to know (source of wit (v.)).
Meaning ability to connect ideas and express them in an amusing way is first recorded 1540s; that of
person of wit or learning is from late 15c. For nuances of usage, see humor.    A witty saying
proves nothing. [Voltaire, Diner du Comte de Boulainvilliers]   <hr />   Wit ought to be five or six
degrees above the ideas that form the intelligence of an audience. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]
Witjar was old slang (18c.) for head, skull. Witling (1690s) was a pretender to wit.


wit (v.)

to know (archaic), Old English witan (past tense wast, past participle witen) to know, beware of or
conscious of, understand, observe, ascertain, learn, from Proto-Germanic *witan to have seen, hence
to know (cognates: Old Saxon witan, Old Norse vita, Old Frisian wita, Middle Dutch, Dutch weten, Old
High German wizzan, German wissen, Gothic witan to know), from PIE *weid- (see wit (n.)). The phrase
to wit, almost the only surviving use of the verb, is first recorded 1570s, from earlier that is to
wit (mid-14c.), probably a loan-translation of Anglo-French cestasavoir, used to render Latin
videlicet (see viz.).


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


witch hazel (n.)

1540s, probably from Old English wice Applied generally or vaguely to various trees having pliant
branches [OED], from wican to bend, related to weak (see vicarious) + h&aelig;sel, used for any bush
of the pine family (see hazel (n.)). The North American bush, from which a soothing lotion is made,
was so called from 1670s. This is the source of the verb witch in dowsing.


witch hunt (n.)

1853 in the literal sense (witch-hunting is from 1630s), from witch (n.) + hunt (n.). The extended
sense is attested from 1919, American English, later re-popularized in reaction to Cold War anti-
Communism.    Senator [Lee S.] Overman. What do you mean by witch hunt?  Mr. [Raymond] Robins. I
mean this, Senator. You are familiar with the old witch-hunt attitude, that when people get
frightened at things and see bogies, then then get out witch proclamations, and mob action and all
kinds of hysteria takes place. [Bolshevik Propaganda, U.S. Senate subcommittee hearings, 1919]


witchcraft (n.)

Old English wiccecr&aelig;ft witchcraft, magic, from wicce (see witch) + cr&aelig;ft power, skill
(see craft). Witchcraft was declared a crime in English law in 1542; trials there peaked in 1580s
and 1640s but fell sharply after 1660. The last, in 1717, ended in acquittal. The Witchcraft Act was
repealed 1736.


witchery (n.)

1540s, from witch (n.) + -ery.


witchy (adj.)

1660s, from witch (n.) + -y (2).


witenagemot (n.)

Anglo-Saxon parliament, Old English witena gemot, from witena, genitive plural of wita man of
knowledge, related to wit (n.)) + gemot assembly, council (see moot (n.)).


with (prep.)

Old English wi&eth; against, opposite, from, toward, by, near, a shortened form related to
wi&eth;er, from Proto-Germanic *withro- against (cognates: Old Saxon withar against, Old Norse
vi&eth;r against, with, toward, at, Middle Dutch, Dutch weder, Dutch weer again, Gothic wi&thorn;ra
against, opposite), from PIE *wi-tero-, literally more apart, suffixed form of root *wi- separation
(cognates: Sanskrit vi, Avestan vi- asunder, Sanskrit vitaram further, farther, Old Church Slavonic
vutoru other, second).    Sense shifted in Middle English to denote association, combination, and
union, partly by influence of Old Norse vidh, and also perhaps by Latin cum with (as in pugnare cum
fight with). In this sense, it replaced Old English mid with, which survives only as a prefix (as in
midwife). Original sense of against, in opposition is retained in compounds such as withhold,
withdraw, withstand. Often treated as a conjunction by ungrammatical writers and used where and
would be correct. First record of with child pregnant is recorded from c.1200. With it cool is black
slang, recorded by 1931. French avec with was originally avoc, from Vulgar Latin *abhoc, from apud
hoc, literally with this.


withal (adv.)

in addition, late 14c., from Middle English with alle (c.1200), superseding Old English mid ealle
wholly (see with).


withdraw (v.)

early 13c. (transitive), to take back, from with away + drawen to draw, possibly a loan-translation
of Latin retrahere to retract. Intransitive sense from mid-13c. Sense of to remove oneself is
recorded from c.1300. Related: Withdrawn; withdrawing.


withdrawal (n.)

1820s, act of taking back, also retraction of a statement, from withdraw + -al (2). Earlier words in
the same sense were withdrawment (1640s); withdraught (mid-14c.). Meaning removal of money from a
bank, etc. is from 1861; psychological sense is from 1916; meaning physical reaction to the
cessation of an addictive substance is from 1929 (with an isolated use from 1897; withdrawal symptom
is from 1910). As a synonym for coitus interruptus from 1889.


withe (n.)

Old English wi&eth;&eth;e twisted cord, tough, flexible twig used for binding, especially a willow
twig, from PIE *withjon-, from PIE *wei- (1) to turn, twist (see withy).


wither (v.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English wydderen dry up, shrivel (late 14c.), intransitive, apparently a
differentiated and special use of wederen to expose to weather (see weather (v.)). Compare German
verwittern to become weather-beaten, from Witter weather. Transitive sense from 1550s. Related:
Withered; withering; witheringly.


withers (n.)

1570s, probably from a dialectal survival of Old English wi&eth;er against, contrary, opposite (see
with) + plural suffix. Usually said to be so called because the withers are the parts of the animal
that oppose the load. Compare German Widerrist withers, from wider against + Rist wrist.


withershins

see widdershins.


withhold (v.)

c.1200, from with- back, away (see with) + holden to hold (see hold (v.)); probably a loan-
translation of Latin retinere to withhold. Related: Withheld; withholding. Past participle form
withholden was still used 19c.


within (adv., prep.)

Old English wi&eth;innan within, from within, literally against the inside, see with + in.


without (adv., prep.)

Old English wi&eth;utan outside of, from outside, literally against the outside (opposite of
within), see with + out (adv.). As a word expressing lack or want of something (opposite of with),
attested from c.1200. In use by late 14c. as a conjunction, short for without that.


withstand (v.)

Old English wi&eth;standan resist, oppose, from wi&eth; against (see with) + standan to stand (see
stand (v.)); perhaps a loan-translation of Latin resistere to resist (see resist). Similar formation
in Old Norse vi&eth;standa, Old Frisian withstonda, Old High German widarstan, German widerstehen.
In 14c. and early 15c., withsit was in use with the same meaning. Related: Withstood; withstanding.


withy (n.)

Old English wi&eth;ig willow, willow twig, from Proto-Germanic *with- willow (cognates: Old Norse
vi&eth;ir, Danish vidje, Swedish vide, Old High German wida, German Weide willow), from PIE root
*wei- (1) to bend, twist (cognates: Avestan vaeiti- osier, Greek itea willow, Latin vitis vine,
Lithuanian vytis willow twig, Polish witwa, Welsh gwden willow, Russian vitvina branch, bough).


witless (adj.)

Old English witleas foolish, mad; see wit (n.) + -less. Phrase scared witless attested from 1975.
Related: Witlessly; witlessness.


witness (n.)

Old English witnes attestation of fact, event, etc., from personal knowledge; also one who so
testifies; originally knowledge, wit, formed from wit (n.) + -ness. Christian use (late 14c.) is as
a literal translation of Greek martys (see martyr). Witness stand is recorded from 1853.


witness (v.)

c.1300, bear testimony, from witness (n.). Meaning affix one's signature to (a document) to
establish its identity is from early 14c. Meaning see or know by personal presence, observe is from
1580s. Related: Witnessed; witnessing.


witted (adj.)

late 14c. in compounds, having wits (of a certain kind), from wit (n.).


witticism (n.)

1670s, coined by Dryden (as wittycism) from witty on model of criticism.    That every witticism is
an inexact thought: that what is perfectly true is imperfectly witty .... [Walter Savage Landor,
Imaginary Conversations]


witting (adj.)

aware, mid-14c. (implied in wytindeliche (adv.)), present participle adjective from wit (v.).
Related: Wittingly.


wittol (n.)

compliant cuckold, late 15c., witewold, probably from witen to know (see wit (v.)) + ending from
noun cuckold (Middle English cokewold).


witty (adj.)

Old English wittig clever, wise, sagacious; in one's right mind; see wit (n.) intellect + -y (2).
Meaning possessing sparkling wit is recorded from 1580s. Related: Wittily; wittiness.


wive (v.)

to marry (a woman), Old English wifian, from wif woman (see wife). Compare Middle Dutch wiven.
Transitive sense provide with a wife is from 1510s. Related: Wived; wiving.


wivern (n.)

see wyvern.


wizard (n.)

early 15c., philosopher, sage, from Middle English wys wise (see wise (adj.)) + -ard. Compare
Lithuanian zynyste magic, zynys sorcerer, zyne witch, all from zinoti to know. The ground sense is
perhaps to know the future. The meaning one with magical power, one proficient in the occult
sciences did not emerge distinctly until c.1550, the distinction between philosophy and magic being
blurred in the Middle Ages. As a slang word meaning excellent it is recorded from 1922.


wizardry (n.)

1580s, from wizard + -ry.


wizen (v.)

Old English wisnian, weosnian to wither, dry up, waste away, from Proto-Germanic *wisnon (cognates:
Old Norse visna to wither, Old High German wesanen to dry up, shrivel, wither; German verwesen to
decay, rot), from PIE root *wei- (2) to wither. Related: Wizened.


wl-

an initial sound cluster in words in Old English and early Middle English; among the Old English
words were wlanc stately, splendid; wl&#230;tung nausea; wlenc pride, arrogance (Middle English
wlonk); wlite brightness, beauty, splendor; wlitig radiant, physically beautiful (Middle English
wliti).


woad (n.)

Old English wad woad, also the blue dye made from its leaves, from Proto-Germanic *waido- (cognates:
Danish vaid, Old Frisian wed, Middle Dutch wede, Dutch wede, Old High German weit, German Waid
woad), perhaps cognate with Latin vitrium glass (see vitreous). Formerly much cultivated; since
superseded by indigo. French gu&egrave;de, Italian guado are Germanic loan-words.


wobbegong (n.)

type of Australian shark, 1852, an Aboriginal word.


wobble (v.)

1650s, wabble, probably from Low German wabbeln to wobble; cognate with Old Norse vafla hover about,
totter, related to vafra move unsteadily, from Proto-Germanic *wab- to move back and forth, perhaps
from PIE *webh- to weave (see waver). Form with -o- is from 1851. Related: Wobbled; wobbling. The
noun is attested from 1690s.


Wobbly (n.)

1914, member of Industrial Workers of the World (I.W.W.). Probably some sort of elaboration of the W
aspect of the acronym.


wobbly (adj.)

1849, wabbly; see wobble (v.) + -ly (1). Form with -o- is from 1851. Related: Wobbliness.


Woden

Anglo-Saxon god, Old English, see Odin.


woe (n.)

late 12c., from the interjection, Old English wa!, a common exclamation of lament in many languages
(compare Latin v&aelig;, Greek oa, German weh, Lettish wai, Old Irish fe, Welsh gwae, Armenian vay).


woebegone (adj.)

c.1300, in expressions such as me is wo bigone woe has beset me, from woe + begon to beset,
surround, overwhelm, from Old English began go over, traverse; inhabit, occupy; surround, beset,
overrun; from be + go.


woeful (adj.)

early 14c., afflicted with sorrow, from woe + -ful. Weakened sense of very bad recorded by 1610s.
Related: Woefully; woefulness.


wog (n.)

c.1920, a lower-class babu shipping clerk [Partridge]; but popularized in World War II British armed
forces slang for Arab, also native of India (especially as a servant or laborer), roughly equivalent
to American gook; possibly shortened from golliwog. Many acronym origins have been proposed, but
none has been found satisfactory. Related: Wogland.


wok (n.)

1952, from Cantonese.


woke

past tense of wake (v.).


wold (n.)

Old English wald (Anglian), weald (West Saxon, Kentish) forest, wooded upland, from Proto-Germanic
*walthuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian wald, Middle Dutch woude, wold, Dutch woud, Middle Low
German walde, Old High German wald, German Wald forest, Swedish vall pasture, Old Norse v&ouml;llr
soil, field, meadow), from PIE root *welt- woods; wild. The sense development from forested upland
to rolling open country (c.1200) perhaps is from Scandinavian influence, or a testimony to the
historical deforestation of Britain. Not current since mid-16c.; survives mainly in place names
(such as Cotswold).


wolf (n.)

Old English wulf wolf, wolfish person, devil, from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (cognates: Old Saxon wulf,
Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root
*wlkwo- wolf (cognates: Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k; Old Church Slavonic vluku;
Russian volcica; Lithuanian vilkas wolf; Old Persian Varkana- Hyrcania, district southeast of the
Caspian Sea, literally wolf-land; probably also Greek lykos, Latin lupus).    This manne can litle
skyl ... to saue himself harmlesse from the perilous accidentes of this world, keping ye wulf from
the doore (as they cal it). [The Institution of a Gentleman, 1555]    Probably extinct in England
from the end of the 15th century; in Scotland from the early 18th. Wolves as a symbol of lust are
ancient, such as Roman slang lupa whore, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian
lupa, French louve). The equation of wolf and prostitute, sexually voracious female persisted into
12c., but by Elizabethan times wolves had become primarily symbolic of male lust. The specific use
of wolf for sexually aggressive male first recorded 1847; wolf-whistle attested by 1945, American
English, at first associated with sailors. The image of a wolf in sheep's skin is attested from
c.1400. See here for a discussion of wolf in Indo-European history. The wolf-spider so called for
prowling and leaping on its prey rather than waiting in a web.


wolf (v.)

eat like a wolf, 1862, from wolf (n.). Related: Wolfed; wolfing.


wolfhound (n.)

also wolf-hound, 1799, from wolf (n.) + hound (n.).


wolfish (adj.)

1560s, from wolf (n.) + -ish. Earlier form was wolvish (early 15c.). Related: Wolfishly;
wolfishness.


wolfram (n.)

1757, from German Wolfram, wolform iron tungstate (1562), of obscure etymology. It looks like wolf-
cream (from rahm cream), but the second element might be Middle High German ram (German Rahm) dirty
mark, soot; if so, perhaps so called in sign of contempt because it was regarded of lesser value
than tin and caused a considerable loss of tin during the smelting process in the furnace [Klein].
Or perhaps the word is originally a personal name, wolf-raven.


wolfsbane (n.)

aconite (especially Aconitum lycoctonum), a somewhat poisonous plant, 1540s, from wolf + bane; a
translation of Latin lycoctonum, from Greek lykotonon, from lykos wolf + base of kteinein to kill.
Also known dialectally as badger's bane, hare's bane, bear's bane.


Wolof (n.)

African people of Senegal and Gambia. Also the name of the Niger-Congo language they speak.


wolverine (n.)

carnivorous mammal, 1610s, alteration of wolvering (1570s), of uncertain origin, possibly from
wolv-, inflectional stem of wolf (n.); or perhaps from wolver one who behaves like a wolf (1590s).


woman (n.)

adult female human, late Old English wimman, wiman (plural wimmen), literally woman-man, alteration
of wifman (plural wifmen) woman, female servant (8c.), a compound of wif woman (see wife) + man
human being (in Old English used in reference to both sexes; see man (n.)). Compare Dutch vrouwmens
wife, literally woman-man.    It is notable that it was thought necessary to join wif, a neuter
noun, representing a female person, to man, a masc. noun representing either a male or female
person, to form a word denoting a female person exclusively. [Century Dictionary]    The formation
is peculiar to English and Dutch. Replaced older Old English wif and quean as the word for female
human being. The pronunciation of the singular altered in Middle English by the rounding influence
of -w-; the plural retains the original vowel. Meaning wife, now largely restricted to U.S.
dialectal use, is attested from mid-15c. Woman-hater misogynist is from c.1600. Women's work is from
1660s. Women's liberation is attested from 1966; women's rights is from 1840, with an isolated
example in 1630s.


womanhood (n.)

late 14c., condition of being a woman, also qualities or characteristics considered natural to a
woman, from woman + -hood. Meaning women collectively is attested from 1520s.


womanise (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of womanize. Related: Womanized; womanizing; womanizer.


womanish (adj.)

late 14c., womanly, feminine; resembling a woman; of a man or men, behaving in the manner of a
woman, effeminate, from woman + -ish. Related: Womanishly; womanishness.


womanize (v.)

1590s, to make effeminate, from woman + -ize. Sense of to chase women, to go wenching is attested
from 1893. Related: Womanized; womanizer; womanizing.


womankind (n.)

late 14c., from woman (n.) + kind (n.).


womanly (adj.)

c.1200, of a man, wanton, lascivious; late 14c. of a woman, feminine, of qualities, proper to a
woman; from woman + -ly (1). From c.1400 of men with the sense effeminate, weak.  Related:
Womanliness.


womb (n.)

Old English wamb, womb belly, bowels, heart, uterus, from Proto-Germanic *wambo (cognates: Old Norse
vomb, Old Frisian wambe, Middle Dutch wamme, Dutch wam, Old High German wamba, German Wamme belly,
paunch, Gothic wamba belly, womb, Old English umbor child), of unknown origin.


wombat (n.)

marsupial mammal of Australia, 1798, from aboriginal Australian womback, wombar.


women

plural of woman (q.v.).


won

past tense and past participle of win (v.).


won&#039;t

contraction of will not, first recorded mid-15c. as wynnot, later wonnot (1580s) before the modern
form emerged 1660s. See will.


wonder (n.)

Old English wundor marvelous thing, miracle, object of astonishment, from Proto-Germanic *wundran
(cognates: Old Saxon wundar, Middle Dutch, Dutch wonder, Old High German wuntar, German wunder, Old
Norse undr), of unknown origin. In Middle English it also came to mean the emotion associated with
such a sight (late 13c.). To be no wonder was in Old English. The original wonder drug (1939) was
Sulfanilamide.


wonder (v.)

Old English wundrian be astonished, also admire; make wonderful, magnify, from the source of wonder
(n.). Cognate with Dutch wonderen, Old High German wuntaron, German wundern. Sense of entertain some
doubt or curiosity is late 13c. Related: Wondered; wondering.    Reflexive use (It wonders me that I
wonder why ...) was common in Middle English and as late as Tindale (1533), and is said to survive
in Yorkshire/Lincolnshire. In Pennsylvania German areas it is idiomatic from German das wundert
mich.


wonder woman (n.)

1917, a woman who seems wonderful or has wonderful qualities, from wonder (n.) + woman. The comic
book superheroine debuted in DC Comics in 1941.


wonder-worker (n.)

1590s, from wonder (n.) + worker, translating Greek thaumatourgos. Old English had wundorweorc
miracle.


wonderful (adj.)

late Old English wunderfoll; see wonder (n.) + -ful. Related: Wonderfully.


wonderland (n.)

imaginary realm, 1787, from wonder (n.) + land (n.).


wonderment (n.)

1530s, from wonder (n.) + -ment.


wonderous (adj.)

see wondrous.


wondrous (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle English wonders (adj.), early 14c., originally genitive of wonder (n.), with
suffix altered by influence of marvelous, etc. As an adverb from 1550s. Related: Wondrously;
wondrousness.


wonk (n.)

overly studious person, 1962, earlier effeminate male (1954), American English student slang.
Perhaps a shortening of British slang wonky shaky, unreliable, or a variant of British slang wanker
masturbator. It seemed to rise into currency as a synonym for nerd late 1980s from Ivy League slang
and was widely popularized 1993 during the presidency of Bill Clinton. Tom Wolfe (1988) described it
as an Eastern prep-school term referring to all those who do not have the 'honk' voice, i.e., all
who are non-aristocratic.


wonky (adj.)

shaky, groggy, unstable, 1919, of unknown origin. German prefix wankel- has a similar sense. Perhaps
from surviving dialectal words based on Old English wancol shaky, tottering (see wench (n.)).


wont (adj.)

accustomed, Middle English contraction of Old English wunod, past participle of wunian to dwell,
inhabit, exist; be accustomed, be used to, from Proto-Germanic *wunen to be content, to rejoice
(cognates: Old Saxon wunon, Old Frisian wonia to dwell, remain, be used to, Old High German wonen,
German wohnen to dwell; related to Old English winnan, gewinnan to win (see win (v.)) and to wean;
from PIE *wen- (1) strive for, desire. The original meaning of the Germanic verbs was be content,
rejoice.


wont (n.)

habitual usage, custom, c.1400, from wont, adjective and verb.


wonted (adj.)

accustomed, usual, c.1400, adjectival formation from wont.  An unconscious double past participle.


wonton (n.)

also won ton, 1948, from Cantonese wan t'an, Mandarin hun tun stuffed dumpling.


woo (v.)

Old English wogian to woo, court, marry, of uncertain origin and with no known cognates; perhaps
related to woh, wog- bent, inclined, as with affection. Related: Wooed; wooing; wooer.


wood (n.)

Old English wudu, earlier widu tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees
are made, from Proto-Germanic *widu- (cognates: Old Norse vi&eth;r, Danish and Swedish ved tree,
wood, Old High German witu wood), from PIE *widhu- tree, wood (cognates: Welsh gwydd trees, Gaelic
fiodh- wood, timber, Old Irish fid tree, wood). Out of the woods safe is from 1792.


wood (adj.)

violently insane (now obsolete), from Old English wod mad, frenzied, from Proto-Germanic *woda-
(cognates: Gothic wo&thorn;s possessed, mad, Old High German wuot mad, madness, German wut rage,
fury), from PIE *wet- (1) to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse; source of Latin vates seer, poet,
Old Irish faith poet; with a common element of mental excitement [Buck]. Compare Old English
wo&thorn; sound, melody, song, Old Norse o&eth;r poetry, and the god-name Odin.


woodbine (n.)

Old English wudubinde, a climbing plant, from wudu wood (see wood (n.)) + binde wreath, related to
bind (v.). Used of various climbing plants on three continents.


woodchuck (n.)

1670s, alteration (influenced by wood (n.)) of Cree (Algonquian) otchek or Ojibwa otchig, marten,
the name subsequently transferred to the groundhog.


woodcock (n.)

Old English wuducoc, from wudu (see wood (n.)) + coc (see cock (n.1)).


woodcut (n.)

engraving on wood, or a print made from one, 1660s, from wood (n.) + cut (n.).


wooded (adj.)

covered with growing trees, c.1600, from wood (n.).


wooden (adj.)

1530s, from wood (n.) + -en (2). Figurative use by 1560s. Wooden nickel counterfeit coin, worthless
token is from 1916, American English. Related: Woodenly; woodenness.


woodland (n.)

Old English wudulond; see wood (n.) + land (n.). As an adjective from mid-14c.


woodlouse (n.)

also wood-louse, 1610s, from wood (n.) + louse (n.). So called from being found in old wood.


woodpecker (n.)

1520s, from wood (n.) + pecker.


woodshed (n.)

shed for keeping wood as fuel, 1799, from wood (n.) + shed (n.). Sometimes a euphemism for outhouse.
Figuratively, as the place for private punishment, by 1907, American English colloquial.


woodsman (n.)

1680s, from woods (see wood (n.)) + man (n.). Earlier was woodman (early 15c.).


woodsy (adj.)

1848, American English, from woods (see wood (n.)) + -y (2).


woodwind (n.)

1876, from wood (n.) + wind (n.1) in the musical instrument sense. Related: Woodwinds.


woodwork (n.)

article made of wood, 1640s, from wood (n.) + work (n.). Especially applied to wooden details of a
house, hence figurative use of to come (or crawl) out of the woodwork, by 1960, suggestive of
cockroaches, etc.


woody (adj.)

late 14c., overgrown with trees and shrubs, from wood (n.) + -y (2). Of plants, having a stem of
wood, from 1570s. Related: Woodiness. Old English had wudulic. As a name for a kind of station wagon
with wood panels, by 1961, U.S. surfer slang (real wood exterior panels were rare after 1951 and the
last use of real wood was in the 1953 Buick Roadmaster Estate Wagon). Slang meaning erection
attested by 1990 (for hardness).


woof (n.1)

weft, texture, fabric, Old English owef, from o- on + wefan to weave (see weave). With excrescent
-w- by influence of warp or weft.


woof (n.2)

dog bark noise, first recorded 1804, echoic.


woofer (n.)

loudspeaker for bass notes, 1935, imitative.


wool (n.)

Old English wull wool, fine soft hair which forms the coat of some animals, from Proto-Germanic
*wulno (cognates: Old Norse ull, Old Frisian wolle, Middle Dutch wolle, Dutch wol, Old High German
wolla, German wolle, Gothic wulla), from PIE *wele- (1) wool (cognates: Sanskrit urna; Avestan
varena; Greek lenos wool; Latin lana wool, vellus fleece; Old Church Slavonic vluna, Russian vulna,
Lithuanian vilna wool; Middle Irish olann, Welsh gwlan wool).    Figurative expression pull the wool
over (someone's) eyes is recorded from 1838, American English. To be literally dyed in the wool
(1725, as opposed to dyed in the piece) is to be so before spinning, while the material is in its
raw state, which has a more durable effect; hence the figurative sense from the beginning; most
thoroughly, attested from 1809, and especially, in U.S. politics, from 1830.


wool-gathering (n.)

also woolgathering, 1550s, indulging in wandering fancies and purposeless thinking, from the literal
meaning gathering fragments of wool torn from sheep by bushes, etc., an activity that necessitates
much wandering to little purpose. See wool + gather.


woolen (adj.)

also woollen (chiefly British English), Old English wullen, wyllen made of wool, from wool + -en
(2). Related: Woolens; woollens.


Woolworth

also Woolworth's, often in reference to inexpensive merchandise, from the F.W. Woolworth &amp;
Company chain of five-and-ten-cent stores, begun 1879 in Lancaster, Pennsylvania.


wooly (adj.)

also woolly, 1570s, resembling or made of wool, from wool + -y (2). Meaning barbarous, rude is
recorded 1891, from wild and wooly (1884) applied to the U.S. western frontier, perhaps in reference
to range steers or to unkempt cowboys. Related: Wooliness.


woozy (adj.)

muddled or dazed, as with drink, 1897, American English colloquial, variant of oozy muddy, or an
alteration of boozy. It is recorded in 1896 as student slang, but with a sense foolish, behind the
times, also pleasant, delightful.


wop (n.)

derogatory for Italian, 1912, American English slang, apparently from southern Italian dialect
guappo dandy, dude, stud, a greeting among male Neapolitans, said to be from Spanish guapo bold,
dandy, which is from Latin vappa sour wine, also worthless fellow; related to vapidus (see vapid).
It is probably <b>not an acronym</b>, and the usual story that it is one seems to date only to
c.1985.


Worcester

Wireceastre (1086), Old English Wigranceastre (717), Weogorna civitas (691), from Weogora, a tribal
name. Worcestershire sauce (Lea &amp; Perrin's) is attested from 1843.


word (n.)

Old English word speech, talk, utterance, sentence, statement, news, report, word, from Proto-
Germanic *wurdan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian word, Dutch woord, Old High German, German wort,
Old Norse or&eth;, Gothic waurd), from PIE *were- (3) speak, say (see verb).    The meaning promise
was in Old English, as was the theological sense. In the plural, the meaning verbal altercation (as
in to have words with someone) dates from mid-15c. Word processor first recorded 1971; word
processing is from 1972; word wrap is from 1977. A word to the wise is from Latin phrase verbum
sapienti satis est a word to the wise is enough. Word-for-word is late 14c. Word of mouth is
recorded from 1550s.    It is dangerous to leave written that which is badly written. A chance word,
upon paper, may destroy the world. Watch carefully and erase, while the power is still yours, I say
to myself, for all that is put down, once it escapes, may rot its way into a thousand minds, the
corn become a black smut, and all libraries, of necessity, be burned to the ground as a consequence.
[William Carlos Williams, Paterson]


word (v.)

c.1200, to utter; 1610s, put into words, from word (n.). Related: Worded; wording.


wordcraft (n.)

Old English wordcr&#230;ft poetic art, eloquence; see word (n.) + craft (n.).


wording (n.)

choice of words, manner in which something is expressed, apparently coined by Milton in
Eikonoklastes (1649). From present participle of word (v.).


wordless (adj.)

c.1200, from word (n.) + -less. Related: Wordlessly.


wordplay (n.)

also word-play, 1855; see word (n.) + play (v).


wordsmith (n.)

1896, from word (n.) + smith (n.). There is a Mrs. F. Wordsmith in the Detroit City Directory for
1855-56, but perhaps this is a typo.


wordy (adj.)

Old English wordig verbose; see word (n.) + -y (2).


wore

modern past tense of wear (v.).


work (n.)

Old English weorc, worc something done, discreet act performed by someone, action (whether voluntary
or required), proceeding, business; that which is made or manufactured, products of labor, also
physical labor, toil; skilled trade, craft, or occupation; opportunity of expending labor in some
useful or remunerative way; also military fortification, from Proto-Germanic *werkan (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch werk, Old Norse verk, Middle Dutch warc, Old High German werah, German
Werk, Gothic gawaurki), from PIE *werg-o-, from root *werg- to do (see organ).    Work is less
boring than amusing oneself. [Baudelaire, Mon Coeur mis a nu, 1862]    In Old English, the noun also
had the sense of fornication. Meaning physical effort, exertion is from c.1200; meaning scholarly
labor or its productions is from c.1200; meaning artistic labor or its productions is from c.1200.
Meaning labor as a measurable commodity is from c.1300. Meaning embroidery, stitchery, needlepoint
is from late 14c. Work of art attested by 1774 as artistic creation, earlier (1728) artifice,
production of humans (as opposed to nature). Work ethic recorded from 1959. To be out of work
unemployed is from 1590s. To make clean work of is from c.1300; to make short work of is from 1640s.
Proverbial expression many hands make light work is from c.1300. To have (one's) work cut out for
one is from 1610s; to have it prepared and prescribed, hence, to have all one can handle. Work in
progress is from 1930 in a general sense, earlier as a specific term in accountancy and
parliamentary procedure.


work (v.)

a fusion of Old English wyrcan (past tense worhte, past participle geworht) prepare, perform, do,
make, construct, produce; strive after (from Proto-Germanic *wurkijan); and Old English wircan
(Mercian) to operate, function, set in motion, a secondary verb formed relatively late from Proto-
Germanic noun *werkan (see work (n.)). Sense of perform physical labor was in Old English, as was
sense ply one's trade and exert creative power, be a creator. Transitive sense manipulate (physical
substances) into a desired state or form was in Old English. Meaning have the expected or desired
effect is from late 14c. In Middle English also perform sexually (mid-13c.). Related: Worked (15c.);
working. To work up excite is from c.1600. To work over beat up, thrash is from 1927. To work
against attempt to subvert is from late 14c.


workable (adj.)

1540s, from work (v.) + -able. Related: Workably; workability.


workaday

c.1200, werkedei (n.), day designated for labor rather than religious observance or rest, from Old
Norse virkr dagr working day; see work (n.) + day. It passed into an adjective 16c.


workaholic (n.)

1968, coined from work (n.) with second element abstracted absurdly from alcoholic. This sets up the
old Rodney Dangerfield joke: My old man was a workaholic: every time he thought about work, he got
drunk.


workaround (n.)

also work-around, by 1987, from the verbal phrase, from work (v.) + around (adv.).


workbook (n.)

1910, from work (n.) + book (n.).


workday (n.)

Old English weorcd&#230;g, from work (n.) + day (n.). The modern word is perhaps a Middle English
re-formation. As an adjective (c.1500) it has generally only the literal sense (compare workaday).


worker (n.)

mid-14c., laborer, toiler, performer, doer, agent noun from work (v.). As a type of bee, 1747. As
one employed for a wage, 1848. Old English had wyrcend worker, laborer.


workflow (n.)

1949, from work (n.) + flow (n.).


workforce (n.)

1947, from work (n.) + force (n.).


workhorse (n.)

1540s, from work (n.) + horse (n.). Figurative use by 1949.


workhouse (n.)

Old English weorchus workshop; see work (n.) + house (n.). From 1650s in the sense of place where
the able-bodied poor or petty criminals are lodged and compelled to work.


working (adj.)

late 14c., active, busy, past participle adjective from work (v.). From 1630s as engaged in physical
toil or manual labor as a means of livelihood. Working class is from 1789 as a noun, 1839 as an
adjective. Working-day is from late 15c.; working man is by 1816.


working (n.)

action, operation, verbal noun from work (v.).


workload (n.)

1939, from work (n.) + load (n.).


workman (n.)

Old English weorcmsnn; see work (n.) + man (n.). Similar formation in Dutch werkman, Old Norse
verkma&#240;r.


workmanlike (adj.)

efficient, no-nonsense, 1739, from workman + like (adj.).


workmanship (n.)

early 14c., performance of labor, from workman + -ship. Meaning skill as a workman is from 1520s.


workout (n.)

1909, boxing bout for training, from work (v.) + out (adv.). General sense of spell of strenuous
physical exercise is attested by 1922. Verbal phrase work out solve (a problem, etc.) is from 1848.
Sense of succeed attested by 1909.


workplace (n.)

1828, a hybrid from work (n.) + place (n.).


works (n.)

Old English, (someone's) deeds, acts, or actions, the things one has done in life, often especially
good deeds, acts of piety, demonstrations of virtue, plural of work (n.). Meaning operations
pertinent to maintaining a large physical place (private, religious, or municipal) is from late 14c.
Meaning industrial place (usually with qualifying adjective) is from late 15c. To be in the works in
the extended sense of in the process of being done or made is by 1973.


worksheet (n.)

1909, from work (n.) + sheet (n.).


workshop (n.)

1580s, from work (n.) + shop (n.). Meaning gathering for study, etc., is from 1937.


workstation (n.)

also work-station, 1950, from work (n.) + station (n.). Computer sense is from 1972.


world (n.)

Old English woruld, worold human existence, the affairs of life, also a long period of time, also
the human race, mankind, humanity, a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon
werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt, German Welt),
with a literal sense of age of man, from Proto-Germanic *wer man (Old English wer, still in
werewolf; see virile) + *ald age (see old).    Originally life on earth, this world (as opposed to
the afterlife), sense extended to the known world, then to the physical world in the broadest sense,
the universe (c.1200). In Old English gospels, the commonest word for the physical world, was
Middangeard (Old Norse Midgard), literally the middle enclosure (see yard (n.1)), which is rooted in
Germanic cosmology. Greek kosmos in its ecclesiastical sense of world of people sometimes was
rendered in Gothic as manase&thorn;s, literally seed of man. The usual Old Norse word was heimr,
literally abode (see home). Words for world in some other Indo-European languages derive from the
root for bottom, foundation (such as Irish domun, Old Church Slavonic duno, related to English
deep); the Lithuanian word is pasaulis, from pa- under + saule sun.    Original sense in world
without end, translating Latin saecula saeculorum, and in worldly. Latin saeculum can mean both age
and world, as can Greek aion. Meaning a great quantity or number is from 1580s. Out of this world
surpassing, marvelous is from 1928; earlier it meant dead. World Cup is by 1951; U.S. baseball World
Series is by 1893 (originally often World's Series). World power in the geopolitical sense first
recorded 1900. World-class is attested from 1950, originally of Olympic athletes.


World Bank (n.)

1930, originally of the Bank for International Settlements, set up in Basel by the League of
Nations. The modern World Bank was created in 1944.


world war (n.)

attested by 1898 as a speculation.    If through fear of entangling alliances the United States
should return the Philippines to Spain, Mr. Page asserted that the predatory nations would swoop
down upon them and a world war would result. [New York Times, Dec. 16, 1898]    Applied to the first
one almost as soon as it began in 1914 (England has Thrown Lot with France in World War -- headline,
Pittsburgh Press, Aug. 2, 1914). World War I coined 1939, replacing Great War as the most common
name for it; First World War, World War II, and Second World War all also are from 1939. Old English
had woruldgewinn, woruldgefeoht, both of which might be translated world war, but with world in the
sense of earthly, secular.


World-Wide Web (n.)

also World Wide Web, 1990. See worldwise + web (n.).


worldly (adj.)

Old English woruldlic earthly, secular, from the roots of world and like (adj.). A common Germanic
compound (Old Frisian wraldlik, Old Saxon weroldlik, Middle Dutch wereldlik, German weltlich, Old
Norse veraldligr). Worldly-wise is recorded from c.1400.


worldview (n.)

also world-view, 1858, from world + view (n.); translating German weltanschauung.


worldwide (adj.)

also world-wide, 1630s, from world + wide.


worm (n.)

Old English wurm, variant of wyrm serpent, snake, dragon, reptile, also in later Old English
earthworm, from Proto-Germanic *wurmiz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German, German wurm, Old
Frisian and Dutch worm, Old Norse ormr, Gothic waurms serpent, worm), from PIE *wrmi- worm
(cognates: Greek rhomos, Latin vermis worm, Old Russian vermie insects, Lithuanian varmas insect,
gnat), probably from root *wer- (3) turn (see versus).    The ancient category of these was much
more extensive than the modern, scientific, one and included serpents, scorpions, maggots, and the
supposed causes of certain diseases. For substitution of -o- for -u-, see come. As an insult meaning
abject, miserable person it dates from Old English. Worms any disease arising from the presence of
parasitic worms is from late Old English. Can of worms figurative for difficult problem is from
1951, from the literal can of worms a fisherman might bring with him, on the image of something all
tangled up.


worm (v.)

to move like a worm, c.1600, from worm (n.). In figurative senses attested from 1620s, suggesting
patient, sinuous progress. Meaning to free from worms is from 1620s. Related: Wormed; worming.


wormhole (n.)

also worm-hole, 1590s, hole made by a burrowing insect (in fruit, timber, etc.), from worm (n.) +
hole (n.). Astrophysics sense is attested from 1957.


wormwood (n.)

c.1400, folk etymology of Old English wermod wormwood, absinthe, related to vermouth, but the
ultimate etymology is unknown. Compare Old Saxon wermoda, Dutch wermoet, Old High German werimuota,
German Wermut. Weekley suggests wer man + mod courage, from its early use as an aphrodisiac.
Figurative use, however, is usually in reference to its proverbial bitter aftertaste. Perhaps
because of the folk etymology, it formerly was used to protect clothes and bedding from moths and
fleas. A medecyne for an hawke that hath mites. Take the Iuce of wormewode and put it ther thay be
and thei shall dye. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


worn (adj.)

c.1500, from adjectival use of past participle of wear (v.); from Old English geworen. Worn-out
exhausted by wear, made ineffective by overuse is attested from 1610s in reference to things, c.1700
in reference to persons.


worrisome (adj.)

causing worry or annoyance, 1828, from worry + -some (1). Related: Worrisomely.


worry (v.)

Old English wyrgan to strangle, from Proto-Germanic *wurgjan (cognates: Middle Dutch worghen, Dutch
worgen, Old High German wurgen, German w&uuml;rgen to strangle, Old Norse virgill rope), from PIE
*wergh- to turn (see wring). Related: Worried; worrier; worrying.    The oldest sense was obsolete
in English after c.1600; meaning annoy, bother, vex, first recorded 1670s, developed from that of
harass by rough or severe treatment (1550s), as of dogs or wolves attacking sheep. Meaning to cause
mental distress or trouble is attested from 1822; intransitive sense of to feel anxiety or mental
trouble is first recorded 1860.


worry (n.)

anxiety arising from cares and troubles, 1804, from worry (v.).


worry wart (n.)

1956, from comic strip Out Our Way by U.S. cartoonist J.R. Williams (1888-1957). According to those
familiar with the strip, Worry Wart was the name of a character who caused others to worry, which is
the inverse of the current colloquial meaning.


worse (adj.)

Old English wiersa, wyrsa worse, from Proto-Germanic *wers-izon- (cognates: Old Saxon wirs, Old
Norse verri, Swedish v&auml;rre, Old Frisian wirra, Old High German wirsiro, Gothic wairsiza worse),
comparative of PIE *wers- (1) to confuse, mix up (cognates: Old High German werra strife, Old Saxon
werran to entangle, compound; see war (n.)). Used as a comparative of bad, evil, ill or as the
opposite of better. The adverb is Old English wyrs; the noun is Old English wyrsa. Phrase for better
or for worse is attested from late 14c. (for bet, for wers); to change for the worse is recorded
from c.1400.


worsen (v.)

mid-13c., wersnen to make worse, also to grow worse, from worse (adj.) + -en (1). The reflexive
sense of to get worse, become worse off was elevated into literary use c.1800-30, where formerly
worse (v.) had served. Related: Worsened; worsening.


worser (adj.)

double comparative; see worse + -er (2). Attested from late 15c. and common 16c.-17c. Noun worsers
(one's) inferiors is from 1580s.


worship (n.)

Old English wor&eth;scip, wur&eth;scip (Anglian), weor&eth;scipe (West Saxon) condition of being
worthy, dignity, glory, distinction, honor, renown, from weor&eth; worthy (see worth) + -scipe (see
-ship). Sense of reverence paid to a supernatural or divine being is first recorded c.1300. The
original sense is preserved in the title worshipful honorable (c.1300).


worship (v.)

c.1200, from worship (n.). Related: Worshipped; worshipping.


worshipper (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from worship (v.).


worst (adj.)

Old English wyrresta, from Proto-Germanic *wers-ista- (cognates: Old Saxon wirsista, Old Norse
verstr, Old Frisian wersta, Old High German wirsisto), superlative of PIE *wers- (1) to confuse, mix
up (see war (n.)). Phrase in the worst way (1839) is from American English sense of most severely.
The adverb is Old English wyrst; the noun, that which is most evil or bad, is from late 14c.


worst (v.)

damage, inflict loss upon, c.1600, from worst (adj.). Meaning defeat in argument is from 1650s.
Related: Worsted; worsting.


worsted (n.)

woolen fabric made from twisted yarn, late 13c., from Worstead (Old English Wur&eth;estede), town in
Norfolk where the cloth originally was made.


wort (n.)

a plant, Old English wyrt root, herb, vegetable, plant, spice, from Proto-Germanic *wurtiz
(cognates: Old Saxon wurt, Old Norse, Danish urt, Old High German wurz plant, herb, German Wurz,
Gothic waurts, Old Norse rot root), from PIE root *wrad- twig, root (see radish). St. John's wort
attested from 15c.


worth (adj.)

Old English weor&thorn; significant, valuable, of value; valued, appreciated, highly thought-of,
deserving, meriting; honorable, noble, of high rank; suitable for, proper, fit, capable, from Proto-
Germanic *werthaz toward, opposite, hence equivalent, worth (cognates: Old Frisian werth, Old Norse
ver&eth;r, Dutch waard, Old High German werd, German wert, Gothic wair&thorn;s worth, worthy),
perhaps a derivative of PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Probably related to weird. Old Church Slavonic vredu, Lithuanian vertas worth are Germanic loan-
words. From c.1200 as equivalent to, of the value of, valued at; having importance equal to; equal
in power to.


worth (v.)

to come to be, now chiefly, if not solely, in the archaic expression woe worth the day, present
subjunctive of Old English weor&eth;an to become, be, to befall, from Proto-Germanic *werthan to
become (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Dutch werthan, Old Norse ver&eth;a, Old Frisian wertha, Old High
German werdan, German werden, Gothic wair&thorn;an to become), literally to turn into, from Proto-
Germanic *werthaz toward, opposite, perhaps a derivative of PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root
*wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).


worth (n.)

Old English weor&thorn; value, price, price paid; worth, worthiness, merit; equivalent value amount,
monetary value, from worth (adj.). From c.1200 as excellence, nobility.


worthless (adj.)

1580s, from worth (n.) + -less. Related: Worthlessly; worthlessness.


worthwhile (adj.)

by 1660s, worth while (one-word form from late 19c.), from worth (adj.) + while (n.). Phrase worth
the while is attested from late 14c.


worthy (adj.)

mid-13c., having merit, from worth (n.) + -y (2). Old English had weor&thorn;ful in this sense.
Attested from late 14c. as a noun meaning person of merit (especially in Nine Worthies, famous men
of history and legend: Joshua, David, Judas Maccab&aelig;us, Hector, Alexander, Julius C&aelig;sar,
Arthur, Charlemagne, Godfrey of Bouillon -- three Jews, three gentiles, three Christians). Related:
Worthily; worthiness.


wot (v.)

to know (archaic), from Old English wat, first and third person singular present indicative of witan
to know (see wit (v.)).


would

Old English wolde, past tense and past subjunctive of willan to will (see will (v.)). Would-be
(adj.) wishing to be, vainly pretending is first recorded c.1300.


wound (n.)

Old English wund hurt, injury, ulcer, from Proto-Germanic *wundaz (cognates: Old Saxon wunda, Old
Norse und, Old Frisian wunde, Old High German wunta, German wunde wound), perhaps from PIE root
*wen- (2) to beat, wound.


wound (v.)

Old English wundian to wound, from the source of wound (n.). Cognate with Old Frisian wundia, Middle
Dutch and Dutch wonden, Old High German wunton, German verwunden, Gothic gawundon. Figurative use,
of feelings, etc., from c.1200. Related: Wounded; wounding.


wounder (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from wound (v.).


woven (adj.)

late 15c., past participle adjective from weave (v.) on analogy of stolen.


wow (interj.)

1510s, Scottish, a natural expression of amazement. This old interjection had a new popularity in
the early 1900s and again during the 1960s and later [DAS].


wow (v.)

overwhelm with delight or amazement, 1924, American English slang, from wow (interj.). Related:
Wowed; wowing. Used as a noun meaning unqualified success since 1920.


WPA

1936, initialism (acronym) from Works Progress Administration, U.S. agency established 1935.


wr-

common Germanic consonantal combination, especially to start words implying twisting or distortion.
Retained in Dutch and Flemish; reduced to -r- in Old High German and Old Norse; represented by vr-
in Danish and Swedish; still spelled -wr- in English, but the -w- ceased to be pronounced
c.1450-1700 except in dialects.


wrack (n.)

late 14c., wrecked ship, shipwreck, probably from Middle Dutch wrak wreck, from Proto-Germanic
*wrakaz-, from root *wreg- to push, shove drive (see wreak). The root sense perhaps is that which is
cast ashore. Sense perhaps influenced by Old English wr&aelig;c misery, punishment, and wrecan to
punish, drive out (source of modern wreak). The meaning damage, disaster, destruction (in wrack and
ruin) is from c.1400, from the Old English word, but conformed in spelling to this one. Sense of
seaweed, etc., cast up on shore is recorded from 1510s, probably an alteration of wreck (n.) in this
sense (mid-15c.). Wrack, wreck, rack and wretch were utterly tangled in spelling and somewhat in
sense in Middle and early modern English.


wrack (v.)

to ruin or wreck (originally of ships), 1560s, from earlier intransitive sense to be shipwrecked
(late 15c.), from wrack (n.). Often confused in this sense since 16c. with rack (v.) in the sense of
torture on the rack; to wrack one's brains is thus erroneous. Related: Wracked; wracking.


wraith (n.)

1510s, ghost, Scottish, of uncertain origin. Weekley and Century Dictionary suggest Old Norse
vor&eth;r guardian in the sense of guardian angel. Klein points to Gaelic and Irish arrach specter,
apparition.


wrangle (v.)

late 14c., from Low German wrangeln to dispute, to wrestle, related to Middle Low German wringen,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang-, from PIE *wrengh-, nasalized variant of *wergh- to turn (see wring).
Meaning take charge of horses is by 1897, American English. Related: Wrangled; wrangling. The noun
is recorded from 1540s.


wrangler (n.)

1510s, one who takes part in quarrels, agent noun from wrangle (v.). Meaning person in charge of
horses or cattle, herder is from 1888; as a proprietary name for a brand of jeans, copyrighted 1947,
claiming use from 1929.


wrap (v.)

early 14c., wrappen, to wind (something around something else), cover (something), conceal; bind up,
swaddle; fold (something) up or back on itself, of uncertain origin, perhaps via Scandinavian
(compare Danish dialectal vravle to wind). Or perhaps a variant of lap (v.2). To wrap up put an end
to is from 1926. Related: Wrapped; wrapping. Wrapping paper is from 1715.


wrap (n.)

late 15c., fine cloth used as a cover or wrapping for bread, from wrap (v.). As a type of women's
garment, recorded from 1827. Meaning plastic film or cellophane used as a wrap is from 1930. Meaning
end of a filming session is attested from 1970. Meaning sandwich material folded up in flour
tortilla is by 1998. Figurative phrase under wraps in concealment is recorded from 1939.


wrap-up (n.)

summary, 1947, from the verbal phrase (see wrap (v.)).


wraparound (n.)

also wrap-around, 1877 as a type of garment, from verbal phrase, from wrap (v.) + around (adv.). As
an adjective by 1937.


wrapper (n.)

late 15c., piece of fine cloth used for wrapping bread, agent noun from wrap (v.). Meaning
disposable protective covering is from 1808.


wrasse (n.)

type of salt-water fish, 1670s, from Cornish wrach, related to Welsh gurach.


wrath (n.)

Old English wr&aelig;&eth;&eth;u anger, from wra&eth; angry (see wroth) + -&thorn;u, from Proto-
Germanic -itho (as in strength, width etc.; see -th (2)).


wrathful (adj.)

c.1300, from wrath + -ful. Related: Wrathfully; wrathfulness.


wreak (v.)

Old English wrecan avenge, originally to drive, drive out, punish (class V strong verb; past tense
wr&aelig;c, past participle wrecen), from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (cognates: Old Saxon wrekan, Old
Norse reka, Old Frisian wreka, Middle Dutch wreken to drive, push, compel, pursue, throw, Old High
German rehhan, German r&auml;chen to avenge, Gothic wrikan to persecute), from PIE root *wreg- to
push, shove, drive, track down (see urge (v.)). Meaning inflict or take vengeance, with on, is
recorded from late 15c.; that of inflict or cause (damage or destruction) is attested from 1817.
Compare wrack (v.). Related: Wreaked; wreaking.


wreath (n.)

Old English wri&eth;a fillet, bandage, band (literally that which is wound around), from Proto-
Germanic *writh- (cognates: Old Norse ri&eth;a, Danish vride, Old High German ridan to turn, twist,
Old Saxon, Old Frisian wreth angry, Dutch wreed rough, harsh, cruel, Old High German reid twisted,
Old Norse rei&eth;a angry), from PIE *wreit- to turn, bend (cognates: Old English wri&eth;a band,
wri&eth;an to twist, torture, wra&thorn; angry), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Meaning ring or garland of flowers or vines is first recorded 1560s.


wreathe (v.)

1520s (transitive), a back-formation from wrethen, Middle English past participle of writhe.
Intransitive sense from 1580s. Related: Wreathed; wreathing.


wreck (n.)

early 13c., goods cast ashore after a shipwreck, flotsam, from Anglo-French wrec, from a
Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse *wrek wreck, flotsam (cognates: Norwegian, Icelandic rek),
related to reka to drive, push, from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (see wreak (v.)). The meaning a
shipwreck is first recorded mid-15c.; that of a wrecked ship is by c.1500. General sense of remains
of anything that has been ruined is recorded from 1713; applied by 1795 to dissipated persons.
Compare wrack (v.).


wreck (v.)

to destroy, ruin, c.1500, from wreck (n.). Earlier (12c.) it meant drive out or away, remove; also
take vengeance. Intransitive sense from 1670s. Related: Wrecked; wrecking.


wreckage (n.)

1814, fact of being wrecked, from wreck (v.) + -age. Meaning remains of a wrecked thing is from
1832.


wrecker (n.)

1804, in reference to those who salvage cargos from wrecked ships, from wreck (n.). In Britain often
with a overtones of one who causes a shipwreck in order to plunder it (1820); but in 19c. Bahamas
and the Florida Keys it could be a legal occupation. Applied to those who wreck and plunder
institutions from 1882. Meaning demolition worker attested by 1958. As a type of ship employed in
salvage operations, from 1789. As a railway vehicle with a crane or hoist, from 1904.


wren (n.)

small, migratory singing bird, Old English wrenna, metathesis variation of earlier werna, a Germanic
word of uncertain origin. Compare Icelandic rindill, Old High German wrendo, wrendilo wren. The
bird's name in other languages usually denotes royalty (such as Latin regulus), in reference to its
golden crest.


wrench (v.)

Old English wrencan to twist, from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (cognates: Old High German renken,
German renken to twist, wrench, Old English wringan to wring), from PIE *wreng- to turn (cognates:
Sanskrit vrnakti turns, twists, Lithuanian rengtis to grow crooked, to writhe), nasalized variant of
*werg- to turn (cognates: Latin vergere to turn, tend toward), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend
(see versus). Related: Wrenched, wrenching.


wrench (n.)

Old English wrenc a twisting, artifice, trick; see wrench (v.). The meaning tool with jaws at one
end for turning or holding is first recorded 1794.


wrest (v.)

Old English wr&aelig;stan to twist, wrench, from Proto-Germanic *wraistjan (source of Old Norse
reista to bend, twist), from PIE  *wreik- to turn (see wry). Meaning to pull, detach (something) is
recorded from c.1300. Meaning to take by force (in reference to power, authority, etc.) is attested
from early 15c. Related: Wrested; wresting.


wrestle (v.)

Old English *wr&aelig;stlian, frequentative of wr&aelig;stan to wrest (see wrest). Compare North
Frisian wrassele, Middle Low German worstelen. Figurative sense is recorded from early 13c. Related:
Wrestled; wrestling.


wrestler (n.)

late Old English, agent noun from wrestle (v.).


wrestling (n.)

Old English wr&aelig;stlung, sport of grappling and throwing, verbal noun from wrestle (v.). From
c.1300 as action of wrestling, a wrestling match. Figurative use from c.1200.


wretch (n.)

Old English wrecca wretch, stranger, exile, from Proto-Germanic *wrakjon pursuer; one pursued
(cognates: Old Saxon wrekkio, Old High German reckeo a banished person, exile, German recke renowned
warrior, hero), related to Old English wreccan to drive out, punish (see wreak). The contrast in the
development of the meaning in Eng. and German is remarkable [OED]. Sense of vile, despicable person
developed in Old English, reflecting the sorry state of the outcast, as presented in Anglo-Saxon
verse (such as The Wanderer). Compare German Elend misery, from Old High German elilenti sojourn in
a foreign land, exile.


wretched (adj.)

c.1200, wrecched, an irregular formation from wrecche wretch (see wretch). Also see wicked. Related:
Wretchedly; wretchedness.


wriggle (v.)

late 15c., from Middle Low German wrigglen to wriggle, from Proto-Germanic *wreik- to turn (see
wry). Related to Old English wrigian to turn, incline, go forward.


wright (n.)

Old English wryhta, wrihta (Northumbrian wyrchta, Kentish werhta) worker, variant of earlier wyhrta,
from wyrcan to work (see work (v.)). Now usually in combinations (wheelwright, playwright, etc.) or
as a surname. Common West Germanic; cognate with Old Saxon wurhito, Old Frisian wrichta, Old High
German wurhto.


wring (v.)

Old English wringan press, strain, wring, twist (class III strong verb; past tense wrang, past
participle wrungen), from Proto-Germanic *wreng- (cognates: Old English wringen to wring, press out,
Old Frisian wringa, Middle Dutch wringhen, Dutch wringen to wring, Old High German ringan to move to
and fro, to twist, German ringen to wrestle), from PIE *wrengh-, nasalized variant of *wergh- to
turn, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). To wring (one's) hands press the hands or
fingers tightly together (as though wringing) as an indication of distress or pain is attested from
c.1200.


wringer (n.)

device for squeezing water from clothes, 1799, agent noun from wring (v.). (Earlier it meant
extortioner, c.1300.) Figurative phrase to put (someone) through the wringer first recorded 1942,
American English.


wrinkle (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), probably from stem of Old English gewrinclod wrinkled, crooked, winding,
past participle of gewrinclian to wind, crease, from perfective prefix ge- + -wrinclian to wind,
from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (see wrench (v.)). Intransitive sense from 1610s. Related: Wrinkled;
wrinkling.


wrinkle (n.)

fold or crease in the extenal body, late 14c.; in cloth or clothing from early 15c., probably from
wrinkle (v.). Meaning defect, problem first recorded 1640s; that of idea, device, notion (especially
a new one) is from 1817.


wrinkly (adj.)

early 15c. (in reference to the penis), from wrinkle (n.) + -y (2). As teen slang noun for old
person, from 1972 (old being relative; a British reference from 1982 applies it to people in their
40s).


wrist (n.)

Old English wrist, from Proto-Germanic *wristiz (cognates: Old Norse rist instep, Old Frisian wrist,
Middle Dutch wrist, German Rist back of the hand, instep), from Proto-Germanic *wreik- to turn (see
wry). The notion is the turning joint. Wrist-watch is from 1889. Wrist-band is from 1570s as a part
of a sleeve, 1969 as a perspiration absorber.


writ (n.)

Old English writ something written, piece of writing, from the past participle stem of writan (see
write). Used of legal documents or instruments since at least 1121.


write (v.)

Old English writan to score, outline, draw the figure of, later to set down in writing (class I
strong verb; past tense wrat, past participle writen), from Proto-Germanic *writan tear, scratch
(cognates: Old Frisian writa to write, Old Saxon writan to tear, scratch, write, Old Norse rita
write, scratch, outline, Old High German rizan to write, scratch, tear, German rei&szlig;en to tear,
pull, tug, sketch, draw, design), outside connections doubtful.  For men use to write an evill turne
in marble stone, but a good turne in the dust. [More, 1513]    Words for write in most Indo-European
languages originally mean carve, scratch, cut (such as Latin scribere, Greek grapho, Sanskrit
rikh-); a few originally meant paint (Gothic meljan, Old Church Slavonic pisati, and most of the
modern Slavic cognates). To write (something) off (1680s) originally was from accounting; figurative
sense is recorded from 1889. Write-in unlisted candidate is recorded from 1932.


write-up (n.)

1882, from the verbal phrase; see write (v.) + up (adv.).


writer (n.)

Old English writere one who can write, clerk; one who produces books or literary compositions, agent
noun from writan (see write (v.)). Meaning sign-painter is from 1837. Writer's cramp attested by
1843; writer's block by 1950.


writhe (v.)

Old English wri&eth;an (transitive) to twist or bend, earlier to bind or fetter, from Proto-Germanic
*writhanan (cognates: North Frisian wrial, Old High German ridan, Old Norse ri&eth;a, Middle Swedish
vri&thorn;a, Middle Danish vride), from PIE *wreit- to turn, bend (see wreath). Intransitive, of the
body or limbs, move in a twisting or tortuous manner, from c.1300. Related: Writhed; writhing.


writing (n.)

Old English writing action of forming letters and characters, verbal noun from write (v.). From
c.1200 as text; body of poetry, narrative, etc. in written form; written material. From c.1300 as a
particular text; mid-14c. as act of composing a written text. From late 14c. as craft of writing;
also one's own handwriting or penmanship. Also late 14c. as act of sending a letter; a letter,
message. Writing-desk is from 1610s.


wrong (adj.)

late Old English, twisted, crooked, wry, from Old Norse rangr, earlier *wrangr crooked, wry, wrong,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang- (cognates: Danish vrang crooked, wrong, Middle Dutch wranc, Dutch wrang
sour, bitter, literally that which distorts the mouth), from PIE *wrengh-, variant of *wergh- to
turn (see wring).    Sense of not right, bad, immoral, unjust developed by c.1300. Wrong thus is
etymologically a negative of right (adj.1), which is from Latin rectus, literally straight. Latin
pravus was literally crooked, but most commonly wrong, bad; and other words for crooked also have
meant wrong in Italian and Slavic. Compare French tort wrong, injustice, from Latin tortus twisted.
As an adverb from c.1200. Wrong-headed first recorded 1732. To get up on the wrong side (of the bed)
be in a bad mood is recorded from 1801, according to OED, from its supposed influence on one's
temper; it appears in Halliwell's Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words in 1846, but doesn't
seem to have been used much generally before late 1870s. To be on the wrong side of a given age,
older than, is from 1660s. Wrong side of the road (that reservbed for oncoming traffic) is by 1838.
To be from (or on) the wrong side of the tracks from the poor part of town is from 1921, American
English.


wrong (n.)

that which is improper or unjust, late Old English, from wrong (adj.). Meaning an unjust action is
recorded from c.1200.


wrong (v.)

to do wrong to, early 14c., from wrong (adj.). Related: Wronged; wronging.


wrongdoing (n.)

also wrong-doing, late 15c., from wrong (n.) + doing.


wrongful (adj.)

early 14c., from wrong (n.) + -ful. Related: Wrongfully. Middle English also had adjective wrongous.


wrongly (adv.)

c.1300, from wrong (adj.) + -ly (2).


wroth (adj.)

Old English wra&eth; angry (literally tormented, twisted), from Proto-Germanic *wraith- (cognates:
Old Frisian wreth evil, Old Saxon wred, Middle Dutch wret, Dutch wreed cruel, Old High German reid,
Old Norse rei&eth;r angry, offended), from PIE *wreit- to turn (see wreath). Rare or obsolete from
early 16c. to mid-19c., but somewhat revived since, especially in dignified writing, or this:
Secretary: The Dean is furious. He's waxing wroth.  Quincy Adams Wagstaf [Groucho]: Is Roth out
there too? Tell Roth to wax the Dean for a while.  [Horse Feathers, 1932]


wrought (adj.)

mid-13c., from past participle of Middle English werken (see work (v.)). Wrought iron (1703) is that
which is malleable and has been brought into some form.


wry (adj.)

1520s, distorted, somewhat twisted to one side, from obsolete verb wry to contort, to twist or turn,
from Old English wrigian to turn, bend, move, go, from Proto-Germanic *wrig- (cognates: Old Frisian
wrigia to bend, Middle Low German wrich turned, twisted), from PIE *wreik- to turn (cognates: Greek
rhoikos crooked, Lithuanian raisas paralysed), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). Of
words, thoughts, etc., from 1590s. The original sense is preserved in awry.


wryly (adv.)

1570s, from wry + -ly (2).


wryneck (n.)

1580s, from wry + neck (n.). The bird so called from the singular manner in which is can twist the
neck.


wunderkind (n.)

child prodigy (especially in music), 1883 in English (earlier as a German word in German contexts),
from German Wunderkind, literally wonder-child.


Wurlitzer (n.)

type of musical instrument (originally a player piano popular in silent movie theaters, later a type
of jukebox), 1925, named for The Wurlitzer Company, founded near Cincinnati, Ohio, 1856 by Rudolph
Wurlitzer (1831-1914), Saxon immigrant to U.S. An importer at first, he started production of pianos
in 1880; coin-operated pianos in 1896.


wurst (n.)

German sausage, 1855, from German Wurst, from Old High German wurst sausage, probably etymologically
mixture, from Proto-Germanic *wursti-, from PIE *wers- (1) to confuse, mix up (see war (n.)).


wuss (n.)

1982, abbreviated from wussy.    Mike Damone: You are a wuss: part wimp, and part pussy  [Fast Times
at Ridgemont High script, 1982]


wussy (n.)

1960s, probably an alteration of pussy (n.2). DAS suggests shortened from hypothetical pussy-wussy,
reduplicated form of pussy (n.1).


wuthering (adj.)

making a sullen roar (as the wind does), Northern England dialectal variant of Scottish and
dialectal whithering rushing, whizzing, blustering, from a verb whither (late 14c.) which was used
in reference to gusts of wind and coughing fits, from Old Norse *hvi&eth;ra (related to Norwegian
kvidra to go quickly to and fro, Old English hwi&thorn;a air, breeze).    Wuthering Heights is the
name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling. 'Wuthering' being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive
of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed, in stormy weather. [Emily Bront&#235;,
Wuthering Heights, 1847]    Charlotte also used forms of the word in her novels.


wyandotte (n.)

type of hen, 1884, from Wyandot, name of an Iroquoian people (1749) and their language, from French
Ouendat, perhaps from Huron wendat forest or yandata village, or from the people's self-designation
wedat, which is perhaps a shortening of a longer form akin to Mohawk skawe:nat one language.


wych

see witch hazel.


wynn (n.)

runic letter in Old English and early Middle English, representing w, Old English wyn, so called for
being the first letter of that word, which literally means delight, pleasure (see Venus).


Wyoming

region in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, from Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) chwewamink at the big
river flat, from /xw-/ big + /-e:wam-/ river flat + /-enk/ place. Popularized by 1809 poem Gertrude
of Wyoming, set amid wars between Indians and American settlers, written by Scottish author Thomas
Campbell (1777-1844), who seems to have had a vague or defective notion of Pennsylvania geography:
On Susquehanna's side, fair Wyoming!  Although the wild-flower on thy ruin'd wall,  And roofless
homes, a sad remembrance bring,  Of what thy gentle people did befall;  Yet thou wert once the
loveliest land of all  That see the Atlantic wave their morn restore.  Sweet land! may I thy lost
delights recall,  And paint thy Gertrude in her bowers of yore,  Whose beauty was the love of
Pennsylvania's shore!   et cetera. Subsequently applied 19c. to other locations (in Kansas, Ohio,
and Wisconsin), and to a western territory organized July 25, 1868 (admitted as a state 1890).    On
the same day there was debate in the Senate over the name for the new Territory. Territories often
keep their names when they become States, so we may be glad that Cheyenne, to be pronounced Shy-en,
was not adopted. Lincoln was rejected for an obvious and, no doubt, sound reason. Apparently, nobody
had a better name to offer, though there must be plenty of Indian words that could properly be used,
and, for the present, the insignificant Wyoming is retained. [The Nation, June 11, 1868]


wyrd

see weird.


wysiwyg

1982, computer programmer's acronym from what you see is what you get.


wyvern (n.)

c.1600, formed (with excrescent -n) from Middle English wyver (c.1300), from Anglo-French wivre,
from Old North French form of Old French guivre snake, from Latin vipera viper (see viper). In
heraldry, a winged dragon with eagle's feet and a serpent's barbed tail.


