-xion

ending favored in British English for certain words that in U.S. typically end in -ction, such as
connexion, complexion, inflexion, as being more true to the Latin rules.


X

The entire entry for X in Johnson's dictionary (1756) is: X is a letter, which, though found in
Saxon words, begins no word in the English language. Most English words beginning in -x- are of
Greek origin or modern commercial coinages. East Anglian in 14c. showed a tendency to use -x- for
initial sh-, sch- (such as xal for shall), which didn't catch on but seems an improvement over the
current system. As a symbol of a kiss on a letter, etc., it is recorded from 1765. In malt liquor,
XX denoted double quality and XXX strongest quality (1827).    Algebraic meaning unknown quantity
(1660 in English, from French), sometimes is said to be from medieval use, originally a crossed -r-,
in that case probably from Latin radix (see root (n.)). Other theories trace it to Arabic (Klein),
but a more prosaic explanation says Descartes (1637) took x, y, z, the last three letters of the
alphabet, for unknowns to correspond to a, b, c, used for known quantities.    Used allusively for
unknown person from 1797, something unknown since 1859. As a type of chromosome, attested from 1902
(first so called in German; Henking, 1891). To designate films deemed suitable for adults only,
first used 1950 in Britain; adopted in U.S. Nov. 1, 1968. The XYZ Affair in American history (1797)
involved French agents designated by those letters.


x (v.)

cross out with an 'X', 1942, from X.


X-ray (n.)

1896, X-rays, translation of German X-strahlen, from X, algebraic symbol for an unknown quantity, +
Strahl (plural Strahlen) beam, ray. Coined 1895 by German scientist Wilhelm Conrad R&ouml;ntgen
(1845-1923), who discovered them, to suggest that the exact nature of the rays was unknown. As a
verb by 1899. Meaning image made using X-rays is from 1934, earlier in this sense was X-radiograph
(1899).


Xanadu

Mongol city founded by Kublai Khan, 1620s, anglicized form of Shang-tu. Sense of dream place of
magnificence and luxury derives from Coleridge's poem (1816).


xanthic (adj.)

yellowish, 1817, from French xanthique, from Greek xanthos yellow (see xantho-).


Xanthippe

also (incorrectly) Xantippe, late 16c., spouse of Socrates (5c. B.C.E.), the prototype of the
quarrelsome, nagging wife. The name is related to the masc. proper name Xanthippos, a compound of
xanthos yellow (see xantho-) + hippos horse (see equine).


xantho-

before vowels xanth-, word-forming element meaning yellow, from Greek xanthos yellow of various
shades; used especially of hair and horses, of unknown origin. Used in scientific words; such as
xanthein (1857) soluble yellow coloring matter in flowers, xanthophyll (1838) yellow coloring matter
in autumn leaves. Also Huxley's Xanthochroi (1867) blond, light-skinned races of Europe (with okhros
pale).


xanthosis (n.)

1857, Modern Latin, from Greek xanthos (see xantho-) + -osis.


xanthous (adj.)

1829, fair-haired and light-complexioned, from Greek xanthos yellow, of unknown origin (see
xantho-). But the word also was used in 19c. anthropology as specifying the yellow or Mongoloid type
of mankind [Century Dictionary].


xebec (n.)

small three-masted vessel, favored by Barbary corsairs but also used in Mediterranean trade, by
1745, from French ch&eacute;bec, from Italian sciabecco, ultimately from Arabic shabbak a small
warship. Altered by influence of cognate Spanish xabeque, which shows the old way of representing
the Spanish sound now spelled -j-.


xenelasia (n.)

prevention of aliens from settling in Sparta, Greek, literally expulsion of foreigners, from
xenelatein to expel foreigners, from xenos stranger (see xeno-) + elatos, verbal adjective of
elaunein drive, drive away, beat out.


Xenia

city in Ohio, from Greek xenia hospitality, rights of a guest, friendly relation with strangers,
literally state of a guest, from xenos guest (see guest (n.)). Founded 1803 and named by vote of a
town meeting, on suggestion of the Rev. Robert Armstrong to imply friendliness and hospitality.


xenial (adj.)

pertaining to hospitality, 1834, from Greek xenia (see Xenia) + -al (1). Related: Xenially.


xeno-

before vowels, xen-, word-forming element meaning strange, foreign; stranger, foreigner, from Greek
xeno-, comb. form of xenos a guest, stranger, foreigner, refugee, guest-friend, one entitled to
hospitality, cognate with Latin hostis (see guest (n.)). The term was politely used of any one whose
name was unknown [Liddell &amp; Scott].


xenogamy (n.)

1877, from xeno- + -gamy.


xenolith (n.)

1894, from xeno- foreign, strange + -lith stone.


xenon (n.)

gaseous element, 1898, from Greek xenon, neuter of xenos foreign, strange (see xeno-); coined by its
co-discoverer, Scottish chemist Sir William Ramsay (1852-1916); compare krypton.


xenophile (nj.)

1922, from xeno- foreign, strange + -phile.


xenophilic (adj.)

1974, from xenophile + -ic.


xenophobe (n.)

1897, from xeno- foreign, strange + -phobe. As an adjective from 1908.


xenophobia (n.)

1903, from xeno- foreign, strange + -phobia fear. Earlier (c.1884) it meant agoraphobia.


xenophobic (adj.)

1912, from xenophobia + -ic.


xerasia (n.)

excessive dryness of hair, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek xerasia dryness, from xeros dry,
withered, from PIE *ksero- dry.


Xeres

Andalusian town (modern Jerez) famous for its wine; see sherry. For first letter, see xebec.


xeric (adj.)

1926; see xero- + -ic.


xero-

before vowels, xer-, word-forming element meaning dry, from Greek xero-, comb. form of xeros dry,
withered (see xerasia).


xeroderma (n.)

1848, from xero- + derma.


xerography (n.)

photographic reduplication without liquid developers, 1948, from Greek xeros dry (see xerasia) +
-ography as in photography. Related: Xerographic.


xerophagy (n.)

habit of living on dry food, especially as a form of fasting, 1650s, from xero- + -phagy (see
-phagous).


xerophilous (adj.)

drought-loving, 1863, from xero- + -philous, from Greek from philos loving, of uncertain origin.


xerophyte (n.)

1897, from xero- + Greek phyton a plant (see phyto-).


xerosis (n.)

1890, Modern Latin, from Greek xerosis, from xeros dry (see xerasia) + -osis.


xerotic (adj.)

characterized by dryness, 1901, from stem of xero- + -ic.


Xerox

1952, trademark taken out by Haloid Co. of Rochester, N.Y., for a copying device, from xerography.
The verb is first attested 1965, from the noun, despite strenuous objection from the Xerox copyright
department. Related: Xeroxed; Xeroxing.


Xerxes

king of Persia who reigned 486-465 B.C.E., Greek Xerxes, from Old Persian X&#353;ayar&#353;an,
literally male (i.e. 'hero') among kings, from X&#353;aya- to rule over (see shah) + ar&#353;an
male, man, hero. The Hebrew rendition was Ahashwerosh, Ahashresh.


Xhosa (n.)

South African Bantu people, 1801, their self-designation. Also of their language.


xi (n.)

fourteenth letter of the Greek alphabet.


xiphias (n.)

1660s, genus of swordfish, from Greek xiphias swordfish, from xiphos a sword (see xiphoid). Related:
Xiphioid.


xiphoid (adj.)

sword-shaped, 1746, from Greek xiphos a sword, of unknown origin (Klein suggests a Semitic source
and compares Hebrew sayif, Arabic sayf) + -oid.


Xmas (n.)

Christmas, 1551, X'temmas, wherein the X is an abbreviation for Christ in Christmas, English letter
X being identical in form (but not sound signification) to Greek chi, the first letter of Greek
Christos Christ (see Christ). The earlier way to abbreviate the word in English was Xp- or Xr-
(corresponding to the Chr- in Greek &#935;&#961;&#953;&#963;&#964;&#959;&#962;), and the form Xres
m&aelig;sse for Christmas appears in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (c.1100).


xylem (n.)

woody tissue in higher plants, 1875, from German Xylem, coined from Greek xylon wood (see xylo-).


xylene (n.)

1851, from Greek xylon wood (see xylo-) + -ene.


xylo-

before vowels xyl-, word forming element meaning wood, from comb. form of Greek xylon wood cut and
ready for use, firewood, timber; piece of wood; stocks, a plank, beam, or bench, in New Testament,
the Cross, of unknown origin.


xylophagous (adj.)

1842, from Latinized form of Greek xylophagos wood-eating; see xylo- + -phagous.


xylophone (n.)

1866, coined from Greek xylon wood (see xylo-) + phone a sound (see fame (n.)).


xyster (n.)

surgical instrument for scraping bones, 1680s, from Greek xyster a graving tool, from xyein to
scrape, from PIE root *kes- (1) to scrape.


