Z

not a native letter in Old English; in Anglo-French words it represents the ts sound (as in Anglo-
French fiz, from Latin filius, modern Fitz); from late 13c. it began to be used for the voiced s
sound and had fully taken that role by 1400. For letter name, see zed.    Thou whoreson Zed, thou
vnnecessary Letter. [King Lear, II.ii.69]    Series of zs to represent a buzzing sound first
attested 1852; zees spell of sleep, a nap is slang first recorded 1963, American English student
slang.


za (n.)

U.S. student slang shortening of pizza, attested from 1968.


Zacchaeus

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Zacchaeus, from Greek Zakkhaios, from Hebrew zakkay, literally
pure, innocent, from zakhah was clean, was pure.


Zachariah

masc. proper name, Late Latin Zacharias, from Greek Zakharias, from Hebrew Zekharyahu, literally the
Lord has remembered, from zakhar he remembered.


zaftig (adj.)

alluringly plump, curvaceous, buxom, 1937, from Yiddish zaftik, literally juicy, from zaft juice,
from Middle High German saft juice (see sap (n.1)).


zag (v.)

1793, from zig-zag (q.v.).


zaibatsu

1937, from Japanese zaibatsu, from zai wealth + batzu clique.


Zaire

African nation (1971-1997), from an early alternative name of the Congo River, from Kikongo nzai,
dialectal form of nzadi river.


zakat (n.)

obligatory Islamic tax for religious purposes, 1802, from Persian zakat, etc., from Arabic zakah.


Zamboni (n.)

proprietary name of a machine used to resurface ice skating rinks, 1957, trademark of Frank J.
Zamboni &amp; Co., Paramount, Calif.


zany (n.)

comic performer, 1580s, from French zani, from Italian zani, zanni a zany, clown, originally Zanni,
Venetian dialect variant of Gianni, pet form of Giovanni John; thus equivalent to English Jack. A
stock character in old comedies, he aped the principal actors.


zany (adj.)

1610s, from zany (n.). Related: Zanily; zaniness.


Zanzibar

island off East Africa, from Zengi, name of a local people, said to mean black, + Arabic barr coast,
shore. Related: Zanzibari.


zap

1929 as a sound, 1942 as a verb; a comic strip word (especially from Buck Rogers in the Twenty-Fifth
Century), of imitative origin. Meaning erase electronically is 1982. Related: Zapped; zapping.


zapper (n.)

electrical pest-killer, 1970, from zap.


Zarathustra

from Avestan Zarathushtra (see Zoroastrian). Related: Zarathustrian.


zarf (n.)

holder for a coffee cup, 1836, from Arabic zarf vessel.


zeal (n.)

passionate ardor in pursuit of an objective or course of action, late 14c., from Old French zel
(Modern French z&#232;le) and directly from Late Latin zelus zeal, emulation (source also of Italian
zelo, Spanish celo), a Church word, from Greek zelos ardor, eager rivalry, emulation, a noble
passion [Liddell &amp; Scott], but also jealousy; prom PIE *ya- to seek, request, desire. From mid-
15c. as devotion.


zealot (n.)

early 14c., member of a militant 1st century Jewish sect which fiercely resisted the Romans in
Palestine, from Late Latin zelotes, from Greek zelotes one who is a zealous follower, from zeloun to
be zealous, from zelos zeal (see zeal). Extended sense of a fanatical enthusiast first recorded
1630s (earlier in this sense was zelator, mid-15c.).


zealotry (n.)

excessive or undue zeal, fanaticism, 1650s, from zealot + -ry.


zealous (adj.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin zelosus full of zeal (source of Italian zeloso, Spanish celoso), from
zelus (see zeal). Related: Zealously, zealousness.


zebra (n.)

c.1600, from Italian zebra, perhaps via Portuguese, earlier applied to a now-extinct wild ass, of
uncertain origin, said to be Congolese [OED], or Amharic [Klein], but perhaps ultimately from Latin
equiferus wild horse, from equus horse (see equine) + ferus (see fierce). Related: Zebrine; zebroid.


zebu (n.)

Asiatic ox, 1774, from French zebu, ultimately of Tibetan origin. First shown in Europe at the Paris
fair of 1752.


Zebulon

masc. proper name, Biblical son of Jacob by Leah, from Hebrew Zebhulun, from zebhul a dwelling +
diminutive suffix -on (see Gen. xxx:20).


Zechariah

masc. proper name, Biblical 11th of the Twelve Prophets; see Zachariah.


zed (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French zede, from Late Latin zeta, from Greek zeta, from Hebrew zayin, letter
name, literally weapon; so called in reference to the shape of this letter in ancient Hebrew. U.S.
pronunciation zee is first attested 1670s. Other dialectal names for the letter are izzard, ezod,
uzzard, and zod.


zee (n.)

the letter Z, 1670s, now more common in American English.


zein (n.)

simple protein obtained from maize and wheat, 1822, from zea, Late Latin name for spelt, from Greek
zeia one-seeded wheat, barley, corn (from PIE root *yewo-) + -in (2).


Zeiss (adj.)

in reference to spy-glasses or binoculars, 1905, from the firm founded by German optical instrument
manufacturer Carl Zeiss (1816-1888).


zeitgeist (n.)

1848, from German Zeitgeist (Herder, 1769), spirit of the age, literally time-spirit, from Zeit time
(see tide (n.)) + Geist spirit (see ghost (n.)). Carlyle has it as a German word in Sartor Resartus
(1840) and translates it as Time-Spirit.


zek (n.)

Russian condemned person in a prison or labor camp, 1968, from Russian zek, probably representing a
vocalization of z/k, abbreviation of zaklyuchennyi prisoner.


Zen (n.)

school of Mahayana Buddhism, 1727, from Japanese, from Chinese ch'an, ultimately from Sanskrit
dhyana thought, meditation, from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Greek sema sign, mark,
token). As an adjective from 1881.


Zend (n.)

1715, Parsee sacred book (in full, Zend-Avesta, 1620s), from Old Persian zend, from Pahlavi zand
commentary. First used 1771 in reference to the language of the Zend-Avesta by French scholar
Abraham Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron (1731-1805).


zenith (n.)

point of the heavens directly overhead at any place, late 14c., from Old French cenith (Modern
French z&eacute;nith), from Medieval Latin cenit, senit, bungled scribal transliterations of Arabic
samt road, path, abbreviation of samt ar-ras, literally the way over the head. Letter -m- misread as
-ni-.    The Medieval Latin word could as well be influenced by the rough agreement of the Arabic
term with classical Latin semita sidetrack, side path (notion of thing going off to the side), from
se- apart + *mi-ta-, suffixed zero-grade form of PIE root *mei- (1) to change (see mutable).
Figurative sense of highest point or state is from c.1600.


zeno-

late 20c. word-forming element used in reference to the planet Jupiter, from Greek zeno-, comb. form
from Zeus (see Zeus; also compare Zenobia).


Zenobia

fem. proper name, from Greek Zenobia, literally the force of Zeus, from Zen, collateral form of
Zeus, + bia strength, force, cognate with Sanskrit jya force, power (see Jain).


Zenonian (adj.)

1843, pertaining to one of two Greek thinkers: Zeno of Elea (Zeno of the Paradoxes, 5c. B.C.E.), who
disproved the possibility of motion; and Zeno of Citium (c. 300 B.C.E.), founder of stoicism.


zep (n.)

abbreviation of zeppelin, attested by 1915.


Zephaniah

masc. proper name, Biblical ninth of the prophets, from Hebrew Tzephanyah the Lord has hidden.


zephyr (n.)

mid-14c., from Old English Zefferus, from Latin Zephyrus (source also of French z&#233;phire,
Spanish zefiro, Italian zeffiro), from Greek Zephyros the west wind (sometimes personified as a
god), probably related to zophos the west, the dark region, darkness, gloom. Extended sense of mild
breeze is c.1600. Related: Zephyrean.


zeppelin (n.)

1900, from German Zeppelin, short for Zeppelinschiff Zeppelin ship, after Count Ferdinand von
Zeppelin (1838-1917), German general who perfected its design. Compare blimp.


zero (n.)

figure which stands for naught in the Arabic notation, also the absence of all quantity considered
as quantity, c.1600, from French z&#233;ro or directly from Italian zero, from Medieval Latin
zephirum, from Arabic sifr cipher, translation of Sanskrit sunya-m empty place, desert, naught (see
cipher (n.)).    A brief history of the invention of zero can be found here. Meaning worthless
person is recorded from 1813. As an adjective from 1810. Zero tolerance first recorded 1972,
originally U.S. political language. Zero-sum in game theory is from 1944 (von Neumann), indicating
that if one player wins X amount the other or others must lose X amount.


zero (v.)

in zero in, 1944, from zero (n.); the image is from instrument adjustment to a setting of zero (1909
in this sense, originally in rifle-shooting). Related: Zeroed; zeroing.


zest (n.)

1670s, from French zeste piece of orange or lemon peel used as a flavoring, of unknown origin. Sense
of thing that adds flavor is 1709; that of keen enjoyment first attested 1791.


zestful (adj.)

1797, from zest + -ful. Related: Zestfully; zestfulness.


zesty (adj.)

1789, from zest + -y (2). Related: Zestily; zestiness.


zeta (n.)

sixth letter of the Greek alphabet; see zed.


zetetic (adj.)

proceeding by inquiry, 1640s, from Modern Latin zeteticus, from Greek zetetikos searching,
inquiring, from zetetos, verbal adjective of zetein seek for, inquire into. Related: Zetetical.


zeugma (n.)

1580s, a single word (usually a verb or adjective) made to refer to two or more nouns in a sentence
(but properly applying to only one of them), from Greek zeugma, a zeugma; that which is used for
joining; boat bridge, literally a yoking, from zeugnynai to yoke (see jugular).


Zeus

supreme god of the ancient Greeks and master of the others, 1706, from Greek, from PIE *dewos- god
(cognates: Latin deus god, Old Persian daiva- demon, evil god, Old Church Slavonic deivai, Sanskrit
deva-), from root *dyeu- to gleam, to shine; also the root of words for sky and day (see diurnal).
The god-sense is originally shining, but whether as originally sun-god or as lightener is not now
clear.


Ziegfeld

in reference to showgirls or stage revues, 1913, from Florenz Ziegfeld (1869-1932), U.S. theatrical
producer, who staged annual follies from 1907-1931.


zig (v.)

1969, from zigzag.


zig-zag (n.)

also zigzag, 1712, from French zigzag (1670s), perhaps from German Zickzack (though this is attested
only from 1703), possibly a reduplication of Zacke tooth, prong. Earliest use in German is in
reference to military siege approaches. Originally in English used to describe the layout of certain
garden paths. As an adjective from 1750; the verb is recorded from 1774. The brand of cigarette
paper is from 1909. Related: Zig-zagged; zig-zagging.


ziggurat (n.)

also zikkurat, 1858, from Assyrian ziqquratu height, pinnacle, from zaqaru to be high.


zilch (n.)

nothing, 1957; insignificant person, 1933, from use of Zilch as a generic comical-sounding surname
for an insignificant person (especially Joe Zilch). There was a Mr. Zilch (1931), comic character in
the magazine Ballyhoo, and the use perhaps originated c.1922 in U.S. college or theater slang.
Probably a nonsense syllable, suggestive of the end of the alphabet, but Zilch is an actual German
surname of Slavic origin.    The [Cadence] agency aims to have each album cover actually promote the
record, on the theory that the day of pretty, boffy, zoomy and zingy covers for the sake of zilch is
no more. [Billboard, Oct. 28, 1957]


zillion (n.)

1942, arbitrary coinage with no definite numerical value; first recorded in Billboard.


Zimbabwe

southern African nation, 1980, named for an ancient city there, from Bantu zimba we bahwe houses of
stones, from zimba, plural of imba house + bahwe stones. Previously known as Rhodesia (1964-80).
Related: Zimbabwean.


zinc (n.)

1650s, zinke, from German Zink, perhaps related to Zinke prong, point; said to have been used first
by Paracelsus (c.1526) on analogy of the form of its crystals after smelting. Zinke is from Old High
German zint a point, jag, from Proto-Germanic *teng- tine (cognates: Old Norse tindr point, top,
summit, Old English tind prong, spike), from PIE *denk- to bite. Spelling with -c- is from 1813,
from French influence.


zine (n.)

1965, short for fanzine.


zinfandel (n.)

1896, red or white dry California wine, origin uncertain; used earlier as the name of the grape from
which it was made (1880). The wine itself is said to have been known in U.S. since 1829. Some wine
experts suggest a corruption of the Austrian grape name Zierfandler, though these grapes are not
related to those of  zinfandel. See <b>this article:</b>   The similarity in the names Zinfandel and
Zierfandler arouses some speculation. Modern vine identification systems did not yet exist in 1829,
so it is conceivable that the cuttings George Gibbs imported to the USA had never been correctly
identified in Austria.


zing (n.)

1911, high pitched sound, of echoic origin. Slang meaning energy, zest is attested from 1918. Verb
is from 1920; meaning to deliver a stinging witticism or retort is by 1975.


zinger (n.)

cruel quip, 1970, from zing + -er (1). Earlier it was baseball slang for fastball (by 1957).


zinnia (n.)

genus of herbs of the aster family, 1767, from Modern Latin (Linn&aelig;us, 1763), named for German
botanist Johann Gottfried Zinn (1729-1759).


Zion

late Old English Sion, from Greek Seon, from Hebrew Tsiyon, name of a Canaanite hill fortress in
Jerusalem captured by David and called in the Bible City of David. It became the center of Jewish
life and worship.


Zionism (n.)

movement for forming (later supporting) a Jewish national state in Palestine, 1896, from German
Zionismus (from Zion + Latin-derived suffix -ismus; see -ism); first recorded 1886 in
Selbstemancipation, by Matthias Acher (pseudonym of Nathan Birnbaum (1864-1937)).


Zionist

1896 (adj. and noun), from Zion + -ist.


zip (v.1)

move rapidly, 1852, of echoic origin. Meaning close with a zipper is from 1932. Related: Zipped;
zipping.


ZIP (adj.)

1963, in U.S. postal ZIP code, an acronym for Zone Improvement Plan, no doubt chosen with conscious
echo of zip (v.1).


zip (n.2)

zero, 1900, student slang for a grade of zero on a test, etc.; of unknown origin; compare zilch.


zip (v.2)

to close or fasten by means of a zipper, 1932, back-formation from zipper (n.). Related: Zipped;
zipping; zipless.


zip (n.1)

sound of something moving rapidly, 1875, imitative. Zip gun homemade pistol first recorded 1950.


zipper (n.)

1925, probably an agent noun from zip (v.1). The trademark taken out on the name that year applied
to a boot with zippers, not to the lightning fastener itself, which was so called by 1927.


Zippo (n.)

proprietary name of a brand of cigarette lighter, patented 1934 by Zippo Manufacturing Co.,
Bradford, Pa.


zippy (adj.)

1904, from zip (n.) energy, force (1900, from zip (v.1)) + -y (2).


zircon (n.)

1794, circon, also jargon, new name given in chemistry to jacinth, from French zircone and German
Zirkon (compare French jargon, Italian giargone), from Arabic zarqun cinnabar, bright red, from
Persian zargun gold-colored, from Avestan zari- gold-colored, from zar gold.


zirconium (n.)

metallic chemical element, 1808, coined by German chemist and mineralogist Martin Heinrich Klaproth
(1743-1817) in 1789; so called because it was found in zircon.


zit (n.)

acne pimple, 1966, originally U.S. teenager slang, of unknown origin.


zither (n.)

stringed musical instrument, 1850, from German Zither, from Old High German zitara, from Latin
cithara, from Greek kithara lute (see guitar).


ziti (n.)

type of tubular pasta, plural of zita (1845), from Italian, said to be a dialect word for
bridegroom.


zloty (n.)

monetary unit of Poland, 1842, from Polish z&#322;oty, literally of gold, from z&#322;oto gold,
related to Russian zoloto, Czech zlato gold (see gold).


zoa (n.)

plural of zoon (q.v.).


zoanthropy (n.)

form of insanity in which a man imagines himself to be another type of beast, 1845, from French
zoanthrope or directly from Modern Latin zoanthropia, from Greek zoion animal (see zoo) + anthropos
man (see anthropo-).


zodiac (n.)

late 14c., from Old French zodiaque, from Latin zodiacus zodiac, from Greek zodiakos (kyklos) zodiac
(circle), literally circle of little animals, from zodiaion, diminutive of zoion animal (see zoo).
Libra is not an animal, but it was not a zodiac constellation to the Greeks, who reckoned 11 but
counted Scorpio and its claws (including what is now Libra) as a double constellation. Libra was
figured back in by the Romans. In Old English the zodiac was twelf tacna the twelve signs, and in
Middle English also Our Ladye's Waye and the Girdle of the Sky.


zodiacal (adj.)

1570s, from zodiac + -al (1).


Zoe

fem. proper name, Greek, literally life (see zoo-).


zoetrope (n.)

optical instrument which exhibits pictures as if alive and in action, 1867, literally wheel of life,
from Greek zoe life (see zoo-) + trope turn (see trope).


Zohar (n.)

Jewish mystical commentary on the Pentateuch, 1680s, Hebrew, literally light, splendor.


zoic (adj.)

pertaining to animal life, 1863, from Greek zoikos, from zoion animal (see zoo-).


zollverein (n.)

1843, from German Zollverein, literally customs union, from Zoll toll (see toll (n.)) + Verein
union, from vereinen to unite, from ver- + ein one (see one).


zombie (n.)

1871, of West African origin (compare Kikongo zumbi fetish; Kimbundu nzambi god), originally the
name of a snake god, later with meaning reanimated corpse in voodoo cult. But perhaps also from
Louisiana creole word meaning phantom, ghost, from Spanish sombra shade, ghost. Sense slow-witted
person is recorded from 1936.


zonal (adj.)

1839, from Late Latin zonalis, from Latin zona (see zone (n.)).


zone (n.)

late 14c., from Latin zona geographical belt, celestial zone, from Greek zone a belt, the girdle
worn by women at the hips, related to zonnynai to gird, from PIE root *yos- to gird (cognates:
Avestan yasta- girt, Lithuanian juosiu to gird, Old Church Slavonic po-jasu girdle). The 10c. Anglo-
Saxon treatise on astronomy translates Latin quinque zonas as fyf gyrdlas.    Originally one of the
five great divisions of the earth's surface (torrid, temperate, frigid; separated by tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn and Arctic and Antarctic circles); meaning any discrete region is first
recorded 1822. Zone defense in team sports is recorded from 1927.


zone (v.)

1760, mark with zones, from zone (n.). Land use planning sense is from 1916. Related: Zoned; zoning.


zoned (adj.)

1960s in drug-use sense, from ozone (n.), which is found high in the atmosphere; the related verb to
zone is from 1980s.


zoning (n.)

land-use planning, 1912, verbal noun from zone (v.).


zonk (v.)

1950, to hit hard; 1968, to put into a stupor; slang term, of echoic origin.


zoo (n.)

c.1847, short for Zoological Gardens of the London Zoological Society, established 1828 in Regent's
Park to house the society's collection of wild animals. The first three letters taken as one
syllable. From a mere vulgarism, this corruption has passed into wide colloquial use [Century
Dictionary]. Slang meaning crowded and chaotic place first recorded 1935.


zoo-

word-forming element meaning animal, living being, from comb. form of Greek zoion an animal,
literally a living being, from PIE root *gwei- to live, life (source also of Greek bios life, Old
English cwicu living; see bio-).


zoography (n.)

1590s, from zoo- + -graphy. Related: Zoographer; zoographic.


zoolatry (n.)

worship of animals or an animal, 1817, from zoo- + -latry. Related: Zoolater; zoolatrous.


zoological (adj.)

1807, from zoology + -ical.


zoologist (n.)

1660s, from zoology + -ist.


zoology (n.)

science of animals, 1660s, from Modern Latin zoologia, from Greek zoion animal (see zoo-) + -logia
study (see -logy).


zoom (v.)

1886, of echoic origin. Gained popularity c.1917 as aviators began to use it. As a noun from 1917.
The photographer's zoom lens is from 1936, from the specific aviation sense of zoom as to quickly
move closer.


zoomorphic (adj.)

representative of animals, especially representative of a god in the form of an animal, 1872, from
zoo- + morphe shape (see Morpheus) + -ic. Related: Zoomorphism.


zoon (n.)

animal form containing all elements of a typical organism of its group, 1864, from Greek zoion
animal (see zoo-).


zoonosis (n.)

disease communicated to humans by animals, plural zoonoses, 1876, from zoo- animal + nosos disease
(see noso-).


zoonotic (adj.)

1900, from zoonosis + -ic.


zoophagous (adj.)

carnivorous, 1840, from zoo- + -phagous. Related: Zoophagy; zoophage.


zoophilia (n.)

attraction to animals involving release of sexual energy, 1899, in a translation of Krafft-Ebing,
from zoo- animal + -philia. [F]ormerly not implying sexual intercourse or bestiality [OED]. The
meaning sympathy or tender care for living creatures is in the nativized formation zoophily (1886).


zoophobia (n.)

1901, from zoo- animal + -phobia. Related: Zoophobic; zoophobe.


zooplankton (n.)

1901, from zoo- animal + plankton.


zoot suit (n.)

1942, American English slang, the first element probably a nonsense reduplication of suit (compare
reet pleat, drape shape from the same jargon).


zooxanthella (n.)

plural zooxanthellae, yellow pigmentary particles found in nature, 1889, from German (Brandt, 1881),
from comb. form of Greek zoion animal (see zoo-) + xantho- yellow (see xantho-) + Latin suffix
-ella.


zori (n.)

1823, from Japanese zori, from so grass, (rice) straw + ri footwear, sole.


Zoroastrian (adj.)

1743, from Zoroaster, from Latin Zoroastres, from Old Persian Zarathushtra, 6c. or 7c. B.C.E.
Persian religious teacher. The name appears to be literally whose camels are old, from *zarant old
(cognate with Greek geron, genitive gerontos old; see gerontology) + ushtra camel. As a noun from
1811.


Zoroastrianism (n.)

1854, from Zoroastrian + -ism.


zorro (n.)

1838, South American fox-wolf, from Spanish zorro, masc. of zorra fox, from Basque azaria fox. The
comic book hero, a variation on the Robin Hood theme set in old Spanish California, was created 1919
by U.S. writer Johnston McCulley (1883-1958).


zoster (n.)

kind of seaweed, c.1600, Latin, from Greek zoster girdle, originally warrior's belt, from zonnynai
(see zone (n.)). Meaning shingles is from 1706; in the literal sense, a belt or girdle, especially
for men, from 1824.


zouave (n.)

member of a French light infantry troop, 1848, from French, from Arabic Zwawa, from Berber
Igawawaen, name of a Kabyle tribe in Algeria, from which the zouaves originally were recruited in
1831. The military units soon became exclusively French but served only in Algeria until 1854 and
were distinguished for their dash, intrepidity, and hardihood, and for their peculiar drill and
showy Oriental uniform [Century Dictionary]. Some Northern regiments in the American Civil War
adopted the name and elements of the uniform. The women's fashionable zouave jacket (1859) also is
based on the uniform.


zouk (n.)

Creole French, party, from zouker engage in unrestrained social activity.


zounds (interj.)

c.1600, oath of surprise or anger, altered from (by) God's wounds!, in reference to the wounds of
Christ on the Cross. One of the innumerable oaths having reference to Christ's passion [Century
Dictionary]. Compare gadzooks.


zowie (interj.)

expression of astonishment, c.1913.


zucchetto (n.)

small, round skull-cap worn by dignitaries in the Catholic Church, 1853, from Italian zucchetta a
cap, originally diminutive of zucca gourd, head, perhaps from Late Latin cucutia, of unknown origin.


zucchini (n.)

1915 in English cookery books, 1910 in travel books about Italy as an Italian word (defined as an
odd kind of little squash, very tender and palatable), from Italian, plural of zucchino, diminutive
of zucca gourd, squash, perhaps from Late Latin cucutia, which is of unknown origin.


Zulu (n.)

one of a Bantu people of South Africa, 1824, a native name. As radio code word for -z- from 1960.


Zuni (n.)

native people and language of New Mexico, 1834, from Spanish, from a local native word.


Zurich

city and lake in Switzerland, German Z&uuml;rich, said to be ultimately from Celtic root *dur-
water.


zwieback (n.)

1894, from German Zweiback biscuit, literally twice-baked, from zwei two, twice + backen to bake;
loan-translation of Italian biscotto (see biscuit).


Zwinglian (adj.)

1532, after Ulrich Zwingli (1484-1531), Swiss Protestant reformer who revolted from the Roman
communion in 1516 but who differed from Luther on theological points relating to the real presence
in the Eucharist.


zydeco (n.)

1949, perhaps from Creole French pronunciation of French les haricots the beans, part of the title
of a popular dance tune (les haricots sont pas sal&eacute;s).


zygoma (n.)

bony arch of the cheek, plural zygomata, 1680s, Modern Latin, from Greek zygoma, from zygon yoke
(see jugular). So called because it connects the bones of the face with those of the skull about the
ear.


zygomatic (adj.)

pertaining to the zygoma, 1709, from Latin zygomaticus, from Greek zygoma (see zygoma).


zygote (n.)

1880, coined 1878 by German cytologist Eduard Strasburger (1844-1912), the widespread attribution to
William Bateson being apparently erroneous; from Greek zygotos yoked, from zygon yoke (see jugular).


Zyklon (n.)

type of fumigant used to kill rats in enclosed spaces, such as holds of ships, boxcars, etc., 1926,
from German Zyklon, commercial name of a type of hydrogen cyanide, said to be of unknown etymology,
but it is the usual German form of the word cyclone. There were at least three varieties, A, B, and
C, Zyklon-B being the one notoriously used in the Nazi death camps.


zymurgy (n.)

branch of chemistry which deals with wine-making and brewing, 1868, from Greek zymo-, comb. form of
zyme a leaven (from PIE root *yeue-; see juice) + -ourgia a working, from ergon work (see organ).
The last word in many standard English dictionaries (and this one); but Century Dictionary ends with
Zyxomma (A genus of Indian dragon-flies) and in the OED [2nd ed.] the last word is zyxt, an obsolete
Kentish form of the second person singular of see (v.).    At the dictionary's letter A  Mr. Brandt
is young and gay  But when at last he reaches zed  He's in his wheelchair, nearly dead  [Einar
Haugen]


